Table of Contents
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .i
Climate Change Advisory Group Membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .ii
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .E1

Chapter 1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Executive Order 2005-02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
The CCAG Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Emissions Inventory and Forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Overview of the Policy Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Summary of the Recommended Individual Policy Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Cross-Cutting (CC) All Sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Residential, Commercial, Industrial (RCI) and
Waste Management Sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
Energy Supply (ES) Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . .14
Agriculture (A) and Forestry (F) Sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
Policy Option Rankings by Reductions and Savings/Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
CCAG Recommended Policy Options by Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20

Chapter 2 Impacts of Climate Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25
Impacts in Arizona and the West . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27

Chapter 3 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and
Reference Case Projections, 1990-2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Arizona Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions: Sources and Trends . . . . . . . . .30
A Closer Look at the Two Major Sources: Electricity and Transportation . . . .32
Reference Case Projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33
Key Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37

Chapter 4 Goals and Cross-Cutting Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
Overview of Cross-Cutting Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
Key Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
Overview of Policy Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
Cross-Cutting (CC) All Sectors Policy Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39

Chapter 5 RCI and Waste Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Overview of GHG Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
Key Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts . . . . . . . . . . .47
RCI and Waste Management (RCI) Sector Policy Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . .50

Table of Contents
Chapter 6 Energy Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Overview of GHG Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .57
Key Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58
Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts . . . . . . . . . . .59
Energy Supply (ES) Sector Policy Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .63

Chapter 7 Transportation and Land Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67
Overview of GHG Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67
Key Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67
Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts . . . . . . . . . . .68
Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector Policy Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . .70

Chapter 8 Agriculture and Forestry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Overview of GHG Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .77
Key Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .78
Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts . . . . . . . . . . .79
Agriculture and Forestry (AF) Sectors Policy Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .81

Appendices
A. Executive Order 2005-02
B. Description of the CCAG Process
C. List of Technical Work Group Members
D. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and Reference Case Projections
1990-2020
E. Center for Climate Strategies Memo: Methods for Quantification and Analysis
F. Cross-Cutting Issues - detailed policy description/analysis
G. RCI, and Waste - detailed policy description/analysis
H. Energy Supply - detailed policy description/analysis
I. Transportation and Land Use - detailed policy description/analysis
J. Agriculture and Forestry - detailed policy description/analysis

Acknowledgements
The Climate Change Advisory Group gratefully acknowledges the following
individuals and organizations who contributed significantly to the successful
completion of the CCAG process and publication of this Climate Change Action Plan:
Thomas D. Peterson and The Center for Climate Strategies, whose
dedicated team of professionals contributed extraordinary amounts of time,
energy and expertise in facilitation of the CCAG process and preparation of the
CCAG’s documents and recommendations:
Alison Bailie
Maureen Mullen
Kenneth Colburn
Stephen Roe
Karl Hausker
Adam Rose
Michael Lazarus
Will Schroeer
Lewison Lem
David von Hippel
Holly Lindquist
Eric Williams
Kurt Maurer, of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, who
coordinated and supervised all activities associated with the CCAG process on
behalf of ADEQ, including overseeing the writing and production of this Climate
Change Action Plan.
Special thanks goes as well to the following ADEQ employees, whose
excellent service and commitment helped ensure an open, public process that
supported the CCAG’s work and its recommendations:
Brian Davidson
Nancy Wrona
Marnie Greenbie
Ira Domsky
Thomas Marcinko
Philip Amorosi
Lynn Ott
Scott Baggiore
Steven Peplau
Emily Bonanni
Randy Sedlacek
Amber Chapa
Cortland Coleman
The CCAG also acknowledges David M. Esposito, formerly of ADEQ, whose
efforts contributed to the successful formation of the CCAG, and Joseph
Mikitish of the Arizona Attorney General’s Office, who served as legal counsel
to the CCAG.
A very special “thank you” goes to Cinda Briggs, George Copeland, Ray
Palmer, Kate Widland and other staff at the Salt River Project who graciously
allowed the use of their conference room facilities for CCAG meetings and
provided other support for the CCAG’s public meetings.
Finally, the CCAG recognizes the many individuals who participated in the
CCAG’s sector-based Technical Work Groups. For a complete listing of these
individuals by work group, see Appendix C.

i
y

Climate Change Advisory Group
Membership
Sandy Bahr
Conservation Outreach Director
Sierra Club
Grand Canyon Chapter
David Berry
Vice President
Public Affairs
Swift Transportation
Mike Boyd
Director
Western Wind Energy
Roger Clark
Director
Air and Energy Program
Grand Canyon Trust
Margaret Cook
Director
Department of
Environmental Quality
Gila River Indian Community
James W. Crosswhite
Rancher
EC Bar Ranch
Nutrioso, AZ
Dannion Cunning
President and
Chief Executive Officer
Lake Havasu City Convention &
Visitors Bureau
Cosimo De Masi
Manager
Corporate Environmental Services
Tucson Electric Power
Kara Downey
Manager
Environmental, Safety and
Health Services
Arizona Electric Power
Cooperative
Rob Elliott
Arizona Raft Adventures
Kirsten Engel
Professor of Law
James E. Rogers College of Law
University of Arizona
Stephen Etsitty
Director
Environmental Protection Agency
Navajo Nation

Edward Fox
Vice President
Communications,
Environment and Safety
Pinnacle West/
Arizona Public Service
Grady Gammage, Jr.
Attorney
Gammage & Burnham PLC
Steve Gatewood
Director
Greater Flagstaff Forest
Partnership
Richard Hayslip
Assistant General Manager
Environmental, Land, Risk
Management and Telecom
Salt River Project
Jim Henness
Farmer
Casa Grande, AZ
Jeff Homer
Environmental,
Health and Safety
General Dynamics
Kevin Kinsall
Vice President
Government Relations
Phelps Dodge
Ursula Kramer
Director
Pima County Department of
Environmental Quality
Willis Martin
Vice President
Land Acquisition
Pulte Homes and Communities
of Del Webb
R. Glenn McGinnis
Chief Executive Officer
Arizona Clean Fuels Yuma, LLC
Tim Mohin
Director
Sustainable Development
Intel Corporation
Don Netko
Director, Arizona Site Services,
Issues Management and
Corporate EHS
Freescale Semiconductor

y
ii

Karen O’Regan
Manager
Environmental Programs
City of Phoenix
Steve Owens
Director
Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality
Bill Pfeifer
President and
Chief Executive Officer
American Lung Association
of Arizona
Suzanne Pfister
Vice President
Marketing, Communications
and Public Relations
St. Joseph’s Hospital
Bobby Ramirez
Manager
Cultural and Environmental
Services
Salt River Pima-Maricopa
Indian Community
Jeff Schlegel
Arizona Representative
Southwest Energy Efficiency
Project
George Seitts
Director
Arizona Department of Weights
and Measures
Sean Seitz
President
Arizona Solar Energy Industry
Association
Thomas Swetnam
Professor
Laboratory of
Tree-Ring Research
University of Arizona
Penny Allee Taylor
Administrator
Corporate Public Affairs
Southwest Gas Corporation
Richard W. Tobin II
Attorney
Lewis and Roca LLP

Executive Summary
Executive Order 2005-02
On February 2, 2005, Governor Janet Napolitano signed Executive Order
2005-02 establishing the Climate Change Advisory Group (CCAG). Appointed
by the Governor, the 35-member CCAG comprised a diverse group of stakeholders
who brought broad perspective and expertise to the topic of climate change
in Arizona. The Governor’s Executive Order directed the CCAG, under the
coordination of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ), to:
1) prepare an inventory and forecast of Arizona greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions; and
2) develop a Climate Change Action Plan with recommendations for
reducing GHG emissions in Arizona.
The Executive Order emphasized that “Arizona and other Western States
have particular concerns about the impacts of climate change and climate
variability on the environment, including the potential for prolonged drought,
severe forest fires, warmer temperatures, increased snowmelt, reduced snow
pack and other effects.”
The Executive Order also recognized that “actions to reduce GHG emissions,
including increasing energy efficiency, conserving natural resources and
developing renewable energy sources, may have multiple benefits including
economic development, job creation, cost savings, and improved air quality.”

The CCAG Process
The CCAG held its first meeting on July 14, 2005, followed by a year of
intensive fact-finding and consensus building, facilitated by the Center for
Climate Strategies (CCS). The CCAG met six times during this period, and five
sector-based technical work groups (TWGs) of the CCAG — Energy Supply (ES);
Residential, Commercial, Industrial and Waste Management (RCI);
Transportation and Land Use (TLU); Agriculture and Forestry (AF); and CrossCutting Issues (CC) – met a total of 40 times via teleconference.
The recommendations adopted by the CCAG underwent two levels of
screening. First, a potential policy option being considered by a TWG was
accepted as a “priority for analysis” and developed for full analysis only if it
had a supermajority of support from CCAG members (with a “supermajority”
defined as five or fewer “no” votes or objections). Second, after the analyses
were conducted, only policy options that received at least majority support
from CCAG members were adopted as recommendations by the CCAG and
included in this report.
Of the 49 policy recommendations adopted by the CCAG, 45 received
unanimous consent, two (2) received a supermajority of support, and two (2)
received a majority of support.

y
E1

Emissions Inventory and Forecast
Prior to the first meeting of the CCAG, a preliminary inventory and forecast
of GHG emissions for Arizona for years 1990 through 2020 was produced pursuant to Executive Order 2005-02.
The inventory provided several critical findings, including:
• Between 1990 and 2005 Arizona’s net GHG emissions increased by
nearly 56%, from an estimated 59.3 million metric tons carbon dioxide
equivalent (MMtCO2e) to an estimated 92.6 MMtCO2e.
• Arizona’s GHG emissions are forecasted to increase by 148% from 1990
to 2020, taking into account the effects of recent energy efficiency
actions adopted by the State. Without these actions emissions growth
in 2020 would be forecasted to increase by 159% over 1990 levels.
• The transportation and electricity sectors account for more than threefourths – roughly 77% -- of Arizona’s total GHG emissions.
Figure E-1 below shows the relative amount of GHG emissions contributed
by each sector in 2000.
Figure E-1

Arizona Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions in 2000

y
E2

Figure E-2 below shows how Arizona’s projected growth in GHG emissions
compares to the growth rates in other states with climate action plans.
Figure E-2

Comparison of 1990-2020 GHG Emissions Growth
for States with Climate Plans

While Arizona’s high emissions growth rate presents challenges, it also
provides major opportunities. Because more than three-fourths of Arizona’s
GHG emissions are directly related to energy and transportation, the opportunity
exists for Arizona to reduce its GHG emissions while continuing its strong
economic growth by being more energy efficient, using more renewable energy
sources, building new infrastructure “right” in the first place to produce lower
GHG emissions and increasing the use of cleaner transportation modes,
technologies and fuels.

The CCAG’s Recommended Policy Options
The CCAG is recommending a comprehensive set of 49 policy options to
reduce GHG emissions in Arizona. The CCAG strongly recommends early and
aggressive implementation of the recommendations and a corresponding set
of incentives to promote their early adoption. The CCAG believes that early
action and implementation of its policy recommendations are critical to put
Arizona quickly on the path toward significant emissions reductions. The CCAG
also urges that the policy options be implemented as a set, to the greatest
extent practicable, to achieve the maximum GHG emissions reductions possible.
Overarching Recommendation: Set a State Goal to Reduce Arizona’s GHG
Emissions to 2000 Levels by 2020 and to 50% below 2000 Levels by 2040.
As an overarching policy matter, the CCAG recommends that Arizona
establish a statewide goal of reducing future GHG emissions to a level equal
to 2000 emissions by the year 2020 and to 50% below the 2000 emissions
level by the year 2040.

y
E3

The recommended goal for reductions in Arizona’s GHG emissions reflects
the CCAG’s policy options recommendations. In fact, the CCAG’s recommended
policy options, if fully implemented, could reduce GHG emissions in Arizona by
several million metric tons more than the amounts called for in the
recommended goal. The CCAG’s policy options could cut Arizona’s GHG emissions
by more than 69 MMtCO2e in 2020, reducing GHG emissions to more than
five percent (5%) below the 2000 level. Cumulative GHG emissions reductions
from 2007-2020 for all the policy options combined could total more than
485 MMtCO2e (adjusted for overlap to avoid double-counting of reductions).
Figure E-3 below shows the annual GHG reductions that could be achieved
by sector through the CCAG’s recommended policy options from 2010 to 2020.
As Figure E-3 illustrates, a significant portion of the achievable reductions are
associated with energy efficiency and renewable energy policy options in the
residential, commercial, and industrial sectors.
Figure E-3

2010 through 2020 GHG Reductions, by Sector

AF – Agriculture and Forestry
TLU – Transportation and Land Use
ES – Energy Supply
RCI – Residential Commercial Industrial (fuel use)

y
E4

The recommended goal for Arizona is consistent with the goals set by other
states, including those in the West, that are implementing GHG reduction strategies:
AZ

2000 levels by 2020; 50 percent below 2000 levels by 2040

CA

2000 levels by 2010; 1990 levels by 2020;
80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050

CT

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

MA

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

ME

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

NJ

3.5 percent below 1990 levels by 2005

NM

2000 levels by 2012; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below 2050

NY

5 percent below 1990 by 2010; 10 percent below 1990 levels by 2020

OR

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent by 2050

RI

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent by 2100

WA

1990 levels by 2020; 70-80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050

(Puget Sound)

Reducing Arizona’s GHG emissions to the recommended levels through
full implementation of all of the CCAG’s recommendations also would result in
significant economic benefits for the state, including substantial economic
cost savings, new job creation and enhanced economic development. The
Center for Climate Strategies (CCS) has calculated overall net economic cost
savings from the CCAG’s recommendations of more than $5.5 billion between
2007-2020, with additional significant cost savings also expected between
2020-2040 (although not calculated by CCS). The CCS also has calculated an
average net economic cost savings of nearly $13 per ton of GHG emisssions
reduced under the CCAG’s recommended policy options (if fully implemented).

y
E5

The Policy Options
The CCAG is recommending a comprehensive set of forty-nine (49)
policy options:
Cross-Cutting (CC) Issues
The CCAG is recommending five (5) policy options to facilitate reductions
in Arizona’s GHG emissions across economic sectors and address issues
associated with climate change. These policy options include:
•Set a State GHG Reduction Goal (as stated above) (CC-1)
•Establish a GHG Emissions Reporting Mechanism (CC-2)
•Establish a GHG Emissions Registry (CC-3)
•Undertake Climate Action Education and Outreach (CC-4)
•Develop a State Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (CC-5)
Residential, Commercial, Industrial and Waste Management (RCI) Sectors
The CCAG is recommending a set of twelve (12) policy options to reduce
emissions from the RCI sector, including improving energy efficiency, substituting lower-emissions energy resources, and strategies to reduce emissions
from the production of electricity consumed by the RCI sector. The state’s
rapid growth and limited pursuit of energy efficiency to date offers particularly
strong opportunities to reduce emissions through improving the efficiency of
buildings, appliances and industrial practices. The RCI policy options include:
•Set Demand-Side Efficiency Goals and Establish Funds, Incentives, and
Programs to Achieve Them (RCI-1)
•Establish State Leadership Programs to Achieve Energy Savings and
Promote Clean Energy (RCI-2)
•Implement Enhanced Appliance Efficiency Standards (RCI-3)
•Adopt Building Standards/Codes/Design Incentives for Energy Efficiency
and Smart Growth (RCI-4 & RCI 5)
•Encourage Distributed Generation of Renewable Energy and Combined
Heat and Power (RCI-6 & RCI 7)
•Implement Electricity Pricing Strategies that Support Energy
Conservation (RCI-8)
•Promote Low-Global-Warming-Potential Refrigerants in Commercial
Operations (RCI-9)
•Provide Incentives for Consumers to Switch to Low GHG Energy Sources
(RCI-10)
•Increase Recycling and Solid Waste Management and Reduction (RCI-12)
•Increase Water Use Efficiency and Promote Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy Production from Water and Wastewater Management
(RCI-13)

y
E6

Energy Supply (ES) Sector
The CCAG is recommending a set of eight (8) policy options to significantly
reduce GHG emissions from the ES sector. The principal challenge in addressing GHG emissions from Arizona’s electricity sector is the state’s extraordinary
growth rate and the accompanying projected increase in energy demand.
New policies are needed to increase utilization of Arizona’s renewable energy
resources, like solar, wind, biomass and geothermal, and reduce reliance on
pulverized coal technology. The ES policy options include:
•Increase the Environmental Portfolio Standard by 1% each year through
2025 (ES-1)
•Provide Incentives for and Encourage Investment in Renewable Energy
(ES-3)
•Explore Development of a National or Regional GHG Cap and Trade
Program (ES-4)
•Implement Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)
•Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Distributed Generation of Clean
Energy (ES-9)
•Implement Net Metering and Advanced Metering for Energy
Consumption (ES-10)
•Implement Pricing Strategies to Promote Energy Conservation and Use
of Renewable Energy (ES-11)
•Implement Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12)
Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector
The CCAG is recommending a set of thirteen (13) policy options to reduce
GHG emissions reductions from the TLU sector, including improved vehicle
fuel efficiency, increased usage of lower-emissions fuels, greater use of loweremissions means of travel and land use and other strategies to decrease the
growth in fuel use and vehicle miles traveled (VMT). GHG emissions from the
TLU sector, which are expected to more than double by 2020 (over 1990
levels), are influenced by transportation technologies and fuels, along with
population, economic growth and land use policies that affect the demand for
transportation services. The TLU policy options include:
•Adopt the Clean Car Program (TLU-1)
•Implement Policies to Promote Smart Growth Planning, Infill, Increased
Density and Transit-Oriented/Pedestrian Friendly Development (TLU-2)
•Promote Multi-Modal Transit (TLU-3)
•Reduce Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)
•Set Standards for Alternative Fuels (TLU-5)
•Provide Incentives for Hybrid Vehicles (TLU-7)
•Explore Feebates (TLU-8)
•Implement a Pilot Program for Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)

y
E7

•Encourage Low Rolling Resistance Tires and Promote Proper Tire
Inflation (TLU-10)
•Provide Incentives for Accelerated Replacement/Retirement of
High-Emitting Diesel Vehicles (TLU-11)
•Increase the Use of Biodiesel (TLU-12)
•Implement Practices and Procurement Policies to Achieve a Lower-GHGEmitting State Vehicle Fleet (TLU-13)
•Reduce the Speed Limit to 60 mph for Commercial Trucks on
Highways/Freeways (TLU-14)
Agriculture and Forestry (AF) Sectors
The CCAG is recommending eleven (11) policy options for the AF sectors.
While the AF sectors are directly responsible for only a small amount of
Arizona’s current GHG emissions, there are opportunities for GHG reductions
in the sectors, as well as reductions in overall GHG emissions in the state by
increased carbon sequestration through new policies and practices in the AF
sectors. The AF policy options include:
•Use Manure Digesters to Reduce Methane Emissions from Livestock
Operations and Promote Energy Use of the Captured Methane (A-1)
•Use Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2)
•Increase Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)
•Convert Agricultural Land to Grassland or Forest to Increase Carbon
Sequestration (A-7)
•Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)
•Promote Consumption of Locally Produced Agricultural Commodities to
Reduce Transportation Emissions (A-9)
•Decrease the Conversion of Forestland to Developed Uses (F-1)
•Increase Reforestation and Restoration of Forestland (F-2)
•Improve Forest Ecosystem Management (F-3a & 3b)
•Improve Commercialization of Biomass Gasification and Combined Cycle
Technologies (F-4)

GHG Reductions from the Recommended Policy Options
Figure E-4 below shows the amount of GHG emissions reductions achievable
under each individual, quantified policy option cumulatively from 2007-2020,
ranked by its GHG reduction potential. The CCS was able to quantify the GHG
emissions reduction potential for 35 of the 49 total recommended policy options.

y
E8

CCAG Recommended Policy Options,
by Quantified Indvidual GHG Reduction 2007-2020
140

120

2007-2020 MMtCO2e

100

80

60

40

20

-9

2
F3

-1

U

U
TL

F-

1
F-

-2
A

A

-8
A

TL

C
R

3b

-1
1

A

-1

a

I-2

0

3
U

-1

I-1
4

TL

U

-1

-1
U

TL

TL

C
R

F-

C

2

R
0
I-1

C
R

-3

-4
U
TL

ES

I-4
C
R

-9
ES

3a

I-3

I-7

-9
U

-1
1

C
R

TL

I-8

ES

C

I-5

-3

C
R

A
I-6
C

U

R

-1
-2
R

-6

U
TL
TL

ES

-1

2

2
R

C

I-1

I-1
C

ES

ES

-1

0

R

Figure E-4

AZ CCAG Policy Option

Policy Option

MMtCO2e

Environmental Portfolio Standard/Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (ES-1)

116.00

Demand-Side Efficiency Goals, Funds, Incentives, and Programs (RCI-1)

103.00

Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)

70.40

Solid Waste Management (RCI-12)

36.00

State Clean Car Program (TLU-1)

32.50

Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12)

28.00

Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)

28.00

Smart Growth Bundle of Options (TLU-2)

26.70

“Beyond Code” Building Design Incentives and Programs for Smart Growth (RCI-5)

18.00

Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power (RCI-6)

16.00

Electricity Pricing Strategies (RCI-8)

16.00

Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation (ES-9)

16.00

Pricing Strategies (ES-11)

16.00

Building Standards/Codes for Smart Growth (RCI-4)

14.00

Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)

12.30

Reduction of Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)

11.80

Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications (RCI-7)

10.00

Direct Renewable Energy Support (ES-3)
(including Tax Credits and Incentives, R&D, and siting/zoning)

10.00

Appliance Standards (RCI-3)

7.00

Demand-Side Fuel Switching (RCI-10)

7.00

Forest Ecosystem Management – Residential Lands (F-3a)

6.40

y
E9

Policy Option

MMtCO2e

Biodiesel Implementation (TLU-12)

6.20

Water Use and Wastewater Management (RCI-13)

6.00

60 mph Speed Limit for Commercial Trucks (TLU-14)

5.20

Low Rolling Resistance Tires and Tire Inflation (TLU-10)

4.80

Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2)

4.54

Manure Management – Manure Digesters (A-1)

3.82

Forestland Protection from Developed Uses (F-1)

3.73

State Leadership Programs (RCI-2)

3.00

Forest Ecosystem Management – Other Lands (F-3b)

2.90

Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)

1.59

Accelerated Replacement/ Retirement of High-Emitting Diesel Fleet (TLU-11)

1.20

Reforestation/Restoration of Forestland (F-2)

0.65

State Lead-By-Example (via Procurement and SmartWay) (TLU-13)

0.40

Programs to Support Local Farming/Buy Local (A-9)

0.15

The data presented illustrate the potential “stand alone” GHG emissions
reductions achievable separately under each individual policy option if the
option was implemented solely by itself and not in conjunction with other policy
options. The potential GHG emissions reduction figures do not account for overlaps that could occur between reductions achievable under individual policy
options if the options were implemented together.
For example, while Figure E-4 shows cumulative GHG emissions reductions
of 116 MMtCO2e for policy option ES-1 as a “stand alone” option, the total
would become 70.3 MMtCO2e if the option were implemented in conjunction
with all of the other recommended policy options, due to overlaps (especially
with the RCI sector). See pages H-3 to H-4 in Appendix H. The same principle
applies for ES-6, which changes from 70.4 MMtCO2e to 50.3 MMtCO2e. See
page H-18 in Appendix H. When adjusted for overlaps to avoid double counting,
the cumulative GHG emissions reductions potentially achievable from 20072020 through full implementation of all of the CCAG’s recommended policy
options is 485.4 MMtCO2e. See Table 1-3 on page 24 and footnote 15.

y
E10

CHAPTER 1: OVERVIEW
Executive Order 2005-02
On February 2, 2005, Governor Janet Napolitano signed Executive Order
2005-02 establishing the Climate Change Advisory Group (CCAG). Appointed
by the Governor, the 35-member CCAG comprised a diverse group of stakeholders
who brought broad perspective and expertise to the topic of climate change
in Arizona. The Governor’s Executive Order directed the CCAG, under the
coordination of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ), to:
1) prepare an inventory and forecast of Arizona greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions; and
2) develop a Climate Change Action Plan with recommendations for
reducing GHG emissions in Arizona.
The Executive Order declared that “scientific consensus has developed
that increasing emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane and other greenhouse gases released to the atmosphere are affecting the Earth’s climate”
and emphasized that “Arizona and other Western States have particular
concerns about the impacts of climate change and climate variability on the
environment, including the potential for prolonged drought, severe forest fires,
warmer temperatures, increased snowmelt, reduced snow pack and other effects.”
The Executive Order also recognized that “a number of states are addressing
climate change and greenhouse gas emissions on an individual and/or
regional basis” and declared that “actions to reduce GHG emissions, including
increasing energy efficiency, conserving natural resources and developing
renewable energy sources, may have multiple benefits including economic
development, job creation, cost savings, and improved air quality.”

The CCAG Process
The CCAG held its first meeting on July 14, 2005, followed by a year of
intensive fact-finding and consensus building. The CCAG met six times, with
its last formal meeting on June 22, 2006. During this period, five sector-based
technical work groups (TWGs) of the CCAG met a total of 40 times via
teleconference, beginning in August 2005 and concluding in May 2006.
The TWGs consisted of CCAG members as well as other individuals with
interest and expertise in the issues being addressed by each TWG. The five
TWGs were: Energy Supply (ES); Residential, Commercial, Industrial and
Waste Management (RCI); Transportation and Land Use (TLU); Agriculture and
Forestry (AF); and Cross-Cutting Issues (CC).
The CCAG process involved a model of informed self-determination
through a facilitated stepwise consensus building approach. Under the
oversight of ADEQ, the process was conducted by The Center for Climate
Strategies (CCS), an independent, expert facilitation and technical analysis

y
1

team, based on procedures that CCS consultants have used in a number of
other state climate change planning initiatives since 2000, adapted specifically
for Arizona.
During the course of the process, the CCAG reached technical consensus
on specific mitigation options and evaluative findings related to benefits,
costs, and ancillary and feasibility issues associated with options, followed by
development of policy consensus on individual recommendations. The CCAG
process sought but did not mandate consensus, and it explicitly documented
the level of CCAG support for individual policy recommendations and key findings established through a voting process, including barriers to consensus
where they existed.
The recommendations adopted by the CCAG and presented in this report
underwent two levels of screening by the CCAG. First, a potential policy option
being considered by a TWG was accepted as a “priority for analysis” and
developed for full analysis only if it had a supermajority of support from CCAG
members (with a “supermajority” defined as five or fewer “no” votes or
objections). Second, after the analyses were conducted, only policy options
that received at least majority support from CCAG members were adopted as
recommendations by the CCAG and included in this report.
In total, of the 49 policy recommendations adopted by the CCAG, 45
received unanimous consent, two (2) received a supermajority of support,
and two (2) received a majority of support (see later chapters in this report
and the Appendices for details).

Arizona GHG Emissions Inventory and Forecast
Prior to the first meeting of the CCAG, a preliminary inventory and forecast
of GHG emissions for Arizona for years 1990 through 2020 was produced
pursuant to Executive Order 2005-02. This document, entitled “Arizona GHG
Emissions Inventory and Reference Case Projections, 1990–2020,” was
completed in June 2005, and then approved by unanimous consent at the
CCAG’s December 2005 meeting following technical review and revision by the
CCAG. This assessment included detailed coverage of all economic sectors and
GHGs in Arizona, including future emissions trends and assessment issues
related to energy, economic and population growth. Figure 1-1 depicts the
level of emissions from each sector in Arizona in year 2000. For comparison,
Figure 1-2 shows GHG emissions in the United States as a whole by economic
sector.

y
2

Figure 1-1

Arizona Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions in 2000

Figure 1-2

US Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions in 2000

y
3

The inventory of Arizona’s GHG emissions provided several critical findings, including:
• Between 1990 and 2005 Arizona’s net GHG emissions increased by nearly
56%, from an estimated 59.3 million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent
(MMtCO2e) to an estimated 92.6 MMtCO2e.1
• Arizona’s GHG emissions have increased more than the nation as a whole,
driven by Arizona’s high population and economic growth combined with
relatively high levels of energy use and carbon intensive energy sources,
particularly coal and petroleum. The State’s GHG emissions are forecasted
to increase by 148% from 1990 to 20202, while national emissions are forecasted to rise by about 42% over this same period.3
• Arizona’s per capita GHG emissions (the total level of statewide emissions
divided by state population) of 14 metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent
(tCO2e) are less than the national average of 22 tCO2e because of the relative absence of heavy industry in the State and other factors, such as
lower than average heating needs for buildings and facilities.
• The transportation and electricity sectors account for more than three-fourths
– roughly 77% -- of Arizona’s total GHG emissions, and are higher than the
national average. Both sectors are growing at relatively high rates as well.
• Other fossil fuels usage – such as natural gas, oil products, and coal – in
the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors contributes another 11%
of the state total, while other industrial processes, agriculture and waste
account for about 12% combined.
• The storage of forest carbon was found to have a significant offsetting
effect to emissions from other sources.
The emissions forecast revealed substantial emissions growth rates and
related policy challenges. Arizona’s projected GHG increase of 148% over 1990
levels by the year 2020 (without further mitigation actions) is the highest
known projected emissions growth rate in the country.4
Arizona’s rate is almost five times the average growth rate for the West
Coast and Northeastern states that have completed climate action plans.
(The average projected GHG emissions growth rate for these states during
the 1990-2020 period is 33%.) Figure 1-3 compares Arizona’s projected GHG
emissions growth with the growth in other states that are addressing their
GHG emissions (expressing the increase from 1990-2020 as a percentage of
1990 levels for each state). Figure 1-4 provides a detailed breakdown of forecasted GHG emissions in Arizona by sector.5
1

Arizona’s GHG emissions in 2000 were an estimated 82.3 MMtCO2e, a 40% increase over 1990 levels.
These growth figures take into account the projected effects of recent energy efficiency related actions
for the RCI sectors adopted by the State. Taking these actions into account, Arizona’s GHG emissions
are projected to be roughly 147 MMtCO2e in 2020. Without these actions emissions growth in 2020
would be forecasted to increase by 159% over 1990 levels for a total of nearly 154 MMtCO2e in 2020.
3
U.S. Energy Information Administration CO2 inventory and forecast data from 1990 to 2030, available
at www.eia.doe.gov/environment.html.
4
These emissions estimates do not include black carbon and organic carbon contributions, such as
soot, smoke and fine particulate matter from diesel emissions. These contributions are difficult
to convert into CO2 equivalents, but application of available methods indicates that black carbon and
organic carbon emissions may have accounted for 3 to 6 MMtCO2e in Arizona in 2002.
5
The figures used for projected GHG emission increases do not take into account impacts on energy
demand resulting from higher temperatures due to climate change; rather, the figures assumed current,
business-as-usual scenarios.
2

y
4

Figure 1-3

Comparison of 1990-2020 GHG Emissions Growth
for States with Climate Plans

Figure 1-4

Chart of Projected Arizona GHG Emissions from 1990-2020

MMtCO2e - Million Metric Tons Carbon Dioxide Equivalent
RCI - Residential Commercial Industrial
ODS – Ozone Depleting Substances
While Arizona’s high emissions growth rate presents challenges, it also
provides major opportunities. Because more than three-fourths of Arizona’s
GHG emissions are directly related to energy and transportation, the opportunity
exists for Arizona to reduce its GHG emissions while continuing its strong
economic growth by being more energy efficient, using more renewable energy
sources, building new infrastructure “right” in the first place to produce lower
GHG emissions and increasing the use of cleaner transportation modes,
technologies and fuels.

y
5

The CCAG’s Policy Options
A. The Overarching Recommendation:
Set a State Goal to Reduce Arizona’s GHG Emissions to 2000 Levels by
2020 and to 50% below 2000 Levels by 2040
As an overarching policy matter, the CCAG recommends that Arizona
establish a statewide goal of reducing future GHG emissions to a level equal
to 2000 emissions by the year 2020, and to 50% below the 2000 emissions
level by the year 2040.
The recommended goals for significant reductions in Arizona’s GHG emissions
reflect the CCAG’s recommendations for 49 specific policy recommendations
and extensive consideration of benefits, costs, and feasibility issues. In fact,
the CCAG’s recommended policy options, if fully implemented, could reduce
GHG emissions in Arizona by several million metric tons more than the
amounts called for in the recommended goal. The CCAG’s policy optons could
cut Arizona’s GHG emissions by more than 69 MMtCO2e in 2020, reducing
GHG emissions to more than five percent (5%) below the 2000 level.
Cumulative GHG emissions reductions from 2007-2020 for all the policy
options combined could total more than 485 MMtCO2e (adjusted for overlaps
to avoid double-counting of reductions).
The GHG reductions between 2010 and 2020 achievable by sector under
the CCAG’s recommendations are shown in Figure 1-6, which illustrates that a
significant portion of the achievable reductions are associated with energy
efficiency and renewable energy policy options in the residential, commercial,
and industrial sectors.
Figure 1-5

2010 through 2020 GHG Reductions, by Sector

AF – Agriculture and Forestry
TLU – Transportation and Land Use

ES – Energy Supply
RCI – Residential Commercial Industrial (fuel use)

y
6

The recommended goal for Arizona is consistent with the goals set by
other states, including those in the West, that are implementing GHG reduction
strategies. Table 1-1 below shows how the CCAG’s recommendation compares
to the goals set by other states:
Table 1-1

Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Reduction Goals & Timelines by State

STATE

GHG REDUCTION GOALS & TIMELINES BY STATE

AZ

2000 levels by 2020; 50 percent below 2000 levels by 2040

CA

2000 levels by 2010; 1990 levels by 2020;
80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050

CT

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

MA

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

ME

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below by 2100

NJ

3.5 percent below 1990 levels by 2005

NM

2000 levels by 2012; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent below 2050

NY

5 percent below 1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020

OR

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent by 2050

RI

1990 levels by 2010; 10 percent below by 2020; 75 percent by 2100

WA

1990 levels by 2020; 70-80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050

(Puget Sound)

While the CCAG’s recommended goal calls for a somewhat lower percentage
reduction in GHG emissions against a base year of 1990 than in other states,
the goal is aggressive in light of Arizona’s record projected baseline growth
rate. Moreover, the CCAG’s recommended goal also is consistent with the
scale of reductions estimated by the IPCC and the National Academies of
Science (NAS) needed to stabilize future GHG emissions.6
The CCAG strongly recommends the early and aggressive implementation
of the recommendations in this Action Plan, and a corresponding set of
incentives to promote such early adoption. The CCAG believes that early
action and implementation of its policy recommendations are critical to put
Arizona quickly on the path toward significant emissions reductions. The CCAG
also urges that the policy options be implemented as a set, to the greatest
extent practicable, to achieve the maximum GHG emissions reductions possible.
6

IPCC, Third Assessment Report, Summary for Policymakers, 2001, p. 20.
http://www.ipcc.ch/pub/un/syreng/spm.pdf

y
7

B. Overview of the Policy Options
The CCAG is recommending a comprehensive set of 49 policy options to
reduce GHG emissions in Arizona. These recommendations are summarized
in Table 1-2 at the end of this chapter and include: 12 actions in the
Residential, Commercial, Industrial and Waste Management (RCI) sectors;
8 actions in the Energy Supply (ES) sector; 13 actions in the Transportation and
Land Use (TLU) sector; 11 actions in the (AF) Agriculture and Forestry sectors7;
and 5 Cross Cutting (CC) issues across all sectors. The detailed descriptions
of these recommendations presented in this report and its appendices also
include a wide variety of potential implementation approaches considered by
the CCAG.
Although not prepared in coordination with other state and regional
actions, the recommendations adopted by the CCAG are consistent with and
supportive of resolutions adopted by the Western Governors Association
(WGA), including those adopted at its June 2006 annual meeting in Sedona,
Arizona, pertaining to “Regional and National Policies Regarding Global
Climate Change,”8 “Clean and Diversified Energy for the West,”9 and
“Transportation Fuels for the Future,”10 as well as the recommendations of
the WGA’s Clean and Diversified Energy Advisory Committee (CDEAC).11
In addition to substantially reducing Arizona’s GHG emissions, implementation of the CCAG’s recommendations would produce significant economic
benefits for the state. The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS) has calculated
overall net economic cost savings from the CCAG’s recommendations of more
than $5.5 billion between 2007-2020, with additional significant cost savings
also expected between 2020-2040 (although not calculated by the CCS). The
CCS also has calculated an average net economic cost savings of nearly $13
per ton of GHGs removed under the CCAG’s recommended policy options
(if fully implemented).
The CCAG’s recommendations also complement other efforts underway,
including those by the Growing Smarter Oversight Council, which is addressing
issues associated with current and projected growth in Arizona. This underscores the potential co-benefits of the CCAG’s recommended policy options.
Finally, the CCAG has recommended that, while taking action to reduce
GHG emissions in Arizona, the Governor also should develop a State climate
change adaptation strategy that identifies – and outlines steps for responding
to – the potential impacts of climate change on the State. Because of the
current build-up in the atmosphere of GHGs and the length of time (100 years
or longer) that GHGs like CO2 will remain in the atmosphere, Arizona will
experience the effects of climate change for years to come, even if immediate
action is taken to reduce future GHG emissions. As such, it is essential that
Arizona develop a strategy to manage the projected impacts of ongoing climate
7

Policy options F-3a and F-3b address Forest Ecosystem Management, on residential lands and other
lands, respectively. While they are summarized collectively in the narrative of this Action Plan, they are
counted separately for the total number of policy options.
8
Resolution 06-3 http://www.westgov.org/wga/policy/06/climate-change.pdf
9
Resolution 06-10 http://www.westgov.org/wga/policy/06/clean-energy.pdf
10
Resolution 06-20 http://www.westgov.org/wga/policy/06/futurefuels.pdf
11
http://www.westgov.org/wga/meetings/am2006/CDEAC06.pdf

y
8

change, and to that end, the CCAG recommends, among other actions, that
the Governor consider appointing a task force or advisory group to develop
recommendations for the State adaptation strategy.

C. Summary of the Recommended Individual Policy Options
Short summaries of the 49 policy options recommended by the CCAG are
listed below.12 More detailed descriptions of individual policy options can be
found in the sector chapters which follow. Fully detailed descriptions of the
individual policy options that were presented to and approved by the CCAG
can be found in the Technical Appendices.

CROSS-CUTTING (CC) ALL SECTORS
State Greenhouse Gas Reduction Goal (CC-1)
Arizona should establish a statewide GHG reduction target to lower GHG
emissions to 2000 levels by 2020 and to 50% below 2000 GHG levels by
2040. The emissions reductions achievable through the specific recommendations adopted by the CCAG can exceed these goals in 2020.
State Greenhouse Gas Reporting (CC-2)
Arizona should implement a GHG reporting mechanism to support tracking
and management of GHG emissions. A reporting mechanism will assist in
future emissions inventories, promote awareness and action to reduce GHG
emissions, and is an essential precursor enabling a GHG registry and possible
future trading opportunities. To the greatest extent possible, GHG reporting
should be structured collaboratively with other interested states.
State Greenhouse Gas Registry (CC-3)
Arizona should implement a GHG registry mechanism – preferably on a
regional basis in concert with other interested states – to enable tracking,
management, crediting, and “baseline protection” for entities that reduce
GHG emissions.
State Climate Action Education and Outreach (CC-4)
Arizona should undertake extensive climate change education and outreach
activities to create a foundation of public awareness to ensure the long-term
success of the State’s mitigation and adaptation actions.
State Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (CC-5)
Arizona should develop and implement a comprehensive state climate
change adaptation strategy to manage the projected impacts of climate
change while simultaneously taking action to reduce its GHG emissions. The
Governor may wish to appoint a CCAG-like task force or advisory group to
develop this strategy.
12

More detailed descriptions and discussion of the policy options are presented in chapters 4-8 of this
Action Plan and in the Appendices to the Action Plan
(see http://www.azclimatechange.us/template.cfm?FrontID=4670).
Gaps in the numbers sequence of policy options reflect options that the CCAG did not approve for recommendation in this Action Plan.

y
9

RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL (RCI) AND WASTE MANAGEMENT SECTORS
Demand-Side Efficiency Goals, Funds, Incentives, and Programs (RCI-1)
Arizona should set energy savings goals for electricity and natural gas, as
well as programs and funding mechanisms to achieve these goals:
1) Electricity (energy savings target): 5% savings by 2010, 15% savings by
2020;
2) Natural Gas (utility spending target): ramp up to spending 1.5% of gas
utility revenues by 2015.
State Leadership Programs (RCI-2)
Arizona should establish “Lead by Example” initiatives to achieve energy
cost savings and promote clean energy technologies by the public and private
sectors. Initiatives include a further 15% reduction in energy use per square
foot in State buildings from 2011 to 2020; standards for new State buildings;
green procurement strategies; and promotion of new combined heat and
power (CHP) facilities in State buildings.
Appliance Standards (RCI-3)
Arizona should implement State appliance efficiency standards for appliances not covered by federal standards or where higher-than-federal standard
efficiency requirements are appropriate.
Building Standards/Codes for Smart Growth (RCI-4))
Arizona should adopt and implement improved energy efficiency building
codes, including potentially establishing a statewide code or strongly encouraging local jurisdictions to adopt and maintain state-of-the-art codes.
“Beyond Code” Building Design Incentives and Programs for Smart Growth (RCI-5)
Arizona should ensure that new and existing buildings achieve high levels
of energy efficiency by implementing energy performance standards for Statefunded and other government buildings, and by providing incentives for private
and other buildings.
Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power (RCI-6)
Arizona should encourage distributed generation/combined heat and
power (DG/CHP) systems through a combination of regulatory changes and
incentive programs.
Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications (RCI-7)
Arizona should promote increasing use of renewable distributed generation
through direct incentives for system purchase, market-based incentives for
system operation (including “net metering”), State goals or directives, and
favorable rules for interconnecting renewable generation systems with the
electricity grid.

y
10

Electricity Pricing Strategies (RCI-8))
Arizona should implement changes in Arizona electricity pricing and tariffs
to provide improved incentives for end-users to conserve energy (through
inverted block rates) and to adjust the timing of energy use to the extent this
reduces GHG emissions.
Mitigating High Global Warming Potential Gas Emissions (RCI-9)
Arizona should consider promoting the use of low “global warming potential”
refrigerants in retail food stores, restaurants, and refrigerated transport
vehicles (trucks and railcars) through voluntary agreements, specifications,
and incentives.
Demand-Side Fuel Switching (RCI-10)
Arizona should encourage consumers to switch from high-carbon fuels
(coal and oil) to lower-carbon fuels (natural gas) or “low or zero carbon”
energy sources (solar water heating or biofuels) through a combination of
incentives and targeted research.
Solid Waste Management (RCI-12)
Arizona should ensure that curbside recycling programs are provided in all
communities over 50,000 in population; increase the penetration of recycling
in multi-family dwellings; create new recycling programs for the commercial
sector (including construction materials); develop markets for recycled materials;
increase participation/recovery rates for existing recycling programs; develop
a statewide recycling goal; and reduce waste generation.
Water Use and Wastewater Management (RCI-13)
Arizona should accelerate investment in water use efficiency, increase the
energy efficiency of all water and wastewater treatment operations, increase
renewable energy production by water and wastewater agencies; encourage
and create incentives for technologies with the capability to reduce water use
associated with power generation; and ensure that power plants use the best
management practices and economically feasible technology available to
conserve water.

y
11

ENERGY SUPPLY (ES) SECTOR
Environmental Portfolio Standard /Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (ES-1))
Arizona should adopt a more aggressive renewable energy mandate than
the current Environmental Portfolio Standard. It would start with the 2005
requirement for 1% renewables and increase it 1% each year to 26% in 2025,
allowing out-of-state renewables and renewable energy credits (RECs) trading.
Further, the CCAG recommends applying this requirement to generation statewide,
not only to Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) jurisdictional utilities.
Direct Renewable Energy Support (ES-3)
Arizona should encourage investment in renewables by providing direct
financial incentives and by removing siting and zoning barriers to renewable
energy facilities. (Note: This recommendation is brought forward by the CCAG
jointly with recommendation RCI-7 concerning Distributed
Generation/Renewable Energy Applications.)
GHG Cap and Trade Program (ES-4))
Arizona should explore the development of a regional or national, economywide cap and trade program for GHG emissions. (Note: While this recommendation originated in the Energy Supply workgroup and focused initially on
utilities, the CCAG “economy-wide” reference explicitly recommends that a
multi-sector cap and trade program be investigated.)
Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)
Arizona should implement a mandatory carbon intensity target that begins in
2010 (i.e., equal to carbon intensity in 2010) and declines by 3 percent annually
through 2025. The carbon intensity target would be translated annually into a
cap, and trading would be allowed under that cap.
Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation (ES-9)
Arizona should remove barriers to renewable energy and clean distributed
generation (DG) to enable more clean generation to enter Arizona’s energy
supply mix. This would have the effect of displacing fossil fuel generation,
thereby reducing CO2 emissions. (Note: This recommendation is brought
forward by the CCAG jointly with recommendation RCI-6 concerning
Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power.)
Metering Strategies (ES-10)
Arizona should implement two effective metering strategies:
Net metering allows owners of grid-connected distributed generation (generating units on the customer side of the meter) to generate excess electricity
and sell it back to the grid, effectively “turning the meter backward.”
Advanced metering allows electricity customers much greater opportunity
to manage their electricity consumption, such as setting a meter to turn off
or turn down air conditioning while away.

y
12

Pricing Strategies (ES-11)
Arizona should implement pricing strategies such as “real-time pricing” in
which utility customer rates are not fixed, but reflect the varying costs that
utilities actually pay for power; “time-of-use” rates, which differ for different
times of the day and/or different seasons; “increasing block” rates whereby
prices increase with higher consumption; and green pricing whereby
customers are given the opportunity to purchase electricity with a renewable
or cleaner mix than the standard supply mix offered by the utility.
Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12))
Arizona should implement an Integrated Resource Planning (IRP) process,
which integrates technology and policy options on the demand side with supply
side options to satisfy anticipated future demand for energy. (Traditional
approaches simply focus on supply-side options to meet forecasted load
growth.) Demand-side measures include energy efficiency, distributed generation,
waste energy recycling, and peak-shaving measures.

y
13

TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE (TLU) SECTOR
State Clean Car Program (TLU-1)
Arizona should adopt the State Clean Car Program emissions standards
adopted by 11 states in order to reduce the net emissions of GHGs from
passenger vehicle operation. The standards, which must still be approved by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), would take effect in Model
Year 2011 (calendar year 2010).
Smart Growth Bundle of Options (TLU-2))
Arizona should implement a bundle of options to reduce GHG emissions
through land use practices and policies. The options include:
1) infill and brownfield redevelopment;
2) transit-oriented development;
3) pedestrian and bicycle friendly development;
4) smart growth planning, modeling and tools;
5) promoting use of multi-modal transit options;
6) increased density.
Multi-Modal Transit Options (TLU-3)
Arizona should implement a bundle of options to reduce GHG emissions
through land use practices and policies that specifically promote the use of
multi-modal transit options.
Reduction of Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)
Arizona should implement policies to reduce idling from diesel and gasoline
heavy-duty vehicles, buses, and other vehicles through the combination of a
statewide anti-idling rule and by promoting and expanding the use of technologies that reduce heavy-duty vehicle idling. These technologies include:
1) automatic engine shut down/start up system controls;
2) direct fired heaters (for providing heat only);
3) auxiliary power units;
4) truck stop electrification.
Standards for Alternative Fuels (TLU-5)
Arizona should develop and enforce a State standard for neat biodiesel
(B100), biodiesel blends, and ethanol blends to ensure fuel quality and
reduce emissions and performance problems with these fuels, and to enable
more widespread acceptance of these fuels.
Hybrid Promotion and Incentives (TLU-7)
Arizona should encourage government programs to promote and incentivize the purchase of hybrid vehicles, including reduction in fees and taxes
(such as the State’s Vehicle License Tax) and giving preferential infrastructure
access to hybrids on carpool lanes or metered parking spaces.

y
14

Feebates (TLU-8)
Arizona should study the desirability/feasibility of a "feebate" program to
incentivize greater consumer choices and purchase of vehicles that produce
lower emissions of GHGs while conserving fuel, including:
1) a fee on relatively high emissions/lower fuel economy vehicles and
2) a rebate or tax credit on low emissions/higher fuel economy vehicles.
Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)
Arizona should implement a pilot program to test the feasibility of allowing
“pay as you drive” (PAYD) insurance under which insurance rates would be
based on the miles driven.
Low Rolling Resistance Tires and Tire Inflation (TLU-10))
Arizona should establish a tire replacement program for low-rolling resistance
tires, which manufacturers currently use on new vehicles but are not easily
available to consumers as replacement tires. Arizona also should promote
proper tire inflation to improve mileage and reduce emissions.
Accelerated Replacement/Retirement of High-Emitting Diesel Fleet (TLU-11)
Arizona should reduce GHG black carbon emissions from heavy-duty
diesel vehicles by developing and implementing an incentives program in
Arizona to accelerate the replacement and/or retirement of the highest-emitting
diesel vehicles.
Biodiesel (TLU-12)
Arizona should implement a series of proposals to increase the use of
biodiesel in Arizona.
State Lead-By-Example via Vehicle Procurement and SmartWay (TLU-13)
Arizona state agencies should “lead by example” by adopting procurement
policies and practices and/or joining the EPA SmartWay program to achieve a
lower-emitting vehicle fleet for the State.
60 MPH Speed Limit for Commercial Trucks (TLU-14)
Arizona should reduce the speed limit for commercial trucks to 60 mph on
Arizona highways and freeways.

y
15

AGRICULTURE (A) AND FORESTRY (F) SECTORS
Manure Management - Manure Digesters (A-1)
Arizona should reduce methane emissions from livestock manure through
the use of manure digesters installed at dairies and promote energy utilization
of the methane captured (e.g., electricity production).
Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2)
Arizona should implement programs to displace fossil fuel use through the
use of agricultural waste (e.g., orchard trimmings, and other crop residue) as
a feedstock for electricity or steam production.
Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)
Arizona should provide incentives for the production of ethanol from crops,
agricultural waste, or other materials to offset fossil fuel (gasoline) use.
Convert Agricultural Land to Grassland or Forest (A-7)
Arizona should increase carbon sequestration in agricultural land by
converting marginal land used for annual crops to permanent cover
(grassland or forests).
Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)
Arizona should reduce the rate at which existing crop and rangelands are
converted to developed uses.
Programs to Support Local Farming/Buy Local (A-9)
Arizona should promote consumption of locally-produced agricultural
commodities, which would offset consumption of commodities transported
from other states or countries.
Forestland Protection from Developed Uses (F-1)
Arizona should implement policy initiatives to decrease the conversion of
forest and woodlands to urban and other developed uses.
Reforestation/Restoration of Forestland (F-2)
Arizona should expand forest cover (and associated carbon stocks) by
regenerating or establishing forests in areas with little or no present forest
cover.
Forest Ecosystem Management (F--3a & 3b)
Arizona should use 50% or more of biomass extracted from residential
and non-residential lands for wood products and/or energy production;
accelerate current and planned fuels treatments in Arizona; and have the
Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council and Forest Health Advisory
Council review forest management practices and policies aimed at GHG
reduction and carbon sequestration.
Improved Commercialization of Biomass Gasification and Combined Cycle (F-4)
Arizona should accelerate the rate of technology development and market
deployment of biomass gasification and combined cycle (BGCC) technologies.

y
16

Policy Option Rankings by Reductions and Savings/Costs
Figures 1-7 and 1-8 and Table 1-2 below show the amount of GHG emissions
reductions achievable from 2007-2020 under each individual, quantified
policy option.13 The CCS was able to quantify the GHG emissions reduction
potential for 35 of the 49 total recommended policy options. Figure 1-8 ranks
the CCAG’s recommended policy options by total savings/cost per ton GHG
removed over this same period.
CCAG Recommended Policy Options,
by Quantified Indvidual GHG Reduction 2007-2020
140

120

2007-2020 MMtCO2e

100

80

60

40

20

-9
A

F3

-1

U

U
TL

F-

1
F-

-2
A

2

-8

I-2

A
-1
1

TL

C

a
R

3b

-1
A

-1

0

3
U

I-1
4

TL

U

-1

-1
U

TL

C
R

F-

C

2

R
I-1

0
TL

C
R

-3

-4
U
TL

ES

I-4
C
R

-9

I-6

ES

C

3a

I-3

I-7

-9
U

-1
1

C
R

TL

I-8

ES

C
R

-3

C
R

A
-2
R

U

I-5

-1
U

-6

TL
TL

ES

-1

2

2
R

C

I-1

I-1
C

ES

ES

-1

0

R

Figure 1-7

AZ CCAG Policy Option

Policy Option

MMtCO2e

Environmental Portfolio Standard/Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (ES-1)

116.00

Demand-Side Efficiency Goals, Funds, Incentives, and Programs (RCI-1)

103.00

Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)

70.40

Solid Waste Management (RCI-12)

36.00

State Clean Car Program (TLU-1)

32.50

Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12)

28.00

Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)

28.00

Smart Growth Bundle of Options (TLU-2)

26.70

“Beyond Code” Building Design Incentives and Programs for Smart Growth (RCI-5)

18.00

Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power (RCI-6)

16.00

Electricity Pricing Strategies (RCI-8)

16.00

Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation (ES-9)

16.00

Pricing Strategies (ES-11)

16.00

13

Quantification reflects potential GHG reduction if each option is implemented alone, rather than as
part of a comprehensive package of CCAG-recommended options. Results would appear lower when
overlaps and duplication are taken into account.

y
17

Policy Option
Building Standards/Codes for Smart Growth (RCI-4)

14.00

Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)

12.30

Reduction of Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)

11.80

Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications (RCI-7)

10.00

Direct Renewable Energy Support (ES-3)
(including Tax Credits and Incentives, R&D, and siting/zoning)

10.00

Appliance Standards (RCI-3)

7.00

Demand-Side Fuel Switching (RCI-10)

7.00

Forest Ecosystem Management – Residential Lands (F-3a)

6.40

Biodiesel Implementation (TLU-12)

6.20

Water Use and Wastewater Management (RCI-13)

6.00

60 mph Speed Limit for Commercial Trucks (TLU-14)

5.20

Low Rolling Resistance Tires and Tire Inflation (TLU-10)

4.80

Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2)

4.54

Manure Management – Manure Digesters (A-1)

3.82

Forestland Protection from Developed Uses (F-1)

3.73

State Leadership Programs (RCI-2)

3.00

Forest Ecosystem Management – Other Lands (F-3b)

2.90

Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)

1.59

Accelerated Replacement/ Retirement of High-Emitting Diesel Fleet (TLU-11)

1.20

Reforestation/Restoration of Forestland (F-2)

0.65

State Lead-By-Example (via Procurement and SmartWay) (TLU-13)

0.40

Programs to Support Local Farming/Buy Local (A-9)

0.15

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, by Quantified Cost Per Ton GHG Removed
Cost savings are shown below the axis. Net costs are shown above the axis.
$80
$60

TL

$20

U
R -1
C
I
R -3
C
ES I-8
R 11
C
I
R -1
C
IES 6
TL -9
U
F- 4
3a
F3
R b
C
I
R -4
C
I-5
A
R 2
C
I-2
ES
TL -12
U
TL -2
U
-9

$40

U
TL -12
U
-1
3
A
-3
A
-1
a
ES
-1
A
-9
F1
R
C
ES I-7
TL -3
U
-1
F- 4
2
ES
-6
A
-8

0
TL

$/MMtCO2e

Figure 1-8

MMtCO2e

-$20

-$40
-$60
-$80

-$100
AZ CCAG Policy Option

y
18

Policy Option

Cost/Cost Savings
per Ton GHG Removed

State Clean Car Program (TLU-1)

-$90

Appliance Standards (RCI-3)

-$66

Electricity Pricing Strategies (RCI-8)

-$63

Pricing Strategies (ES-11)

-$63

Demand-Side Efficiency Goals, Funds, Incentives, and Programs (RCI-1)

-$36

Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power (RCI-6)

-$25

Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation (ES-9)

-$25

Reduction of Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)

-$22

Forest Ecosystem Management – Residential Lands (F-3a)

-$21

Forest Ecosystem Management – Other Lands (F-3b)

-$21

Building Standards/Codes for Smart Growth (RCI-4)

-$18

“Beyond Code” Building Design Incentives and Programs for Smart Growth (RCI-5)

-$17

Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam/Production (A-2)

-$8

State Leadership Programs (RCI-2)

-$4

Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12)

-$2

Smart Growth Bundle of Options (TLU-2)

$0

Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)

$0

Biodiesel Implementation (TLU-12)

$0

State Lead-By-Example (via Procurement and SmartWay) (TLU-13)

$0

Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)

$0

Environmental Portfolio Standard/Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (ES-1)

$6

Programs to Support Local Farming/Buy Local (A-9)

$6

Manure Management – Manure Digesters (A-1)

$7

Forestland Protection from Developed Uses (F-1)

$17

Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications (RCI-7)

$31

Direct Renewable Energy Support (ES-3)
(including Tax Credits and Incentives, R&D, and siting/zoning)

$31

60 mph Speed Limit for Commercial Trucks (TLU- 14)

$35

Reforestation/Restoration of Forestland (F-2)

$44

Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)

$44

Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)

$65

y
19

Table 1-2

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL (RCI) AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative Cost/Cost Savings
Per Ton GHG
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
Removed
($/tCO2e)
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

RCI-1

Demand-Side Efficiency Goals,
Funds, Incentives, and Programs

3.1

15.1

103

-$36

RCI-2

State Leadership Programs

0.04

0.4

3

-$4

RCI-3

Appliance Standards

0.2

1.0

7

-$66

RCI-4

Building Standards/Codes for
Smart Growth

0.3

2.2

14

-$18

RCI-5

“Beyond Code” Building Design
Incentives and Programs for
Smart Growth

0.2

3.1

18

-$17

RCI-6

Distributed Generation
Combined Heat and Power

0.4

2.7

16

-$25

RCI-7

Distributed Generation
Renewable Energy Applications

0.1

2.1

10

$31

RCI-8

Electricity Pricing Strategies

1.1

1.5

16

-$63

RCI-9

Mitigating High Global Warming
Potential (GWP) Gas Emissions
(HFCs, SFCs, PFCs)

RCI-10

Demand-Side Fuel Switching

0.1

1.2

7

Not available

RCI-12

Solid Waste Management

2.2

3.7

36

Not available

RCI-13

Water Use and Wastewater
Management

0.2

0.8

6

Not available

Not available

Notes
Numbers are rounded to the nearest one-tenth.
Cost savings are shown as negative costs. All costs are estimated using a real discount rate of 5%
(see Appendix G for details).
RCI-9: Lack of specific policy design and lack of data prevented estimation of tons and costs.
RCI-10: Lack of data prevented estimation of costs.
RCI-12: Lack of data prevented estimation of costs.
RCI-13: Lack of data prevented estimation of costs.

y
20

Table 1-2

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

ENERGY SUPPLY (ES)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative Cost/Cost Savings
Per Ton GHG
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) Removed ($/tCO2e)

ES-1

Environmental Portfolio
Standard/Renewable Energy
Standard and Tariff

4.2

16.4

116.0

$6

ES-3

Direct Renewable Energy Support
(including Tax Credits and
Incentives, R&D, and
siting/zoning)

0.1

2.1

10.0

$31

ES-4

National or Regional GHG Cap and
Trade

- 0.28—
0.18

2.0—
18.5

7 - 88

$7 - $19

ES-6

Carbon Intensity Targets

0.0

14.0

70.4

$44

ES-9

Reduce Barriers to Renewables
and Clean Distributed Generation

0.4

2.7

16.0

-$25

ES-10

Metering Strategies

ES-11

Pricing Strategies

1.1

1.5

16.0

-$63

ES-12

Integrated Resource Planning

0.1

5.4

28.0

-$2

Not available

Notes
Cost savings are shown as negative costs. All costs are estimated using a real discount rate of 5%
(see Appendix H for details).
ES-3: This option is quantified under RCI-7, Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications.
Values are shown above for completeness, but not included in cumulative totals to
prevent double-counting.
ES-4: These estimates are based on U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) modeling of a
national cap-and-trade policy and the likely impact on Arizona’s power sector based on simple
apportionment. The above values reflect the range of results for GHG reductions and costs from
four scenarios modeled by EIA. These values are not included in the cumulative totals because
Arizona cannot implement a national or regional cap-and-trade policy unilaterally and to avoid
duplicative counting of reductions based on overlaps with other policy option recommendations.
ES-9: This option is quantified under RCI-6, Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power.
Values are shown above for completeness, but not included in cumulative totals to prevent
double-counting.
ES-10: This option is an enabling policy for RCI-6 and RCI-7; its quantification is incorporated as part
of those options.
ES-11: This option is quantified under RCI-8, Electricity Pricing Strategies. Values are shown above
for completeness, but not included in cumulative totals to prevent double-counting.
ES-12: This option overlaps substantially with ES-1, Environmental Portfolio Standard, and ES-6,
Carbon Intensity Targets Values are shown above for completeness, but not included in cumulative
totals to prevent double-counting.

y
21

Table 1-2

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE (TLU)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative Cost/Cost Savings
Per Ton GHG
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
Removed
($/tCO2e)
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

TLU-1

State Clean Car Program

0.3

5.6

32.5

-$90

TLU-2

Smart Growth Bundle of Options

1.5

4.0

26.7

$0

TLU-3

Promoting Multimodal Transit

TLU-4

Reduction of Vehicle Idling

TLU-5

Standards for Alternative Fuels

Not available

TLU-7

Hybrid Promotion and Incentives

Not available

TLU-8

Feebates

Not available

TLU-9

Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance

0.0

2.8

12.3

$0

TLU-10

Low Rolling Resistance Tires and
Tire Inflation

0.0

0.8

4.8

Not available

TLU-11

Accelerated Replacement/
Retirement of High-Emitting
Diesel Fleet

0.2

0.03

1.2

Not available

TLU-12

Biodiesel Implementation

0.1

1.1

6.2

$0

TLU-13

State Lead-By-Example (via
Procurement and Smart Way)

0.03

0.04

0.4

$0

TLU-14

60 mph Speed Limit for
Commercial Trucks

0.3

0.5

5.2

$35

Not available
0.7

1.3

11.8

-$22

Notes
Cost savings are shown as negative costs. All costs are estimated using a real discount rate of 5%
(see Appendix I for details).
TLU-3: This option was analyzed in tandem with TLU-2; its quantification is incorporated as part of
that option.
TLU-5: This option is an enabling policy for TLU-12 and A-3; its quantification is incorporated as part
of those options.
TLU-7: This option overlaps substantially with TLU-1; its quantification is incorporated as part of that
option.
TLU-8: This option overlaps substantially with TLU-1. Insufficient data prevented estimation of
cumulative GHG reductions and costs.
TLU-10: Insufficient data prevented estimation of costs.
TLU-11: Insufficient data prevented estimation of costs.

y
22

Table 1-2

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

AGRICULTURE (A) AND FORESTRY (F)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative Cost/Cost Savings
Per Ton GHG
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
Removed
($/tCO2e)
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

A-1

Manure Management –
Manure Digesters

0.2

0.5

3.8

$1

A-2

Biomass Feedstocks for
Electricity or Steam Production

0.05

0.1

4.5

-$8

A-3

Ethanol Production and Use

0.5

4.0

28.0

$0

A-7

Convert Agricultural Land
to Forest or Grassland

A-8

Reduce Conversion of Farm &
Rangelands to Developed Uses

0.1

0.2

1.6

$65

A-9

Programs to Support Local
Farming/Buy Local

0.01

0.02

0.1

$6

F-1

Forestland Protection from
Developed Uses

0.3

0.3

3.7

$17

F-2

Reforestation/Restoration of
Forestland

0.02

0.1

0.6

$44

F-3a

Forest Ecosystem Management
– Residential Lands

0.5

0.5

6.4

-$21

F-3b

Forest Ecosystem Management
– Other Lands

0.2

0.2

2.9

-$21

F-4

Improved Commercialization of
Biomass Gasification and
Combined Cycle

Not available

Not available

Notes
Cost savings are shown as negative costs. All costs are estimated using a real discount rate of 5%
(see Appendix J for details).
A-7: Lack of specific policy design and lack of data prevented estimation of tons and cost.
F-4: This option overlaps substantially with F-3a and 3b, thus it was not estimated to prevent doublecounting.

y
23

The GHG emissions reductions estimate for each policy option in Table 1-2
is presented as a “stand alone” figure, indicating the potential GHG emissions
reductions achievable if the particular policy option was implemented solely
by itself and not in conjunction with other policy options. To estimate the total
quantity of GHG emissions reductions achievable if all of the CCAG’s recommended policy options were implemented together, the potential cumulative
GHG emissions reduction figure for the combined policy options must be
adjusted to account for overlaps between individual policy options to avoid
double-counting of potential reductions.
For example, there would be overlaps between and among policy options
in the RCI and ES sections, as reductions in electricity demand could also
result in lower electricity production. As such, again for example, while ES-1
has a “stand alone” reduction estimate of 116 MMtCO2e cumulatively from
2007-2020, the potential reductions from this policy option are an estimated
70.3 MMtCO2e if all of the CCAG’s policy options were implemented together
as a comprehensive package. See page H3 in Appendix H. The same principle
would apply to ES-6, which would change from a “stand alone” GHG emissions
reduction estimate of 70.4 MMtCO2e to 50.3 MMtCO2e cumulatively from
2007 to 2020 if it were implemented as part of a comprehensive package.
See page H3 in Appendix H.
Table 1-3 below shows the total estimated GHG emissions reductions
achievable if all of the CCAG’s recommended policy options were implemented
together, with the appropriate adjustments made to account for overlaps and
avoid double-counting of emissions reductions.
Table 1-3

Totals

Total of all CCAG Options with Adjustments for Overlap
(Detailed data may be found in the Tables presented in Chapters 4-8
and the Appendices.)

2010
Annual GHG
Reduction
(MMtCO2e)

2020
Annual GHG
Reduction
(MMtCO2e)

2007-2020
Cumulative
Reduction
(MMtCO2e)

15.4

69.4

485.414

The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS) has calculated overall net economic
cost savings from the CCAG’s policy option recommendations of more than $5.5
billion from 2007-2020. The CCS also has calculated that the average cost for
each ton of GHGs removed would be -$12.74, meaning that there would be a
net econmic cost savings of $12.74 for each ton of GHGs removed.15

14

As noted, the potential cumulative GHG reduction figures have been adjusted to account for overlaps
between reductions achievable under individual policy options to avoid double-counting of potential
GHG emissions reductions. The CCAG notes that the cumulative figure represents the total potential
GHG emissions reductions achievable if all of the recommended policy options are implemented and
acknowledges that there may be challenges to full implementation of all the recommended policy
options. The CCAG also notes that the cumulative figures do not include any potential emissions
reductions from ES-4 Cap and Trade because only a range of estimates is presented in Table 1-2. The
cumulative figures would be higher if reductions from a cap and trade program were included.
15
The overall net economic cost savings figure of more than $5.5 billion and the average $12.74 per
ton net savings figure are based on the savings/costs for the cumulative GHG emissions reductions
for which CCS was able to estimate savings/cost data, as indicated in Table 1-2, adjusted for overlaps to prevent double-counting of reductions.

y
24

Chapter 2: Impacts of Climate Change
While some CCAG members may hold differing opinions about the science
of climate change, the CCAG agreed at the outset of its deliberations not to
debate climate change science in order to achieve the directive of Executive
Order 2005-02 and move the CCAG process forward.16
As Governor Napolitano’s Executive Order stated, a growing scientific
consensus has emerged that increasing emissions of carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxides, and other GHGs are affecting the Earth’s climate.
The work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) represents
this consensus.17 According to the IPCC, human activities, particularly the burning
of fossil fuels such as coal and petroleum, have added measurably to the
natural background levels of GHGs in the atmosphere, which in turn has
contributed to rising global temperatures.18
The IPCC estimates that the Earth’s surface temperature increased by
about 1 degree Fahrenheit during the past century, with much of that warming
occurring during the past two decades. The hottest 22 years on record have
occurred since 1980; the hottest 10 years on record have all occurred since
1990; and 2005 was the hottest year ever recorded. According to the IPCC,
most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is likely due to increased
GHG concentrations attributable to human activities (see Figure 2-1 below).19

16

On September 29, 2005, many CCAG members participated in an informal background briefing on the
causes and impacts of climate change presented by Dr. Andrew Comrie, Professor of Atmospheric
Sciences, University of Arizona.
See http://www.azclimatechange.us/ewebeditpro/items/O40F7043.pdf
17
The IPCC is composed of thousands of scientists (including several from Arizona, such as Dr. Jonathan
Overpeck, Professor of Geosciences, University of Arizona, and director of the University’s Institute for
the Study of Planet Earth) representing the parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), and was formed to provide assessments of climate science, impacts, and
mitigation policy to the parties to the UNFCCC every five years.
See http://www.ipcc.ch.
18
IPCC, Third Assessment Report (2001) www.ipcc.ch.
19
IPCC, Third Assessment Report (2001) The IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report is due in 2007. The
National Academy of Sciences affirmed the IPCC conclusions in its 2001 report titled “Climate Change
Science: An Analysis of Some Key Questions,” http://newton.nap.edu/catalog/10139.html.

y
25

Figure 2-1

Observed Temperatures and Two Simulations:
Natural vs. Anthropogenic Plus Natural20

(Figure courtesy of Dr. Gerald Meehl, National Center for Atmospheric Research.)

Future increases in global temperature are projected to occur with
increased atmospheric GHG concentrations unless action is taken to reduce
total annual GHG emissions. According to the IPCC, worldwide consequences
of increased temperatures due to the build-up of GHGs in the atmosphere are
likely to include increased warming of the earth, and enhanced heat stress,
natural and human water system needs, melting glaciers and ice caps, sea
level rise, increased severe weather events, flooded coastal and lowland
communities, more frequent and intense tropical storms and hurricanes,
expanded drought, expansion of tropical disease risk, and other serious
occurrences.21

20

IPCC scientists use climate models to simulate the observed temperature changes over the last
century attributable to atmospheric “forcings,” both natural and anthropogenic (a forcing can be a
warming or cooling effect).
Figure 2-1 compares the results for two simulations:
(1) The blue line shows a simulation of natural forcing (solar variation and volcanic activity).
(2) The red line shows the simulation of natural forcing plus anthropogenic forcing, i.e., GHG gases
and sulfate aerosols (which have a cooling effect).

Actual temperature observations are shown in a black line representing deviations from the average of
temperatures from 1890-1999.
21

IPCC, Third Assessment Report (2001)

y
26

Impacts in Arizona and the West
Over the past 50 years, the climate in the western United States has warmed
on average by 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit. IPCC climate models predict that
further June to August temperature increases of 3.6 to 9.0 degrees
Fahrenheit are possible by 2040 to 2069 for western North America,22 while
the most extreme warming scenario currently considered possible suggests that
annual mean temperatures in the southwestern United States could increase
potentially by up to 14 degrees Fahrenheit before the end of the century.23 A
warmer climate could mean less winter snowfall, more winter rain and a
faster, earlier snowmelt in Arizona’s mountains.
Higher temperatures and increased evaporation also could lower reservoir
levels, lake levels, and stream flows in the summer. Lower stream flows could
concentrate pollutant levels and increase salinity, a critical water quality problem
in Arizona. Less water would be available to support irrigation, hydropower
production, public and industrial supply, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation.
More winter rain, coupled with more rapid snowmelt, could contribute to winter
and spring flooding. Meanwhile, less spring and summer aquifer recharge
could exacerbate already-declining water levels in parts of the state that
depend on groundwater withdrawals for irrigation and municipal supply. With
continued population growth, water demand could outpace water supply in
areas of the State.
Even conservative estimates of climate change predict significant potential
impacts on the Colorado River system by the end of this century due to
decreased snowfall and snow pack and increased evaporation, including a
15% reduction in annual runoff; a 40% decrease in basin storage; and a
decline in hydroelectric power production to 45 to 56% of the historical average.
The date of peak spring runoff could continue to advance, coming more than
a month earlier in many Western rivers by the century’s end.24
Further, climate change could reduce Arizona’s forested areas by 15 to
30%, with hotter, drier weather conditions increasing the already-high potential
for more frequent, intense wildfires that threaten both forests and property.25
Milder, drier winters could also increase the likelihood of insect outbreaks and
wildfires that result from the accumulation of dead wood on the forest floor.
Arizona is already experiencing the effects of a hotter, drier climate. Due in
part to a decade-long drought and warmer temperatures, Arizona’s fire season
began earlier (in February) this year (2006) than ever before. Moreover, the
two worst wildfires in Arizona history have occurred in just the last few years:

22

Professor Steven Running, Numerical Terradynamic Simulation Group, University of Montana;
published July 6, 2006 in ScienceXpress, the online version of the journal Science;
10.1126/science.1130370.
23
Stainforth et al., Nature, Vol 433, 27 January 2005; www.nature.com/nature.
24
From presentation of Dr. Andrew Comrie, Professor of Atmospheric Sciences, University of Arizona, to
the CCAG. See http://www.azclimatechange.us/ewebeditpro/items/O40F7043.pdf
25
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Fact Sheet 236-F-98-007c, “Climate Change and Arizona”
http://yosemite.epa.gov/OAR/globalwarming.nsf/UniqueKeyLookup/SHSU5BNJMV/$File/az_impct.pdf

y
27

the Rodeo-Chediski fire in 2002, which consumed nearly 500,000 acres; and
the Cave Creek Complex fire in 2005, which burned nearly 250,000 acres.26
The drought and warmer winter temperatures also have contributed to bark
beetle infestations in the State’s forests, killing thousands of pine trees and
adding to the already-severe fire risk. The State’s two driest years in more
than a century occurred in 2002 and 2006, respectively, and coincided with
the two lowest levels of run-off ever recorded due to decreased snowfall. The
2006 spring runoff season, which measures snowmelt from January through
May, provided just 121,000 acre-feet of water this year (2006), as compared
to 665,000 acre-feet normally.27
Climate change could likewise significantly alter Arizona’s agricultural crop
production, which is heavily dependent on irrigation.28 Cotton yields could
decline by 5 to 11% and wheat yields by as much as 70% as temperatures
rise beyond the tolerance levels for the crop, particularly with reduced water
availability. Livestock production, which accounts for about half of the State’s
annual agriculture industry, could also suffer, as livestock tend to gain less
weight in hotter, drier conditions and when pasture yields decline, limiting forage.29 The potential increased susceptibility of crops and livestock caused by
these stressors, combined with reduced die-back of pests and diseases
resulting from milder winters, could exacerbate these impacts.
A changing climate also could exacerbate Arizona’s air pollution problems.
During the winter of 2005-06, the Phoenix metropolitan area suffered a
record-breaking 143 consecutive days without measurable precipitation,
which contributed to unprecedented levels of particulate matter pollution
(referred to as PM10) in the area. Between November 1, 2005 and March 15,
2006, the Phoenix metropolitan area exceeded the federal standard for PM10
on 30 days, and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ)
issued 25 High Pollution Advisories, more than in the previous decade
combined. Increased temperatures also could contribute to increased ozone
concentrations in the Phoenix metropolitan area during summer months.

26

A July 6, 2006 study published in ScienceXpress, the online version of the journal Science, linked climate change to larger, longer-lasting wildfires in the Western United States and found that the worst
fires (1,000 acres or more) occurred in years with warmer springs and earlier snowmelts. More
acreage and larger fires burned in the West between 1987 and 2003 than in the previous 16-year
span. See “Warming and Earlier Spring Increases Western U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity”
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/rapidpdf/1128834.pdf. Dr. Thomas Swetnam of the University of
Arizona’s Tree Ring Research Laboratory, a CCAG member, was a co-author of the study.
27
Arizona Republic, June 16, 2006.
28
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Fact Sheet 236-F-98-007c, “Climate Change and Arizona”
http://yosemite.epa.gov/OAR/globalwarming.nsf/UniqueKeyLookup/SHSU5BNJMV/$File/az_impct.pdf
29
Ibid.

y
28

Chapter 3
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and
Reference Case Projections 1990-2020
Executive Order 2005-02 directed the Climate Change Advisory Group
(CCAG) to prepare an inventory of Arizona’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and a projection of future emissions. The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS)
prepared a draft document for this purpose for the first CCAG meeting, and
CCAG members reviewed the methodology, assumptions, and conclusions in
subsequent meetings. The Technical Work Groups did the same for the portions of the document relevant to their sectors. At their December meeting
the CCAG members unanimously approved the final document, Arizona
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and Reference Case Projections, 19902020 (hereafter, the Inventory and Projections, Appendix D to the Action Plan).
The Inventory and Projections provides historical GHG emissions estimates
for the years 1990 through 200330 using a set of generally-accepted principles
and guidelines for state GHG emissions and relying to the extent possible on
Arizona-specific data and inputs.31 The reference case projections to 2020 are
based on a compilation of various existing Arizona and regional projections of
electricity generation, fuel use, and other GHG emitting activities, along with a
set of simple, transparent assumptions described later in this chapter.
The Inventory and Projections covers the six types of gases included in the
U.S. Greenhouse Gas Inventory: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous
oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6). Emissions of these greenhouse gases are presented using
a common metric, CO2 equivalence (CO2e), which indicates the relative
contribution of each gas to global average radiative forcing32 on a Global
Warming Potential (GWP) weighted basis. In addition, black carbon
(soot/smoke particles) and organic carbon aerosols (used in a variety of
commercial and consumer products) could have a significant climate impact,
with black carbon having a particularly powerful warming impact. However,
because the science is less certain on the relative magnitude of this impact,
and because there are as yet no widely-accepted GWP weights to enable
comparison with greenhouse gases, these black and organic carbon emissions
are not integrated in the CO2 equivalent emissions estimates provided in the
main GHG inventory and projection figures presented here.

30

For some sectors and sources, historical data are only available through 2000-2002.
The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) prepared a preliminary GHG inventory
assessment, which provided a starting point for this analysis.
32
A change in the net radiative energy (incoming solar radiation and outgoing infrared radiation) of the
global Earth-atmosphere system is termed a radiative forcing. Positive radiative forcings warm the
Earth’s surface and lower atmosphere; negative radiative forcings cool them.
31

y
29

Arizona Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions: Sources and Trends
In 2000, Arizona accounted for approximately 82.3 million metric tons33
(MMt) of net carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) emissions, an amount equal to
1.2% of total U.S. GHG emissions34. Arizona GHG emissions are rising rapidly
compared with the nation as a whole, driven by the rapid pace of Arizona’s
population and economic growth. Arizona GHG emissions were up nearly 40%
from 1990 to 2000, while national emissions rose by 23% during this period.35
On a per capita basis, Arizonans emit about 14 tCO2e, 36% less than the
national average of 22 tCO2e per capita. Lower per capita emissions are due
in part to Arizona’s mild climate, and also to the State’s less emissions-intensive economic base.36 Figure 3-1 illustrates the State’s lower emissions per
capita and per unit of economic output. It also shows that like the nation as a
whole, per capita emissions have remained fairly flat, while economic growth
outpaced emissions growth throughout the 1990-2002 period. During the
1990s, emissions per unit of gross product dropped by 29% nationally, and by
33% in Arizona.
Figure 3-1

Arizona and U.S. GHG Emissions, Per Capita and Per Unit Gross Product
(2000 Dollars)

MMtCO2e – million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent
tCO2e – metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent
100gCO2e – 100 grams carbon dioxide equivalent

33

All GHG emissions are reported here in metric tons.
United States emissions estimates are drawn from Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT) version 1.5.
(Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 2003). Available at: http://cait.wri.org.
35
During the 1990s, population grew by 39% in Arizona compared with 13% nationally. Furthermore,
Arizona’s economy grew faster on a per capita basis (up 63% vs. 52% nationally).
36
Arizona’s economy has a lower share of emissions-intensive industrial and agricultural activities, such
as steel production, petroleum refining, or dairy farming. Furthermore, while cooling demands are
significant, the emissions associated with air conditioning are lower on average than those for space
heating in the rest of the country.
34

y
30

Electricity use and transportation are the State’s principal GHG emissions
sources. Together, the combustion of fossil fuels in these two sectors
accounts for nearly 80% of Arizona’s gross GHG emissions, as shown in
Figure 3-2.37 The remaining use of fossil fuels – natural gas, oil products, and
coal – in the residential, commercial, and industrial (RCI) sectors constitutes
another 11% of State emissions.
Agricultural activities such as manure management, fertilizer use, and
livestock (enteric fermentation) result in methane and nitrous oxide emissions that account for another 5% of State GHG emissions. Industrial process
emissions also comprise about 5% of State GHG emissions today, and these
emissions are rising rapidly due to the increasing use of hydrofluorocarbons
(HFC) as substitutes for ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons.38 Other industrial processes emissions result from perfluorocarbon (PFC) use in semiconductor manufacturing, carbon dioxide released during cement and lime
production, and methane released by natural gas systems and coal mines.
Landfills and wastewater management facilities produce methane and
nitrous oxide emissions accounting for the remaining 2% of current State
emissions; these emissions have declined slightly in recent years as landfill
gas is increasingly captured and flared or used for energy purposes.
Figure 3-2

Gross GHG Emissions by Sector, 2000, Arizona and U.S.

Gross emissions estimates do not include the effects of carbon sinks; i.e.,
the net carbon sequestered in, or released from, soils and vegetation. Recent
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) estimates suggest that Arizona forests and the use of
forest products sequestered on average about 7 MMtCO2e per year from
1985 to 2002. Much of this increase appears to have occurred during a
period when the formal definition of forestland under Forest Inventory and
Analysis (FIA) surveys was liberalized from a minimum 10% forest cover to 5%
cover requirements. As a result, refined estimates regarding total statewide
biomass sequestration may result in significant changes to current estimates as discussed below and should be the focus of further analysis. The
Inventory and Projections reports net GHG emissions – which include the
above sequestration estimates – separately from the gross GHG emissions.
37

Gross emissions estimates only include those sources with positive emissions. Carbon sequestration
in soils and vegetation is included in net emissions estimates.
38
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are also potent greenhouse gases. However, they are not included in GHG
estimates because of concerns related to implementation of the Montreal Protocol. See Appendix D.

y
31

A Closer Look at the Two Major Sources:
Electricity and Transportation
As shown in Figure 3-2, electricity use accounts for nearly 40% of
Arizona’s gross GHG emissions, or about 35 MMtCO2e, slightly higher than
the national share of emissions from electricity production (32%).39 On a per
capita basis, in contrast, Arizona emits slightly less in terms of greenhouse
gases (7 tCO2e/capita vs. 8 tCO2e/capita nationally) due to electricity. The
average Arizonan uses about the same amount of electricity as the average US
resident (12,000 kWh per person per year), but Arizona electricity has lower
emissions than the national average.40 Arizona gets slightly less electricity from
coal (46% vs. 52% nationally in 2000) and more from low-emitting sources,
such as nuclear, hydro, and renewables (44% vs. 29% nationally in 2000).
During the 1990s, Arizona electricity demand grew at a rate of 4% per
year, while electricity emissions grew 3.3% annually, reflecting a decline in
emissions per kWh. This decline was due largely to the rapid growth of new
natural gas generation, and to a lesser extent, increases in nuclear generation.
It is important to note that these electricity emissions estimates reflect the
GHG emissions associated with the electricity sources used to meet Arizona
demands, corresponding to a consumption-based approach to emissions
accounting. Another way to look at electricity emissions is to consider the
GHG emissions produced by electricity generation facilities in the State. For
many years, Arizona power plants have tended to produce considerably more
electricity than is consumed in the State – in the year 2000, for example,
Arizona produced 23% more electricity than it used, exporting on a net basis
to consumers in nearby states. As a result, in 2000, emissions associated
with electricity production (44.5 MMtCO2e) were considerably higher than
those associated with electricity use (34.5 MMtCO2e).41
While the Inventory and Projections presents both the emissions from
electricity production and use, unless otherwise indicated, tables, figures, and
totals here reflect electricity use emissions. The consumption-based approach
can better reflect the emissions (and emissions reductions) associated with
activities occurring in the State, particularly with respect to electricity use
(and efficiency improvements), and is thus particularly useful in a policy-making
context. Under this approach, emissions associated with electricity exported
to other states would need to be covered in those states’ accounts in order to
avoid double counting or exclusions. (Indeed, California, Oregon, and
Washington are currently considering such an approach.)
Like electricity emissions, GHG emissions in Arizona from transportation
fuel use have risen steadily since 1990 at an average rate of slightly over 3%
39

Unlike for Arizona, for the U.S. as a whole, there is relatively little difference between the emissions
from electricity use and emissions from electricity production, as the U.S. imports only about 1% of its
electricity, and exports far less.
40
In 2000, electricity generation in Arizona emitted 1107 lbCO2e (0.50tCO2e) per MWh; the analysis
assumes the same emission rate for electricity delivered to Arizona consumers. In 2000, electricity
generation in the US averaged 1321 lbCO2e (0.60tCO2e) per MWh.
41
Estimating the emissions associated with electricity use requires an understanding of the electricity
sources (both in-state and out-of-state) used by utilities to meet consumer loads. The current estimate
reflects some simple assumptions described in the Inventory and Projections (Appendix D).

y
32

annually. Gasoline-powered vehicles account for about 65% of transportation
GHG emissions. Diesel vehicles account for another 20%, air travel for roughly
10%, and the remainder of transportation emissions come from natural gas
and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) vehicles. As the result of Arizona’s rapid
expansion and an increase in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) during the 1990s
(from 35 billion VMT in 1990 to 50 billion VMT in 2000), gasoline use has grown
at a rate of 3.2% annually.42 Meanwhile, diesel use has risen 6.5% annually,
suggesting an even more rapid growth in freight movement within the State.
With respect to black carbon emissions, the transportation sector is the
largest contributor. Transportation sources such as on-road diesel vehicles
contributed 59% of Arizona’s black carbon (BC) emissions in 2002. Other
important BC emissions sectors include non-road diesel engines (18%; e.g.,
generators, construction equipment) and railroad engines (about 11%).
Coal-fired electricity generating units contributed another 6%.

Reference Case Projections
Relying on U.S. Department of Energy (USDOE) and Arizona agency
projections of electricity and fuel use, and other assumptions noted below,
the Inventory and Projections makes a forecast of GHG emissions through
2020.43 It assumes a continuation of current trends and reflects, to the extent
possible, announced plans (e.g., power plant construction and retirement)
and the implementation of recently enacted policies. One such policy is the
Environmental Portfolio Standard, which currently requires investor-owned
utilities to provide 1.1% of the electricity sales from renewable sources by 2012,
and could result in emissions savings of slightly over 0.2 MMtCO2e by 2012.
Figure 3-3 illustrates the results of the reference case projection in terms
of gross GHG emissions. Corresponding numerical results are shown at the
bottom of Table 3-1 under the four different emissions accounting approaches
considered here: consumption basis, production basis, gross, and net. Under
the gross, consumption-basis approach – i.e., excluding emissions associated
with net electricity exports – Arizona GHG emissions climb to 160 MMtCO2e
by 2020, 80% above 2000 levels and 143% above 1990 levels. Assuming
current estimates for forest sequestration (6.7 MMtCO2e) continue through
2020, net emissions are lower than gross emissions, but the relative increase
is greater.
The percentage increases in emissions relative to historical levels are
slightly lower under a production-based approach, i.e., one that includes all
emissions associated with in-state electricity production. Under the gross
emissions case, 2020 production-based emissions are 75% above 2000 levels
and 123% above 1990 levels. This difference results from the assumption –
based on estimates from the Arizona Corporation Commission and USDOE –
that Arizona electricity sales will grow slightly faster than electricity generation
from 2010 onwards.
42

Based on U.S. Energy Information Agency data for the year 2000, Arizona gasoline use is also slightly
below the national average (1.1 vs. 1.3 gallons per person per day). www.eia.doe.gov.
43
Historical data run through 2001 to 2003 depending on the emissions source.

y
33

Electricity and gasoline use are projected to be the largest contributors to
future emissions growth, as shown in Figure 3-4. Other major sources of
emissions growth include freight transport (diesel), fuel use in buildings and
industry (RCI), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) used in place of ozone-depleting
substances (ODS), and air travel.
Figure 3-3

Gross GHG Emissions by Sector, 1990-2020: Historical and Projected

* This chart does not show net carbon sinks (forestry and land use) which average slightly
over 10 MMtCO2e/year.
RCI – Residential, Industrial, and Commercial
ODS – Ozone-Depleting Substances

Figure 3-4

Contributions to Emissions Growth, 1990-2020:
Reference Case Projections (MMTCO2e)

The particularly steep increase in electricity use emissions is due not only
to the assumption that electricity use will continue to grow rapidly, but also
that natural gas prices will continue to rise, and the mix of new generation will
shift heavily towards coal after 2010, as depicted in Figure 3-5.

y
34

Figure 3-5

CO2 Emissions from Electricity Production in Arizona, by Fuel Source
(Includes All In-State Emissions)

Overall, the projected rate of emissions growth is 3% per year from the
year 2000 onward, well below anticipated levels of economic growth (4.9%
per year), but nonetheless significant. As illustrated in Figure 3-6, emissions
track population growth fairly closely until the latter half of this decade, after
which they begin to rise more rapidly. The increase in per capita emissions
after 2010 appears largely as the result of four factors:
1) electricity growth at a rate faster than population growth
2) increasing reliance on coal-based generation
3) on-road vehicle emissions, particularly freight traffic growing faster than
population
4) increasing hydrofluorocarbon emissions in refrigeration, air conditioning,
and other applications.
For nearly all other sources, with the exception of natural gas use in
residential, commercial, and industrial sectors, emissions are projected to
grow at a pace slower than State population.
Figure 3-6

Historical and Projected GHG Emissions, GSP, and Population
(Indexed to 1990 Value)

y
35

Table 3-1

Historical and Reference Case GHG Emissions, 1990-2020, by Source44

(Million Metric Tons CO2e)

1990 2000

2010 2020

Explanatory Notes for Projections

Energy Use (CO2, CH4, N2O)
57.9
78.8
103.6 144.6
Electricity Use
24.9
34.5
46.6
72.2
Electricity Production (in-state)
32.3
44.5
58.4
75.8
Total emissions for in-state power plants
Coal
30.9
39.2
42.4
57.5
See electric sector assumptions
Natural Gas
1.3
5.1
15.9
18.3
in Appendix H
Oil
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
Net Electricity Exports
-7.4
-10.0
-11.8
-3.6
9.3
11.6
13.8
Res/Comm/Ind (RCI)
7.7
Coal
1.2
1.5
1.8
1.9
Based on USDOE regional projections
Natural Gas
4.2
4.7
5.7
7.2
Based on USDOE regional projections
Oil
2.2
3.0
4.1
4.6
Based on USDOE regional projections
Wood (CH4 and N2O)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Assumes no change after 2003
Transportation
25.3
35.0
45.4
58.6
On-road Gasoline
16.8
22.8
28.9
36.3
VMT from MoveAZ, constant energy/VMT
On-road Diesel
3.5
6.5
9.5
13.6
VMT from MoveAZ, constant energy/VMT
Jet Fuel and Aviation Gasoline
3.5
4.3
5.7
7.4
Based on USDOE regional projections
Natural Gas (pipeline use)
1.4
1.1
1.2
1.2
constant at 2002 levels
Other
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
Based on USDOE regional projections
Industrial Processes
1.9
4.1
6.3
9.1
ODS Substitutes
0.0
1.4
4.0
6.9
Based on national projections (USEPA)
PFCs in Semi-conductor Ind.
0.4
1.0
0.5
0.3
Based on national projections (USEPA)
SF6 from Electric Utilities
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
Based on national projections (USEPA)
Cement & Other Industry
0.6
1.0
0.9
1.0
Increases with state population
Methane from Oil & Gas Systems 0.4
0.4
0.6
0.8
Increases with natural gas use
Methane from Coal Mining
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Assumes no change after 2003
Agriculture, Land Use, Forestry
-2.6
-2.5
-2.1
-2.1
Agriculture (CH4 & N20)
4.1
4.2
4.7
4.7
Assumes (for now) no change after 2002
Soils and Forest Sinks
-6.7
-6.7
-6.7
-6.7
Subject to considerable uncertainty
Waste Management
2.1
1.9
2.0
1.9
Solid Waste Management
1.7
1.3
1.4
1.1
Based on national projections (USEPA)
Wastewater Management
0.4
0.5
0.7
0.8
Increases with state population
Total Emissions - Consumption-Basis (Excluding Emissions from Net Electricity Exports)
Gross (excluding sinks)
66.0
89.0
116.6 160.3
increase relative to 1990
35%
77%
143%
increase relative to 2000
31%
80%
Net (including sinks)
59.3
82.3
109.9 153.5
increase relative to 1990
39%
85%
159%
increase relative to 2000
34%
87%
Total Emissions - Production-Basis (Including All In-State Electricity Generation)
Gross (excluding sinks)
73.5
99.0
128.4 163.9
increase relative to 1990
35%
75%
123%
increase relative to 2000
30%
66%
Net (including sinks)
66.7
92.3
121.6 157.2
increase relative to 1990
38%
82%
135%
increase relative to 2000
32%
70%
44

These emissions estimates do not include black carbon and organic carbon contributions. These emissions are difficult to convert into CO2 equivalents,
given the lack of commonly accepted GWPs. Available research provides the basis for some initial GWP estimates, as discussed in Appendix D.
Application of these GWPs suggests that Arizona black and organic carbon emissions may have accounted for 3 to 6 MMtCO2e emissions in 2002.
These figures also do not take into account the projected effects of recent energy efficiency related actions for the RCI sectors adopted by the State.
With these actions, Arizona’s GHG emissions are projected to be roughly 147 MMtCO2e net, including sinks, in 2020, instead of 153.5 MMtCO2e.

y
36

Key Uncertainties
The strong growth in GHG emissions forecast here is driven largely by
economic, demographic, and land use trends (including growth patterns and
transportation system impacts), all of which are subject to uncertainty. Table
3-2 presents some of the major assumptions used in this report. Population
estimates are based on official projections from the Arizona Department of
Economic Security (DES). These projections, however, are widely recognized
as outdated (based on assumptions circa 1997). Population growth has been
more rapid than these projections would indicate, and the DES projections are
currently under revision and might lead to even higher GHG growth projections.45
Table 3-2

Key Annual Growth Rates, Historical and Projected
Historical
Projected
1980-1990 1990-2000 2000-2020

Parameter

Sources/Uses

Population*

3.1%

3.4%

72.0%

U.S. Census Bureau for historic,
AZ Department of Economic Security
for projection

GSP

4.1%

6.3%

4.9%

(not used for projections)

Employment*

3.9%

2.9%

2.5%

AZ DOT’s MoveAZ report for historic, AZ
Department of Economic Security
for projection

Electricity sales

4.5%

4.0%

3.6%

EIA SEDS for historic, RCI TWG for projections

Personal Vehicle
Miles Traveled*

n/a

n/a

2.4%

Bureau of Transport Statistics for historic,
AZ DOT’s MoveAZ for projections

Freight Vehicle
Miles Traveled*

n/a

n/a

3.7%

Bureau of Transport Statistics for historic,
AZ DOT’s MoveAZ for projections

* Population, employment and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) projections for Arizona were used
together with USDOE’s Annual Energy Outlook 2005 projections of changes in fuel use on a
per capita, per employee, and per VMT, as relevant for each sector. For instance, growth in
Arizona residential natural gas use is calculated as the Arizona population growth times the
change in per capita Arizona natural gas use for the Mountain region. Arizona population
growth is also used as the driver of growth in cement production, soda ash consumption,
solid waste generation, and wastewater generation.

In addition, the reference case does not include an analysis of future
agriculture emissions, which might change significantly if water scarcity,
commodity programs, and trade agreements, among other factors, induce
major shifts among crops and livestock grown in the State.

45

If the projected growth rates are higher than currently projected (2.0%), then some emissions projections could rise. However, it is important to note that several of the key drivers for this analysis, such
as growth in electricity growth and passenger VMT, are already higher than the projected population,
and may implicitly reflect population projections higher than the official forecast.

y
37

Two other areas may be subject to significant uncertainty, not simply
because the future is hard to predict, but because of limited data availability
and scientific understanding:
• Terrestrial carbon emissions and sinks. The net forest and land use
sequestration estimates noted above are based on recent improvements to
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) carbon stock inventory data that have changed
data collection and interpretation during the period of analysis. For
instance, during the Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) survey periods used
for FORCARB246 estimates, the definition of Arizona forestland changed
from a minimum forest cover requirement of 10%, to a minimum of 5%. As
a result, grasslands may or may not be included in these estimates,
depending on their level of tree stocking. Follow up work by CCS and the
TWG with the USFS suggested that rangeland carbon fluxes are not likely to
significantly affect the final results of the forest carbon inventory and
forecast.47
Second, what the USFS defines as forest area in Arizona has increased
by 14% since 1985, when it totaled 4.25 million hectares. This addition
appears to account for much of the net gain in carbon stock in the USFS
estimates (offsetting a decrease in carbon stock per hectare from 1996 to
2002) and may or may not be attributable to the change in the definition of
forestland and the addition of lands at between 5% and 10% forest cover.
However, further analysis of data and conferrals with the USFS indicated
that further quantification of these changes between inventory periods is
unlikely to significantly change current inventory or forecast estimates.
• Black carbon and other aerosol emissions. Emissions of aerosols, particularly
black carbon from fossil fuel and biomass combustion, could have potentially
significant impacts in terms radiative forcing (i.e., climate impacts).
Methodologies for conversion of black carbon mass estimates and projections
to global warming potential involve significant uncertainty at present. Best
available methods for estimating black carbon emissions and their carbon
dioxide equivalent are provided in a supplement to Appendix D, along with a
preliminary inventory for Arizona for the year 2002. These results are not
integrated in either the CO2 equivalent emissions estimates provided in the
main GHG emissions inventory and forecast or the projections presented here.

46

FORCARB is the original USFS model estimate of carbon in forests. FORCARB2 is the second version of
this model.
47
However, the carbon cycle for rangelands is not well understood, and has not been included in current
surveys.

y
38

Chapter 4
Goals and Cross-Cutting Issues
Overview of Cross-Cutting Issues
Some issues considered by the CCAG apply broadly across multiple sectors
and are therefore better addressed as “cross-cutting” issues across all sectors
rather than assigned to any individual sector. This set includes GHG reduction
goals, emissions reporting, GHG emission reduction registries, public education
and outreach, and adaptation. The Cross Cutting Issues Technical Work Group
(TWG) developed policy options for each of these issues.

Key Challenges and Opportunities
Cross cutting issues bring forth key challenges in addition to the
CCAG’s recommended goal. Notable among them, GHG reporting and registry
programs will be far more effective if applied on a broad regional or national
basis rather than through separate, state-by-state implementation. Beyond
the usual differences in states’ perspectives, a further challenge lies in
the fact that states are at much different stages of the learning curve with
respect to these and other climate actions.

Overview of Policy Recommendations
After carefully considering Arizona’s extraordinary growth rate, overall
emissions reduction feasibility, and goals established in other jurisdictions, the
CCAG identified a GHG emission reduction goal that is aggressive, yet achievable.
The CCAG recommends that a comprehensive effort be undertaken to develop
policy options and recommendations for adapting to these conditions.
A thorough GHG emissions reporting program is essential for better understanding mitigation obstacles and opportunities, as well as for measuring future
progress. A GHG registry will help recognize and share accomplishments and
also protect entities by quantitatively recording early GHG reduction accomplishments. Public awareness of climate change is the cornerstone of public acceptance of the need for concerted climate action because climate impacts are
already affecting Arizona dramatically.
All of the following recommendations received the unanimous support of
the CCAG.

CCAG Cross-Cutting (CC) All Sectors Policy Descriptions
The Cross-Cutting sector includes policies and measures that apply
across the board to all sectors and activities. Cross-cutting recommendations
typically enable or support emissions mitigation activities and/or other opportunities. Fully detailed descriptions of the individual Cross-Cutting sector policy
options as presented to and approved by the CCAG can be found in Appendix F.

y
39

State GHG Reduction Goal (CC-1)
The CCAG recommends that Arizona establish a statewide GHG reduction
target to lower GHG emissions to the 2000 level by 2020, with an additional
50% reduction below the 2000 level by 2040. In lieu of establishing a specific
target for 2010, the CCAG also strongly recommends the early and aggressive
implementation of the recommendations in this report, along with a corresponding
set of incentives to promote early adoption.
As the reference case forecast in Figure 4-1 illustrates, Arizona’s extraordinary growth in population and economic activity is expected to generate
very high percentage growth in carbon emissions compared to other states.
Early and aggressive action in Arizona is thus crucial to slowing – and ultimately
reducing – carbon emissions.
The recommended goal for reductions in Arizona’s GHG emissions reflects the
CCAG’s policy options recommendations. In fact, the CCAG’s recommended policy
options, if fully implemented, could reduce GHG emissions in Arizona by several
million metric tons more than the amounts called for in the recommended goal.
Figure 4-1

1990-2040 GHG Emissions: Reference Case Forecast, CCAG Goal, and
Estimated Cumulative Reductions with CCAG Options

State Greenhouse Gas Reporting (CC-2)
Measurement and public reporting of GHG emissions at a statewide,
sector, or sub-sector level are important to support tracking and management
of emissions. GHG reporting can help sources identify emission reduction
opportunities and reduce potential risks associated with possible future GHG
mandates by “starting up the learning curve.” Tracking and reporting of GHG
emissions will also help in the construction of periodic state GHG inventories.
GHG reporting is a key precursor for sources to participate in voluntary
GHG reduction programs, opportunities for recognition, a GHG emission
reduction registry, and to secure “baseline protection.” Further, GHG reporting

y
40

is an opportunity for the state to influence reporting practices throughout the
region and nation, and to build consistency with other reporting programs.
Subject to consistently rigorous quantification, GHG reporting should not be
constrained to particular sectors, sources, or approaches in order to encourage
GHG mitigation activities from all quarters.
The CCAG recommends implementing a reporting mechanism that
includes the following key elements:
• Phasing in mandatory GHG reporting by sectors as rigorous, standardized
quantification protocols, base data, and tools become available and
responsible parties become clear; allowing for voluntary reporting before
mandatory reporting applies; and allowing the state itself to be a participant,
reporting emissions associated with its own activities and the programs it
implements.
• Applying to all source types (e.g., combustion, processes, vehicles, etc.) but
using common sense regarding de minimis emissions.
• Having a goal of reporting “organization-wide emissions within Arizona” but
doing so with greatest possible “granularity” to facilitate baseline protection
(e.g., the “rolling up” of facility and field emissions reports in a reporting
database would provide organization totals in Arizona).
• Reporting annually on a calendar year basis for all six traditional GHGs and,
to the extent possible, black carbon.
• Requiring reporting of direct emissions, phasing in reporting of indirect
emissions associated with purchased power and heat, and allowing voluntary
reporting of other indirect emissions.
• Maximizing consistency with other state and federal reporting programs.
• Verifying emissions reports through self-certification and ADEQ spot-checks,
adding third-party verification for registry purposes.
• Allowing for appropriate public transparency of reported emissions, and
allowing voluntary project-based emissions reporting when properly
quantified.
Suggestions for specific design elements of an effective GHG reporting
program are included in Appendix F.
State Greenhouse Gas Registry (CC-3)
Measurement and recording of GHG emissions reductions at a macro- or
micro-scale level in a central repository with a “transaction ledger” capacity to
support tracking, management, and “ownership” of emission reductions as
well as to encourage GHG reductions, to enable potential recognition, baseline protection, and/or the crediting of actions by implementing programs and
parties in relation to possible emissions reduction goals, and to provide a
mechanism for regional, multi-state, and cross-border cooperation. Subject to
consistently rigorous quantification, registration of GHG reductions should not
be constrained to particular sectors, sources, or approaches in order to
encourage GHG mitigation activities from all quarters.

y
41

The CCAG recommends that the State implement a registry mechanism
with the following key elements:
• Geographic applicability at least at the statewide level and as broadly
(i.e., regionally or nationally) as possible.
• Allowing sources to start as far back chronologically as good data exists, as
affirmed by third-party verification, and allowing registration of projectbased reductions or “offsets” that are equally rigorously quantified.
• Incorporating adequate safeguards to ensure that reductions are not
double-counted by multiple registry participants; providing appropriate
transparency; and allowing the state itself to be a participant, registering
GHG reductions associated with its programs, direct activities, or efforts.
• Striving for maximum consistency with other state, regional, and/or national
efforts, greatest flexibility as GHG mitigation approaches evolve; and providing
guidance to assist participants.
Suggestions for specific design elements of an appropriate GHG registry
are included in Appendix F.
State Climate Action Education and Outreach (CC-4)
Public education and outreach are vitally important to foster a broad awareness of climate change issues and effects (including co-benefits, such as clean
air and public health) among the state’s citizens and to engage them in actions
to reduce GHG emissions. Such efforts should seek to integrate with and build
upon existing outreach efforts involving climate change and related issues in
the state. Ultimately, public education and outreach will be the foundation for
the long-term success of all the mitigation actions proposed by the CCAG as well
as those which may evolve in the future.
The CCAG recommends that the state undertake climate change education
and outreach activities directed toward, but not limited to, the following audiences:
• Policymakers (e.g., legislators, regulators, executive branch, agencies) –
because implementation of climate actions hinges on policymakers’ approval.
• Younger generations – by integrating climate change issues into educational
curricula, post-secondary degree programs, and professional licensing
programs.
• Community leaders and community-based organizations (e.g., businesses,
institutions, municipalities, service clubs, social and affinity groups,
non-governmental organizations, etc.) – in order to recognize leadership,
share success stories and role models, and expand climate involvement and
participation in climate change issues.
• The general public – to increase awareness and engage citizens in climate
actions in their personal and professional lives.
One concept proposed by a CCAG member would be to create an “extension
agent” position to assist in proliferating best practices among builders, homeowners, businesses, farmers and others. Further suggestions for specific
activities are included in Appendix F.

y
42

State Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (CC-5)
Because of the build-up in the atmosphere of greenhouse gases that
already has occurred, Arizona will experience the effects of climate change for
years to come, even if immediate action is taken to reduce future GHG
emissions. As such, it is essential that the state develop a strategy to identify
and manage the projected impacts of ongoing climate change.
While taking action to reduce GHG emissions in Arizona, the CCAG recommends that a comprehensive state climate change adaptation strategy be
developed and implemented. The strategy should include time- and programbased goals, characterization of the potential risks and costs of inaction, and
the potential costs, benefits, and co-benefits associated with specific policy
and program actions and time periods. Further, the strategy should outline
actions to be taken to respond to existing climate change impacts and to coordinate these actions with response plans and efforts that are underway or
may be contemplated at other agencies or organizations or through other
initiatives. Such impacts include the concerns outlined Executive Order
2005-02 (i.e., prolonged drought, severe forest fires, warmer temperatures,
increased snowmelt, and reduced snow pack) as well as other serious issues,
including risks to public health.
The Governor may wish to consider appointing a task force or advisory
group to develop recommendations for the state climate change adaptation
strategy. Moreover, the Governor should direct state agencies and other
appropriate institutions to identify and characterize potential current and
future risks in Arizona to human, natural and economic systems, including
potential risks to water resources, temperature sensitive populations and
systems, energy systems, transportation systems, vital infrastructure and
public facilities, and natural lands (e.g., forests, rangelands, and farmland).
Adaptation measures that also help mitigate GHG emissions should be
given priority in the state climate change adaptation strategy, particularly
water use conservation and efficiency, forest and agriculture conservation
and management, energy production and use, facility siting and management
(including residential), infrastructure development, and efficient transportation
and land use systems. These actions should be linked to implementation of
other specific recommendations of the CCAG to the greatest extent possible.

y
43

y
44

Chapter 5
RCI and Waste Management
Overview of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The residential, commercial, and industrial (RCI) sectors are directly
responsible for only about one-tenth of Arizona’s current GHG emissions (11.3
MMtCO2e in 2000). Direct emissions result principally from the on-site
combustion of natural gas, oil, and coal, the release of CO2 and fluorinated
gases (HFCs, PFCs) during industrial processing (largely cement and semiconductors), and the leakage of HFCs from refrigeration and related equipment.48
Considering only the direct emissions that occur within buildings and
industries, however, ignores the fact that nearly all electricity sold in the state
is consumed as the result of residential, commercial, and industrial activity. If
the emissions associated with producing this electricity are considered, RCI
activities are associated with about half of the state’s GHG emissions.
Arizona’s future GHG emissions therefore will depend heavily on future trends
in the consumption of electricity and other fuels in these sectors.
Figure 5-1 shows historical and projected RCI GHG emissions by fuel and
source, and illustrates the large fraction of RCI emissions associated with
electricity use. RCI emissions associated with electricity and natural gas use
are expected to double from 2000 from 2020, and are likely to account for
over half of the State’s emissions growth during this period.49
Figure 5-1

Historical and Projected Residential Commercial and Industrial (RCI)
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions, 1990 to 2020

48

RCI fuel use accounted for 9.3 MMtCO2e in GHG emissions in 2000, while industrial process
emissions, largely from cement production and the use of perfluorocarbons in the semi-conductor
industry, accounted for 2.0 MMtCO2e. Emissions due to leakage of HFC refrigerants from appliances
and equipment in the RCI sector have not been estimated.
49
The exception is process emissions from the semi-conductor industry, which are expected to decline
significantly due to voluntary efforts.

y
45

Table 5-1 shows estimated historical and projected emissions from solid
waste management and wastewater treatment. Emissions from waste management consist largely of methane leaking from landfills, while emissions
from wastewater treatment include both methane and nitrous oxide. These
emissions, in terms of carbon equivalents, are relatively minor compared to
overall RCI emissions, yielding 2010 and 2020 estimated emissions equal to
2 to 3% of RCI emissions.
Table 5-1

Summary of Estimated Historical and Projected Emissions from
Waste and Wastewater Management in Arizona

(Million Metric Tons CO2 equivalent)

1990

2000

2010

2020

Waste Management

2.1

1.9

2.0

1.9

Solid Waste Management

1.7

1.3

1.4

1.1

Wastewater Management

0.4

0.5

0.7

0.8

Until recently, overall emissions associated with residential, commercial,
and industrial activity have been roughly equivalent across the three sectors.
Rapid population growth and increasing emphasis on the commercial sector
as the engine for the state’s economy suggests, however, that over the coming
decades the residential and commercial sectors will, under business as usual
conditions, come to dominate in terms of emissions. Manufacturing activity is
expected to continue to grow at a rate of about 1.8% per year, though this
growth is likely to be offset by continuing declines in overall energy intensity
due to energy efficiency gains and structural shifts to less energy-intensive
industries.50
Figure 5-2

1990-2020 GHG Emissions by Sectors

50

Projections of manufacturing activity (employment growth) are based on estimates from the Arizona
Department of Economic Security. By contrast, non-manufacturing employment is projected to grow
at an annual rate of 2.6%. Declines in energy intensity are based on projections by the U.S.
Department of Energy (Annual Energy Outlook 2005).

y
46

Key Challenges and Opportunities
The principal means to reduce RCI emissions include improving energy
efficiency, substituting electricity and natural gas with lower-emission energy
resources (e.g., solar water heating), and various strategies to decrease the
emissions associated with electricity production (see Energy Supply). The
state’s rapid growth and limited pursuit of energy efficiency to date offers
particularly strong opportunities to reduce emissions through programs and
initiatives to improve the efficiency of buildings, appliances, and industrial
practices. At the same time, fast growth places pressure on communities and
businesses to make swift decisions, and can shorten their time horizons for
recouping investments. A key challenge lies in the design and implementation
of strategies that overcome these barriers and thus ensure new buildings and
industries take full advantage of opportunities to reduce energy use and
emissions.
Arizona’s business, tribal, government, and citizen representatives have
recently taken major steps in this direction. Adopted in 2003, the state’s
government building energy goals are a nationally-recognized example of
leadership-by-example. The state universities have recently installed state-ofthe-art combined-heat-and-power facilities, and have completed extensive
Energy Saving Performance Contracts. Together with several other states,
Arizona adopted state appliance efficiency standards in 2005, which in part
provided the impetus for federal adoption in the 2005 Federal Energy Bill. In
the past year, the state’s electric and gas utilities have made significant new
commitments to increase their energy efficiency programs. And the state’s
semiconductor industry has committed to major reductions of PFC emissions;
Intel Corporation, for example, has reduced its PFC emissions in Arizona by a
factor of 4 over the past 3-4 years. While an indication of the growing momentum
for improving efficiency and reducing emissions, these actions only begin to
tap the overall potential of the state to slow its growth of energy use and GHG
emissions.
Emissions from solid waste management practices can be addressed
through the implementation of more aggressive recycling and waste reduction
programs. Programs to reduce water use in the municipal, agricultural, and
industrial sectors can yield further savings by reducing the energy required to
pump water from place to place.

Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts
The CCAG recommends a set of ten (10) policy options for the residential,
commercial, and industrial sectors, plus two (2) options focused on waste and
water management, that offer the potential for major economic benefits and
emissions savings. As summarized in Figure 5-3, these 12 policy recommendations could lead to emissions savings from reference case projections of 31
MMtCO2e per year by 2020 and cumulative savings of over 220 MMtCO2e
from 2006 through 2020. The weighted average cost of saved carbon from
the policy options for which quantitative estimates of both costs and savings
were prepared was minus $30 per metric ton of CO2 equivalent, meaning

y
47

Figure 5-3

Impact of Policy Recommendations on RCI Emissions

that there is a net savings to the Arizona economy in implementing these
options. Most emissions savings from the RCI options are in the form of
reduced carbon dioxide emissions, with relatively minor reductions of
emissions of other greenhouse gases (principally methane and nitrous oxide)
produced via leakage and/or combustion of fuels.
The estimated impacts of the RCI and solid waste/water management
policies recommended by the CCAG are shown in Table 5-2. Also shown in
Table 5-2 are the results of several policies that have either been recently
implemented or will be implemented as a result of earlier State policies.
These “Savings from Recent RCI Actions” are not accounted for in the reference inventory and forecast, but contribute to overall emissions reduction
along with savings from the CCAG-recommended measures. The combination
of savings from recent actions and CCAG policies are, in the RCI sectors,
estimated to approximately equal projected reference case growth in
emissions from 2006 through 2020.
The CCAG policy recommendations described below result not only in
significant emissions and costs savings, but offer a host of additional benefits
as well. These benefits include (but are by no means limited to) reduction in
spending on energy by homeowners and businesses, contributing to local
economic development, reduced local air pollution, reduced need for electricity
supply facilities, and, for example, for building improvement measures,
improvements in comfort and convenience.
In order for the RCI policy options recommended by the CCAG to yield the
levels of savings described here, the options must be implemented in a
timely, aggressive, and thorough manner. This means, for example, not only
putting the policies themselves in place, but also attending to the development
of “supporting policies” that are needed to help make the recommended
options effective. Improved building codes will not be optimally effective, for
example, without training of contractors, builders, architects, financial institutions,

y
48

Table 5-2

Summary of Results

RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL (RCI) AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

Cost or Cost
Savings Per Ton
GHG Removed
($/tCO2e)

Level of
CCAG
Support

RCI-1

Demand-Side Efficiency
Goals, Funds, Incentives,
and Programs

3.1

15.1

103

-$36

Unanimous

RCI-2

State Leadership Programs

0.04

0.4

3

-$4

Unanimous

RCI-3

Appliance Standards

0.2

1.0

7

-$66

Unanimous

RCI-4

Building Standards/Codes
for Smart Growth

0.3

2.2

14

-$18

Unanimous

RCI-5

“Beyond Code” Building
Design Incentives and
Programs for Smart Growth

0.2

3.1

18

-$17

Unanimous

RCI-6

Distributed Generation
Combined Heat and Power

0.4

2.7

16

-$25

Unanimous

RCI-7

Distributed Generation
Renewable Energy
Applications

0.1

2.1

10

$31

Unanimous

RCI-8

Electricity Pricing
Strategies

1.1

1.5

16

-$63

Unanimous

RCI-9

Mitigating High Global
Warming Potential (GWP)
Gas Emissions
(HFCs, SFCs, PFCs)

RCI-10

Demand-Side Fuel
Switching

0.1

1.2

7

Not available

Unanimous

RCI-12

Solid Waste Management

2.2

3.7

36

Not available

Unanimous

RCI-13

Water Use and Wastewater
Management

0.2

0.8

6

Not available

Unanimous

Total all options,
adjusted for overlap and interaction

7.5

31.1

222

Unanimous

Not available

y
49

and building inspectors, among others, in the methods and benefits of efficient
building design. Regulatory policies that provide incentives and lower
disincentives for the adoption of consumer-sited combined heat and power
and renewable electricity generation are also among the supporting policies
crucial to the success of the RCI options recommended by the CCAG. The CCAG’s
work indicates that there are considerable benefits to both the environment
and to consumers from adoption of the policy options offered, but careful,
comprehensive, and detailed planning and implementation, as well as consistent
support, of these policies will be required if these benefits are to be achieved.

CCAG RCI and Waste Management (RCI) Sector Policy Descriptions
The Residential, Commercial, Industrial and Waste Management Sectors
include emissions reduction opportunities related to improving energy (and
water) use efficiency, using lower GHG energy sources, and enhancing waste
management practices. Fully detailed descriptions of the individual RCI policy
options as presented to and approved by the CCAG can be found in the
Appendix G.
Demand-Side Efficiency Goals, Funds, Incentives, and Programs (RCI-1)
The CCAG recommends the setting of energy savings goals for electricity
and natural gas, and the implementation of the policy, program, and funding
mechanisms that are needed to achieve these goals. These goals, incentives,
and programs are intended to work in tandem with other strategies under
consideration by the RCI and ES sectors. Suggested energy savings goals are
as follows:
• Electricity (energy savings target): 5% savings by 2010, 15% savings by 2020.51
• Natural gas (utility spending target): ramp up to spending 1.5% of gas utility
revenues on energy efficiency programs by 2015 pursuant to Arizona
Corporation Commission (ACC) decoupling of gas sales and revenue.
Further decisions by the ACC to decouple gas sales and revenues are
viewed as central to achieving this target.
Possible implementation options include public benefit charges, tariff riders,
enabling legislation, and/or regulatory directives. These and other options
can be augmented, where applicable by state and national tax incentives for
energy efficient equipment. Indeed, an evolving and flexible mix of these policy
mechanisms may be needed to achieve the efficiency goals described here.
Supporting activities may be important elements in the success of energy
efficiency strategies, and could include consumer education and outreach
programs (including, for example, enhanced State Energy Office and universitybased energy-efficiency extension services), and market transformation
programs and organizations. Activities in support of energy efficiency could
also include decoupling utility sales and revenues and creating performance
incentives that reward utilities for implementing effective demand-side
51

These savings targets would be for electricity sales (MWh), and would reflect cumulative (from today),
verified savings as a percentage of those years’ (projected) loads, starting from the time of policy
adoption.

y
50

management (DSM) programs. Furthermore, the CCAG recommends the
inclusion of energy efficiency resource in an integrated resource planning
(IRP) process, which can enable the overall most efficient and cost-effective
delivery of energy services.
State Leadership Programs (RCI-2)
The CCAG recommends that state and local governments undertake
“Lead by Example” activities to achieve energy cost savings and promote
clean energy technologies by the public and private sectors.
Specific recommendations include:
• Extending state building energy savings goal (A.R.S. §34-451) to include a
further 15% reduction in energy use per square foot in state buildings from
2011 to 2020, along with purchasing of EnergyStar equipment.
• Standards for new state buildings, with possible design parameters including
recommendations for new buildings to be better than code or LEED52 (or
similar) energy efficiency requirements, such as those recommended by
the Arizona Working Group on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency and
by the Energy Efficiency Task Force of the Western Governors Association
Clean and Diversified Energy Advisory Committee (WGA CDEAC) (see also
Option RCI-5), as well as mechanisms to support the state in achieving its
building energy efficiency goals.
• Green procurement strategies, such as installation of renewable energy
systems as additional backup services in emergency services buildings,
and efforts to promote or require the purchase by state buildings of 5% of
their building energy needs from renewable sources (over a phased-in
period) by 2012, increasing to 10% by 2020.
• The promotion of new combined heat and power (CHP) facilities in State
buildings, recent examples of which are the facilities in place and under
construction at Arizona State University and the University of Arizona
(approximately 35 MW total), and the expansion of existing performance
contracting law to require life cycle analysis for CHP in State lease-purchase
construction.
The full policy option description provided in Appendix G acknowledges
numerous programs and policies currently in place in Arizona and includes
additional specific recommendations.
Appliance Standards (RCI-3)
Appliance efficiency standards reduce the market cost of energy efficiency
improvements by incorporating technological advances into base appliance
models, thereby creating economies of scale. Appliance efficiency standards
can be implemented at the state level for appliances not covered by federal
standards. Arizona and other states recently adopted state level appliance
efficiency standards covering several appliances.
52

The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification process includes, but is not
limited to, energy-efficiency specifications for buildings. Other building energy-efficiency guidelines
may also be applicable.

y
51

The CCAG recommends implementation of state appliance efficiency
standards for appliances not covered by federal standards or where higherthan-federal standard efficiency requirements are appropriate.
More specifically, the CCAG calls for the State to:
• Advocate for stronger federal appliance efficiency standards where such
standards are technically feasible and economically justified.
• For those appliances not likely to be covered by federal efforts, pursue
efficiency standards already adopted by California and/or other states.
• Where possible, consider encouraging local manufacturing of high-efficiency
appliances and equipment when adopting state standards.
Building Standards/Codes for Smart Growth (RCI-4)
The CCAG recommends that improved and increasingly stringent energy
efficiency codes for Arizona be adopted and implemented.
Building energy codes specify minimum energy efficiency requirements for
new buildings or for existing buildings undergoing major renovations. Given
Arizona’s growth and the long lifetime of buildings, the current and future
building codes will have a considerable impact on future energy use in
buildings, and on related greenhouse gas emissions. Specifically, the CCAG
recommends that:
• Arizona should either establish a statewide code or strongly encourage local
jurisdictions to adopt and maintain state-of-the-art codes. Adoption is targeted
for 2007, with codes in force in early 2008, but with the recognition that
some municipalities in Arizona may implement energy efficiency codes later
than others.
• Arizona and/or local jurisdictions should adopt the 2004 International
Energy Conservation Code (IECC), to the extent that adoption has not
already occurred. Also, Arizona and/or local jurisdictions should consider
adopting innovative features of California’s latest Title 24 building energy
codes, such as lighting efficiency requirements in new homes.
• Arizona and local jurisdictions should update energy codes regularly.
A three-year cycle could be timed to coincide with release of the national
model codes.
• Revised building codes for Arizona as a whole and for local jurisdictions
should be prepared with the involvement of local chapters of code organizations to assist in obtaining support for and compliance with the new policies.
All buildings should be covered, including manufactured homes, and local
building inspectors should enforce compliance with codes. Inspectors need
to be properly trained in new elements of the codes.
“Beyond Code” Building Design Incentives and Programs for Smart Growth (RCI-5)
The CCAG recommends that building energy performance standards be
implemented in State-funded and other (such as local) government buildings.
It also recommends promotion of similar standards for use in other buildings,

y
52

such that new buildings achieve high standards of energy efficiency, and
existing buildings are renovated or retrofitted to yield significant energy
efficiency improvements. Specifically, this policy option includes:
• Implementation of the energy-efficiency elements of LEED (Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design) standards/certifications and/or other
“green building” certifications and/or measured or modeled building energy
performance criteria to specify building energy performance standards.
• A performance standard for State-owned or state-leased buildings to
demonstrate the feasibility of not only achieving the minimum code requirements but also significantly exceeding code requirements.
• A requirement that State-owned or leased facilities use life-cycle costing,
including full consideration of future energy costs, in the selection and
implementation of building designs and components (including energyusing equipment such as heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems)
for both new and renovated space, or for the selection of replacement
components. Further, following life-cycle cost analysis, require that the most
cost-effective design/equipment/component options be chosen.
• Financial or tax incentives for non-public and non-state public buildings
(such as municipal buildings) to improve their energy performance beyond
that required by existing codes.
Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power (RCI-6)
Distributed generation with clean combined heat and power (DG/CHP)
systems improves the overall efficiency of fuel use as well as electricity system
benefits. The CCAG recommends that the implementation of DG/CHP systems
should be encouraged through a combination of regulatory changes and
incentive programs. CHP systems of 10 MW or smaller (or of equivalent
mechanical power) would be covered, and policies in place by the end of
2006, and in force thereafter, with periodic review as needed. Regulatory
changes and incentives should be designed to enable a significant fraction of
Arizona's estimated remaining CHP potential to be realized. The full policy
description for RCI-6, as provided in Appendix G, notes possible funding
mechanisms and regulatory standards that could be considered.
Distributed Generation/Renewable Energy Applications (RCI-7)
Customer-sited distributed generation powered by renewable energy
sources provides electricity system benefits such as avoided capital investment
and avoided transmission and distribution losses, while also displacing fossilfueled generation and thus reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Customersited renewable distributed generation can include solar photovoltaic
systems, wind power systems, biogas and landfill gas-fired systems, geothermal
generation systems, and systems fueled with biomass wastes or biomass
collected or grown as fuel.
The CCAG proposes that Arizona promote the increased use of renewable
distributed generation in Arizona through a combination of regulatory changes
and incentives.

y
53

Policies to encourage and accelerate the implementation of customer-sited
renewable distributed generation include direct incentives for system purchase,
market incentives (including “net metering”) related to the pricing of electricity
output by renewable distributed generation, state goals or directives, and
favorable rules for interconnecting renewable generation systems with the
electricity grid.
Non-electric renewable energy applications also covered by this policy
include solar water heat and solar space heat and cooling. It is suggested that
Arizona should, at a minimum, set as its target the addition of customer-sited
distributed renewable generation consistent with the overall generation capacity
by year goals for renewable distributed generation in the West as expressed in
the WGA CDEAC reports.
Electricity Pricing Strategies (RCI-8)
As with other energy and non-energy commodities, the pricing of electricity—
including electricity from the grid used by consumers and electricity generated
on the consumers’ premises flowing to the grid—can have a significant impact
on consumers’ usage decisions. Proper and clear electricity tariffs and price
signals can provide significant encouragement to distributed generation,
energy conservation (in many forms), and reduction of electricity use during
times of peak electricity demand.
Creating such tariff structures may involve restructuring tariffs to provide
incentives for “shoulder” and peak usage period demand reductions—for
example, through implementation of time-of-use energy charges—as well as
setting net metering or other rules for sales from distributed generation to the
grid that provide appropriate credit for the electricity generated during periods
of high power demand. Changes in tariff structures are also needed that
revise the balance between energy and demand charges and change the way
that demand charges are fixed.
The CCAG recommends that changes in Arizona electricity pricing and tariffs
be designed to provide improved incentives for end-users to adjust the timing
of energy use so as to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as much as possible.
The implementation of inverted block rates, where higher tariffs are charged
once electricity use per household (for example) reaches a threshold level
each month, is also recommended.
Mitigating High Global Warming Potential Gas Emissions (RCI-9)
The CCAG recommends a combination of voluntary agreements with
industries and new specifications for key equipment to reduce the emissions
of process gases that have high global warming potential.53 In particular, the
CCAG suggests consideration of specifications and possible voluntary incentives
53

Based on the current AZ emissions inventory and projection, GHG emissions from hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs) could grow from about 1 MMtCO2e or <1% of Arizona GHG emissions in 2000 to over 7 MMtCO2e
or about 5% of state emissions by 2020. Most HFC emissions are expected to result from leaks in
mobile air conditioning and refrigeration applications. Other sources of high Global Warming Potential
(GWP) gases, which include the emission of perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and HFCs and from semiconductor
manufacture and leakage of sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) from electricity distribution equipment,
contribute less to state emissions, and these emissions are expected to decline based on existing
emission reduction efforts, such as the semiconductor industry’s voluntary worldwide agreement.

y
54

for new commercial refrigeration equipment, such as the specifications
currently under consideration by the California Air Resources Board. The
specifications would: a) promote the use of low global warming potential (GWP)
refrigerants in refrigerators in retail food stores, restaurants, and refrigerated
transport vehicles (trucks and railcars); and/or b) require or provide incentives
that centralized systems with large refrigerant charges and long distribution
lines be avoided in favor of systems that use much less refrigerant and lack
long distribution lines.
The CCAG further recommends that the Governor explore working with
California and other states in addressing HFC emissions from refrigeration
systems. Maintaining momentum of voluntary industry-government partnerships
(such as the semi-conductor industry agreement) should also be a high priority.
Demand-Side Fuel Switching (RCI-10)
The CCAG recommends the adoption of options for encouraging consumers
to switch to the use of less carbon-intensive fuels to provide key energy services.
Fuel switching opportunities can include using natural gas in the place of
electricity for thermal end-uses, natural gas in the place of coal for key industrial
end-uses, biomass fuels in the place of electricity or natural gas for thermal
end-uses, and solar thermal energy in the place of electricity or natural gas
for thermal end-uses.
The CCAG recommends a two-part approach to promote demand-side fuel
switching. Phase I consists of efforts to promote switching from high-carbon
fuels to lower-carbon fuels (such as from oil or coal to natural gas). Phase II
targets inducing consumers to switch to “low or zero carbon” fuels by offering
incentives to do so. In particular: a) the promotion of solar water heating
through a combination of incentives and targeted research, and b) the
substitution of biodiesel for diesel in commercial and industrial equipment,
are recommended.
Solid Waste Management (RCI-12)
The CCAG recommends pursuing several options to increase recycling and
reduce waste generation in order to limit greenhouse gas emissions associated
with landfill methane generation and with the production of raw materials. In
2005, over 3 million residents in 39 Arizona communities had access to
residential curbside recycling, representing slightly over 50% of the state’s
population. To further increase the diversion of waste from landfill and the
amount of materials recycled, the State should aim to:
• Ensure that curbside recycling programs are provided in all communities
over 50,000 in population;
• Increase the penetration of recycling programs in multi-family dwellings;
• Create new recycling programs for the commercial sector;
• Provide incentives for the recycling of construction materials;
• Develop markets for recycled materials;
• Increase average statewide participation/recovery rates for all existing
recycling programs;
• Develop a statewide recycling goal.

y
55

Implementation options to increase recycling and reduce waste generation
may include the following: expanded ADEQ Waste Reduction Assistance (WRA)
grants; mandatory source separation and recycling laws or ordinances in
urban areas; tax breaks or other incentives to make recycling financially
attractive for private commercial sector waste haulers; full recycling as a
contract requirement for state facilities; government purchasing requirements
for recycled content of items purchased (paper, carpets, etc.); a waste education
campaign, aiming at waste reuse and reduction, and targeting greenhouse gas
reductions; and general awareness building, such as working with community
leaders to appreciate benefits and cost-effectiveness of curbside recycling.
Water Use and Wastewater Management (RCI-13))
Arizona currently uses about 7.2 million acre-feet (MAF) of water, an
estimated 78%54 of which is delivered to agricultural consumers, 18% to
municipal consumers, and the remainder to industrial users. A significant
amount of energy is used to pump this water from underground aquifers (3.6
MAF), from the Colorado River (2.6 MAF), and other sources (1.2 MAF), and to
treat it in wastewater facilities after it is used. The CCAG has the following five
recommendations:
• Accelerate investment in water use efficiency. Elements may include
implementing best management practices and efficient water management
practices, and providing incentives for implementation of water management
improvement measures. Consideration should also be given to developing
a statewide water and wastewater savings plan, based on a thorough
assessment of water and wastewater options in all water using sectors.
• Increase the energy efficiency of all water and wastewater treatment
operations, and develop long-term programs to better mesh with the longterm investments in water and wastewater infrastructure. Two specific
suggestions with respect to improving pump efficiency are detailed in the
full policy description for RCI-13 provided in Appendix G.
• Increase energy production by water and wastewater agencies from renewable
sources such as in-conduit hydropower generation and biogas production
from sewage sludge.
• Encourage and create incentives for technologies with the capability to
reduce water use associated with power generation.
• Ensure that power plants use the best management practices and
economically feasible technology available to conserve water (via siting,
evaluation, permitting, or other processes).

54

Arizona Department of Water Resources statistic, July 2006.

y
56

Chapter 6: Energy Supply
Overview of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Arizona’s historical sources of electricity generation by fuel type are shown
in Figure 6-1, with projections to the year 2020.55 Natural gas generation has
grown considerably during the past decade, while coal, nuclear, and hydro
generation have stayed relatively constant. Based on the CCAG reference
case forecast, natural gas will continue to dominate new generation through
2010, at which point coal assumes an increasing market share, reflecting
that natural gas prices may continue to rise.
Figure 6-1

Electricity Generated by Arizona Power Plants, 1990-202056

Electricity emissions are estimated both on a consumption basis (i.e.,
accounting for the GHG emissions associated with electricity consumed within
the State) and on a production basis (i.e., based on the GHG emissions associated
with electricity produced within Arizona, much of which is currently exported).
Figure 6-2 shows the GHG emissions associated with electricity consumption
and exports, based on the assumptions mentioned above. From 1990 to 2000,
electricity sales in the state grew by about 4% per year, with CO2 emissions
growing at roughly 3% per year in this period. Emissions grew more slowly
than electricity sales because the share of natural gas generation increased
while the coal share decreased. The decreasing share of coal led to a slight
decrease in CO2 emissions per MWh generated (1,142 lb CO2/MWh in 1990
to 1,107 lb CO2/MWh in 2000). From 2000 to 2020, emissions associated
with electricity use are projected to grow at 3.8% per year, as the fraction of
coal generation increases, especially after 2010.
55

Values are based on the assumptions described in Appendix D, Final Arizona Greenhouse Gas
Inventory and Reference Case Projections, 1990-2020.
56
This same data and graphic are also presented in Figure 6-4 herein as the “Reference Case Electricity
Supply by Fuel Type” for purposes of comparison with the projected impact of the CCAG’s recommended
policy options on electricity generation fuel supply.

y
57

Figure 6-2

Historical and Projected CO2 Emissions Associated with Electricity Use
(Consumption-Basis) and Exports, 1990-2020

Key Challenges and Opportunities
The principal challenge in addressing GHG emissions from Arizona’s
electricity sector is the State’s extraordinary growth rate, specifically the
accompanying increase in baseload demand expected over the next 15 years,
coupled with natural gas price uncertainty. Absent any carbon policy, the
least-cost choice for new baseload capacity in the 2010 to 2020 timeframe is
expected to be pulverized coal. Commercial scale applications of advanced
coal technologies like integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) with carbon
capture and storage are currently under development in many states (including
Arizona) with commercial operation anticipated between 2011 and 2014.
These advanced coal technologies offer the opportunity for the implementation
of low carbon policies. If low carbon policies are implemented, advanced coal
technologies like IGCC will likely be less costly (in terms of electricity produced)
than pulverized coal, albeit at a cost higher than today’s cost for pulverized coal.
Arizona’s most plentiful renewable resource, of course, is solar energy,
and the State has a significant leadership opportunity in the commercialization
of solar technologies. Solar photovoltaic (PV) is commercial in certain applications, particularly for peak shaving and for off-grid applications, but requires
cost-effective storage technology in order to provide baseload power.
Concentrating solar power (CSP) is an emerging technology on the cusp of
commercialization. Some CSP technologies can dispatch electricity for six or
more hours after sundown, providing power for all but the lowest demand
hours. Arizona has untapped, but limited, wind resources. Wind’s intermittency inhibits its value for baseload capacity, but wind can provide baseload
power if wind facilities are carefully planned at multiple sites and coupled with
backup combustion turbines.
Arizona may also face unusual challenges in reducing electric sector GHG
emissions as a result of the nature of its electric power industry. Generating
stations in Arizona are subject to substantially different oversight regimes
depending on whether they are regulated by the Arizona Corporation
Commission (e.g., APS, Tucson Electric), overseen by independently elected
board (e.g., the Salt River Project), or are located on tribal lands (e.g., the Four
Corners and Navajo generating stations). This disparity may make broad
adoption of some of the CCAG’s recommendations more difficult.

y
58

Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts
The CCAG recommends a set of eight policy options for the Energy Supply
(ES) sector that offer the potential for significant emission reductions. Of
these policies, three (ES-3, Direct Renewable Energy Support; ES-9, Reduce
Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation; and ES-11, Pricing
Strategies) are quantified under the RCI sector. These results are noted in
Table 6-1 below, but they are not included in the Energy Supply sector totals
in order to avoid double-counting. The CCAG has recommended ES-4, GHG
Cap and Trade, as a policy option that Arizona should explore at the regional
or national level. The estimates in Table 6-1 are based on modeling of a
national cap and trade program and the likely impact on only Arizona’s power
sector. The CCAG has recommended an economy-wide cap and trade program, but the estimates do not include any projected reductions from sectors
other than the power sector. Values for the range of results are shown. ES-10,
Metering Strategies, is an enabling policy for greater penetration of clean
distributed generation and energy efficiency technologies. The reductions
attributable to this greater penetration are quantified under other CCAG
policy options.
Three policies are quantified as Energy Supply options that Arizona can
implement on its own, including ES-1, Environmental Portfolio
Standard/Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff; ES-6, Carbon Intensity
Targets; and ES-12, Integrated Resource Planning. Because the purpose of
ES-12 would largely be accomplished by (i.e., overlap with) the activities that
would be undertaken to satisfy ES-1 and ES-6, only the results from ES-1 and
ES-6 are included in the totals in Table 6-1. (The results of ES-12 are indicated in
the Table, but not counted in the totals in order to avoid double-counting.)
Further, because either ES-1 or ES-6 would exhaust all available wind, biomass,
and geothermal generation capacity within Arizona, GHG reductions from
these resources are included only in ES-6 in order to avoid double-counting.57
If implemented as part of a comprehensive package of the CCAG’s recommendations, ES-1 and ES-6 would need to be evaluated with respect to the
reference case electricity demand forecast in order to take into account the
fact that other measures (e.g., energy efficiency and distributed generation)
would reduce the demand for grid electricity generation. Because the GHG
reductions associated with ES-1 and ES-6 are directly related to total MWhs
generated, GHG reductions for ES-1 and ES-6, in this situation, would have to
be adjusted downward to reflect this lower demand. Specifically, GHG reductions
achieved by the ES policies would have to be reduced by the same percentage
as the RCI policies reduced grid electricity generation in order to approximate
the combined results of ES and RCI policies. See the Appendix H for further
information.

57

ES-6 was chosen for relative ease of calculation; wind, biomass, and geothermal could have been
included in ES-1 instead.

y
59

Figure 6-3 shows the impact of ES-1 and ES-6 on GHG emission projections
in Arizona.
Figure 6-3

Impact of Policy Recommendations on Energy Supply (ES) GHG
Emissions Compared to Reference Case

The individual CCAG policy recommendations described briefly below (and
in more detail in Appendix H) provide substantial GHG emission reductions,
and when combined with the options recommended jointly by Energy Supply
and RCI, substantial cost savings and additional benefits as well. These benefits
include (but are not limited to) reduced need for electric generation facilities,
reduced local air pollution, greater energy reliability and security, and greater
contribution to local economic development, including the creation of jobs in
rural communities and job-needy areas due to the development of alternative
energy opportunities (i.e., biomass, biofuels and wind) in these areas. It is
estimated that a 50 MMgal/year ethanol plant in Arizona would yield approximately 70 full-time positions, with additional job creation resulting from the
production and processing of feedstocks used in production of ethanol. Given
the estimates for ethanol production assumed in this Action Plan, 14 plants
would be required by 2020 resulting in nearly 1,000 new jobs in rural Arizona.
Implementing the policies recommended by the CCAG to reduce carbon
emissions associated with electric generation, increase renewable energy,
and enhance energy efficiency would have a profound effect on the character
of Arizona’s future energy supply sector. This is evident in the contrast
between Figure 6-4, the reference case, and Figure 6-5, which reflects the
carbon-intensity-reducing and demand-reducing policies recommended by the
CCAG from the ES and RCI sectors.

y
60

Figure 6-4

Reference Case Electricity Supply by Fuel Type

Figure 6-5

Policy Case Electricity Supply by Fuel Type
(Reflecting CCAG ES and RCI Recommendations)

Not directly evident from the above figures is the fact that the dramatic
expansion of renewables would be accompanied by a corresponding increase
in the number of jobs in Arizona associated with this expansion. This would be
paid for in large measure by the corresponding reduction in imports to Arizona
of fossil fuels.
The CCAG’s Energy Supply recommendations will not provide the levels of
savings indicated here, of course, unless they are implemented in a timely,
aggressive and effective manner, along with corresponding enabling policies.
Careful, comprehensive, and consistent regulatory policies to reduce barriers
and provide incentives for the adoption of consumer-sited combined heat and

y
61

power, waste energy recovery, and renewable electricity generation will be crucial
to the success of these and several RCI policy options recommended by the
CCAG. Similarly, public education and outreach, and institutional incentives
such as GHG reporting and registry programs – also recommended by the
CCAG – will be essential for maximum effectiveness.
Table 6-1

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

ENERGY SUPPLY (ES)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

Cost or Cost
Savings Per Ton
GHG Removed
($/tCO2e)

ES-1

Environmental Portfolio
Standard/Renewable
Energy Standard and Tariff

ES-3

Direct Renewable Energy
Support (including Tax
Credits and Incentives,
R&D, and siting/zoning)

This option is quantified under RCI-7, Distributed Generation /
Renewable Energy Applications. Values are shown below for completeness, but not included in cumulative totals to prevent double-counting.

National or Regional GHG
Cap and Trade

These estimates are based on modeling of a national cap-and-trade
policy and the likely impact on Arizona’s power sector. The values presented here show the range of results for GHG reductions and costs.

ES-4

4.2

0.1

16.4

2.1

116.0

10.0

$6

Level of
CCAG
Support

Majority

Unanimous

$31

- 0.28—
0.18

2.0—
18.5

7 - 88

$7 - $19

0.0

14.0

70.4

$44

Unanimous

ES-6

Carbon Intensity Targets

ES-9

Reduce Barriers to
Renewables and Clean
Distributed Generation

This option is quantified under RCI-6, Distributed Generation /
Combined Heat and Power. Values are shown below for completeness,
but not included in cumulative totals to prevent double-counting.
2.7
16.0
-$25
0.4

Unanimous

ES-10

Metering Strategies

ES-10 is an enabling policy for RCI-6 and RCI-7;
its quantification is incorporated as part of those options.

Unanimous

ES-11

Pricing Strategies

This option is quantified under RCI-8, Electricity Pricing
Strategies. Values are shown below for completeness, but
not included in cumulative totals to prevent double-counting.
1.1

ES-12

Integrated Resource
Planning

Total All Options,
Adjusted for overlap and
interaction

1.5

16.0

5.4

28.0

3.0

17.9

120.6

y
62

Unanimous

-$63

This option overlaps substantially with ES-6, Carbon Intensity
Targets. Values are shown below for completeness, but not
included in cumulative totals to prevent double-counting.
0.1

Majority

Unanimous

-$2
Note: Total
includes
only ES-1
and ES-6.

CCAG Energy Supply (ES) Sector Policy Descriptions
The Energy Supply sector includes emissions and mitigation opportunities
related to electrical energy supply options, including the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, whether generated through the combustion of fossil fuels or by renewable energy sources, and whether generated in
a centralized power station supplying the grid or by distributed generation
facilities. Arizona has relatively little oil and gas production, so the CCAG has
made no recommendations concerning the oil and gas energy supply options.
Fully detailed descriptions of the individual Energy Supply policy options
as presented to and approved by the CCAG can be found in Appendix H.
Environmental Portfolio Standard /Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (ES-1)
An environmental portfolio standard (EPS) is a requirement that utilities
must supply a certain percentage of electricity from environmentally-friendly
sources. An EPS differs from a Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) in that an
EPS can include more options than renewables for meeting the requirement.
Utilities can meet their requirements by purchasing or generating environmentally-friendly electricity or by purchasing clean energy credits. By giving utilities
the flexibility to purchase clean energy credits, a market in these credits will
emerge that will provide an incentive to companies that are best able to
generate clean energy, either through energy efficiency or renewables.
The CCAG initially considered four option scenarios as variations of the
changes that the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) is expected to make to
the State’s existing EPS. The EPS, of course, applies only to ACC-jurisdictional
utilities. Major aspects of the anticipated ACC changes include:
• RPS of 5% in 2015, 15% in 2025.
• Starting in 2007, 5% of this total renewable requirement must be from distributed renewables, increasing to 30% by 2011 and remaining at 30% in
future years.
• Renewable Energy Credit (REC) trading is allowed, provided that all other
associated attributes are retired when applying RECs to the annual renewable
energy requirement.
• Out-of-state resources can be used provided that the necessary transmission
rights are obtained and used.
The CCAG narrowed the list of options from four to two:
• ES-1a(1): The ACC’s likely changes to the EPS, with the Salt River Project
(SRP) continuing with its sustainable resource program. (SRP plans to supply 15% of energy for retail sales with renewable or demand-side sources by
2025.)
• ES-1c: A more aggressive alternative proposal, applicable to all utilities in
the state (not just ACC-jurisdictional utilities) starting with the 1% RPS in
2005 and increasing 1% each year to 26% in 2025, and allowing out-of-state
renewables and REC trading.

y
63

The CCAG recognized that the ACC has related proceedings underway and
believes that approval of the ACC’s current rule-making effort would provide
significant GHG emissions reductions. The CCAG recommended the more
aggressive alternative (ES-1c) because of its cost-effectiveness and significant
emissions reductions.
Direct Renewable Energy Support (ES-3)
The purpose of this suite of policies is to encourage investment in
renewables by providing direct financial incentives and by removing siting and
zoning barriers to renewable energy facilities. Development of new renewable
technologies is also encouraged through research and development funding.
Direct renewable energy support can take many forms including:
1) direct subsidies for purchasing/selling renewable technologies given to the
buyer/seller;
2) tax credits or exemptions for purchasing/selling renewable technologies
given to the buyer/seller;
3) tax credits or exemptions for operating renewable energy facilities;
4) feed-in tariffs, which are direct payments to renewable generators for each
kWh of electricity generated from a qualifying renewable facility;
5) tax credits for each kWh generated from a qualifying renewable facility.
This option is closely related to RCI-7, Distributed Generation / Renewable
Energy Applications, and is quantified under that option.
Greenhouse Gas Cap and Trade Program (ES-4)
A cap and trade system is a market mechanism in which CO2 emissions
are limited or capped at a specified level, and those participating in the system
can trade allowances (where each allowance represents one ton of CO2
emissions) in order to lower overall costs of compliance. For every ton of
CO2 released, an emitter must hold an allowance. The total number of
allowances issued or allocated represents the cap. The government can give
allowances away for free to those participating in the cap and trade system (or
even to those who are not) using many different approaches (e.g., based on
generation output, based on historical emissions, etc.), or it can auction them,
or use a hybrid approach. Participants can range from a small group within a
single sector to the entire economy, and the program can be implemented on
“upstream” sources (where fuel is extracted or imported) or “downstream”
sources (where fuel is consumed).
The CCAG recommendation is to encourage the Governor to explore development of a regional or national, economy-wide cap and trade program.
Carbon Intensity Targets (ES-6)
Rather than a fixed cap on carbon emissions, a carbon intensity target is a
limit on the ratio of carbon emissions to a measure of output. Absolute
emissions can increase as output increases. Measures of output are clear for
some sectors like electricity generation (i.e., MWh), but are less clear for sectors
where outputs vary widely (e.g., manufacturing). One measure of output for

y
64

such sectors could be dollars equal to the value of the output. The CCAG’s
recommendation reflects consideration of a mandatory carbon intensity target
for Arizona beginning in 2010 (i.e., set equivalent to carbon intensity in 2010)
and declining by 3% each year through 2025. The annual carbon intensity target
would be translated into a cap, and trading would be allowed under that cap.
Reduce Barriers to Renewables and Clean Distributed Generation (ES-9)
By removing barriers to renewables and clean distributed generation (DG),
more clean generation can come into the energy supply mix, displacing fossil
fueled generation and thereby reducing CO2 emissions. The CCAG’s recommendation proposes to remove barriers by standardizing interconnection
policies; improving procurement policies (e.g., state power purchases, loading
order requirements, long-term contracting with clean DG, etc.); and requiring
environmental disclosure, among other approaches. This option is closely
related to RCI-6, Distributed Generation/Combined Heat and Power, and is
quantified under that option.
Metering Strategies (ES-10)
There are two common metering strategies and policies: net metering and
advanced metering. Net metering is a policy that allows owners of grid-connected
distributed generation (i.e., generating units on the customer side of the meter)
to generate excess electricity and sell it back to the grid, effectively “turning
the meter backward.” This policy allows for low transaction costs (e.g., by
avoiding the need to negotiate individual contracts for the sale of electricity
back to the utility) and is attractive to distributed generation (DG) owners
because they are compensated equal to the full cost of purchased electricity
(i.e., the sum of wholesale generation, transmission and distribution, and utility administration costs), rather than just the utility’s avoided costs.
Advanced metering technology allows electricity consumers much greater
opportunity to manage their electricity consumption. For example, consumers
could set their meter to turn off air conditioning during the day while they are
away. Coupled with pricing strategies whereby prices reflect actual costs,
advanced metering could be set to automatically reduce power demand by
turning off lights or appliances during peak times when the price reaches a
threshold set by the consumer. Advanced metering could be encouraged by
subsidizing or requiring their installation.
The CCAG approved this policy option as a recommendation, but because
it is more of an enabling policy (for clean, distributed generation) than a
reduction policy per se, it was not quantified for GHG reduction potential or
cost effectiveness. It is an enabling policy for RCI-6 and RCI-7, which are
quantified.
Pricing Strategies (ES-11))
Pricing strategies can take many forms including: (a) real-time pricing in
which utility customer rates are not fixed, but reflect the varying costs that
utilities themselves pay for power (which vary substantially during the day and
over the seasons); (b) “time-of-use” rates which are fixed rates for different

y
65

times of the day and/or for different seasons; (c) “increasing block” rates
whereby unit prices rise as consumption increases; (d) green pricing whereby
customers are given the opportunity to purchase electricity with a renewable
or cleaner mix than the standard supply mix offered by the utility; and (e) taking
advantage of advanced metering to allow electricity consumers far greater
opportunity to manage their electricity consumption to reduce use and cost.
The CCAG approved this option as a recommendation, but decided not to
quantify it because of uncertainties surrounding it (e.g., load-shifting under
time-of-use rates would reduce costs but could actually increase GHG
emissions). However, this option is closely related to RCI-8, Electricity Pricing
Strategies, which is quantified.
Integrated Resource Planning (ES-12)
Integrated Resource Planning (IRP) is a process that diverges from
traditional utility least-cost planning. Rather than focusing only on supply-side
options to meet a forecasted growth in electricity demand, IRP also incorporates
demand-side technology and policy options to meet the anticipated future
demand. Demand-side measures include energy efficiency, distributed
generation, waste energy recovery, and peak-shaving measures. Typically, IRP
also takes into account a broader array of costs, including environmental
and social costs.
IRP is an involved, iterative process that, by its nature as a bottom-up
planning methodology for individual utilities, does not lend itself to setting
broad implementation levels per se. An emissions value, or “shadow price”,
can be specified for use in the IRP planning process, however. In making
decisions about which resources to use to satisfy future energy demand,
utilities would be required to apply this shadow price as a CO2 adder in the
course of their evaluation of technologies and options. Utilities would not
actually be required to pay the shadow price.
The CCAG’s analysis and recommendation reflects a shadow price of $15
per ton of CO2 emitted to approximate the results of an IRP process.

y
66

Chapter 7:
Transportation and Land Use
Overview of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The transportation sector is a major source of GHG emissions in Arizona –
currently accounting for about 40% of Arizona’s gross GHG emissions. The
transportation technologies and fuels used are key determinants of those
emissions, along with population, economic growth, and various land use policies that all affect the demand for transportation services. GHG emissions
from the transportation sector totaled about 35 MMtCO2e in 2000. Carbon
dioxide accounts for about 97% of transportation GHG emissions from fuel
use; much of the remaining 3% is due to nitrous oxide emissions from gasoline
engines.
Figure 7-1 shows historical and projected Transportation and Land Use
(TLU) GHG emissions by fuel and source, and illustrates their rapid growth.
TLU emissions are expected to more than double from 1990 from 2020.
Arizona studies suggest on-road vehicle miles traveled (VMT) will continue to
grow faster than the population, and rapid growth in freight VMT is also
expected, reflecting continued economic growth and cross-border trade.
Figure 7-1

Historical and Projected TLU GHG Emissions, from 1990 to 2020

Key Challenges and Opportunities
The principal means to reduce TLU emissions include improving vehicle
fuel efficiency, substituting gasoline and diesel with lower-emission fuels,
modal switches to lower-emission means of travel, and various strategies to
decrease the growth in fuel use and VMT.
In Arizona and in the nation as a whole, vehicle fuel efficiency has
improved little since the late 1980s, yet many studies have documented the
potential for substantial increases consistent with maintaining vehicle size
and performance. The use of biofuels with lower GHG emissions is growing in

y
67

Arizona, but many obstacles remain in the way of large market penetration.
Arizona also has taken some steps to increase transit options and encouraging
Smart Growth.

Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts
The CCAG recommends a set of 13 policy options for the TLU sector that
offer the potential for major GHG emissions reductions from the reference
projection. As summarized in Table 7-1, these 13 policy recommendations
could lead to emissions savings from reference case projections of 14.5
MMtCO2e per year by 2020 and cumulative savings of 91 MMtCO2e from 2007
through 2020. The weighted average cost of saved carbon from the policy
options for which quantitative estimates of both costs and savings were
prepared was minus $32 per metric ton of CO2 equivalent, meaning that
there is a net savings to the Arizona economy in implementing these options.
The estimated impacts of the TLU policies recommended by the CCAG are
shown in Figure 7-2. Aggressive implementation of these policies could keep
TLU emissions growth relatively flat, increasing only to about 44 MMtCO2e in
2020.
Figure7-2

Impact of Policy Recommendations on TLU Emissions

The CCAG policy recommendations described briefly here (and in more
detail in Appendix I) result not only in the significant emissions and costs savings, but offer a host of additional benefits as well. These benefits include (but
are by no means limited to) reduced local air pollution, more livable, healthy
communities, and economic development and job growth from in-state biofuel
production.
In order for the TLU policy options recommended by the CCAG to yield the
levels of savings described here, the options must be implemented in a
timely, aggressive, and thorough manner. Notably, the State Clean Car Program

y
68

for light-duty vehicles (TLU-1) accounts for a large portion of the reductions in
this sector (e.g., more than 5 of the 16 MMtCO2e of reductions in the year
2020). This option must clear several hurdles before Arizona or any other
state can adopt it, including EPA approval of the original California Clean Car
Program (that other states can then opt into) and a court challenge to the
underlying notion of regulation of GHG emissions from vehicles. If, for any reason, Arizona is not able to implement the Clean Car Program, other options
could play a larger role. For example, Hybrid Promotion and Incentives (TLU-7)
and Feebates (TLU-8) would improve fuel efficiency. A multi-state approach

Table 7-1

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE (TLU)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

Cost or Cost
Savings Per Ton
GHG Removed
($/tCO2e)

Level of
CCAG
Support

TLU-1

State Clean Car Program

0.3

5.6

32.5

-$90

Unanimous

TLU-2

Smart Growth Bundle
of Options

1.5

4.0

26.7

$0
(Net Savings)

Unanimous

TLU-3

Promoting Multimodal
Transit

TLU-4

Reduction of Vehicle Idling

TLU-5

Standards for
Alternative Fuels

TLU-7

Hybrid Promotion and
Incentives

TLU-8

Feebates

TLU-9

Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance

0.0

2.8

12.3

$0
(Zero net cost)

Unanimous

TLU-10

Low Rolling Resistance
Tires and Tire Inflation

0.0

0.8

4.8

Not available

Unanimous

TLU-11

Accelerated Replacement/
Retirement of HighEmitting Diesel Fleet

0.2

0.03

1.2

Not available

Unanimous

TLU-12

Biodiesel Implementation

0.1

1.1

6.2

$0
(Zero net cost)

Unanimous

TLU-13

State Lead-By-Example
(via Procurement and
Smart Way)

0.03

0.04

0.4

$0

Unanimous

TLU-14

60 mph Speed Limit for
Commercial Trucks

0.3

0.5

5.2

$35

SuperMajority

3.1

14.5

91.0

Total all options
adjusted for overlap and interaction

Unanimous

Not available (included in TLU-2)
0.7

1.3

11.8

-$22

Unanimous

Not available (enabling policy for TLU-12 and A-3)

Unanimous

Not available (include in TLU-1)

Unanimous

Not available

Super-Majority

y
69

to feebates is recommended here because of the drawbacks of Arizona (or
any state) acting alone in this area.
To be most effective, Smart Growth (TLU-2) will require change at every
level of government, and as such will be most effective with focused leadership
by the State, including training, outreach, and technical assistance to local
governments.
Transit-Oriented Development (TLU-3), as well, will require integrated action
by state, regional, and local governments. The State can lead by ensuring that
state investments support regional and local smart growth, by both how and
where it makes those investments. Finally, TLU-2 and TLU-3 are mutually supportive, and implementing one will increase the benefits generated by the other.

CCAG Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector Policy Descriptions
The TLU sector includes emissions and mitigation opportunities related to
vehicle technologies, fuel choices, transit options, and demand for transportation
services. Fully detailed descriptions of the individual TLU policy options as
presented to and approved by the CCAG can be found in Appendix I.
State Clean Car Program (TLU-1)
Arizona should adopt the State Clean Car Program in order to reduce
GHG emissions from new light-duty vehicles. The standards, which must still
be approved by US EPA, would take effect in model year 2011 (calendar year
2010). Other Clean Car Program elements include standards requiring
reductions in smog- and soot-forming pollutants, and promoting introduction
of very low-emitting technologies into new vehicles.
New cars and light trucks in all states must comply with Federal emission
standards, and, generally speaking, states have the choice of adopting a
stronger set of standards applicable in California.
Eleven (11) states already have adopted the Clean Car Program standards:
California, Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and Washington.
Smart Growth Bundle of Options (TLU-2)
Arizona should implement a bundle of options to reduce GHG emissions
driven by land use practices and policies. The options include:
• Infill, increased density and brownfield redevelopment: Shifting housing
and commercial development toward location efficient sites, such as
brownfields and infill parcels, and away from location inefficient sites,
such as greenfields, reduces overall travel demand and expand lower
emitting mode choices. Brownfields are commercial or industrial properties
that are abandoned or are not being fully used because of actual or perceived environmental contamination. These properties have potential for
redevelopment, but the uncertainty and risk of environmental liability and
the cost of investigation and cleanup keep them from being redeveloped.
Brownfields can be former industrial properties, abandoned gas stations,

y
70

vacant warehouses, or former dry-cleaning establishments. Redevelopment
of these contaminated properties creates jobs, revitalizes neighborhoods,
increases property and sales tax revenues, decreases urban sprawl, and
reduces potential health risks to the local community. Infill development
and increased density can also revitalize neighborhoods, increase tax
revenues, and decrease urban sprawl.
• Transit-oriented development: Enables shifts to lower emitting modes by
building compact, mixed-use development around transit stops so that
people can meet daily needs by foot, bicycle, or transit.
• Smart growth: Smart growth allows for mixed land uses with a range of
housing opportunities and multiple transportation options including
pedestrian/bike access. State actions to support smart growth include
planning, modeling, and regulatory tools that support location efficient
growth; and making State-funded investments in smart growth communities
that are proximate to household amenities (such as jobs, shopping, school,
services, entertainment, etc.) as opposed to growth in areas that are not
proximate and require greater travel distance and have less mode choice.
• Targeted open space protection: Includes programs designed to protect
and conserve State lands and other open spaces, and develop and
improve neighborhood, community, and regional parks in ways that
encourage location efficient growth and broader mode choice.
Multi-Modal Transit Options (TLU-3)
Arizona should enable and support multimodal transit and promote shifts
in passenger transportation mode choice (auto, bus, rail, bike, pedestrian,
etc.) to lower emitting choices. This includes: making optimal use of
Community Multi-scale Air Quality (CMAQ) funds; expanding transit infrastructure (rail, bus, bus rapid transit [BRT]); improving transit service, promoting
and marketing transit (including tax-free and employer-paid commuter benefits);
improving bike and pedestrian infrastructure; exploring commuter rail using
existing rail corridors; considering re-establishing train service between
Phoenix and Tucson; reviewing all proposed transportation projects for multimodal flexibility (e.g., add BRT or light rail if feasible); and conducting
research into new transportation technologies and urban planning techniques.
Reduction of Vehicle Idling (TLU-4)
Arizona should implement policies to reduce idling from diesel and gasoline
heavy-duty vehicles, buses, and other vehicles through the combination of a
Statewide anti-idling ordinance and by promoting and expanding the use of
technologies that reduce heavy-duty vehicle idling. These technologies include:
automatic engine shut down/start up system controls; direct fired heaters (for
providing heat only); auxiliary power units; and truck stop electrification.
The goal of this policy is to implement a Statewide vehicle idling restriction
rule that can be enforced and that minimizes allowable exemptions, in place
by 2008, with plans for providing the necessary resources for enforcing the
ordinance. The policy also aims to develop and pilot truck stop electrification
programs. The policy target is an overall reduction in idling of 80% by 2010
and 100% by 2020.

y
71

This policy would be implemented through the following primary mechanisms:
information and outreach to provide information indicating when and where
idling is prohibited, and indicating the benefits of reducing idling, including
fuel savings, toxic emission reductions, and GHG reductions; technical
assistance for coordination with anti-idling product manufacturers; funding
mechanisms to partially fund idling technology loan grants; a well-defined
anti-idling ordinance; and a phased enforcement program.
Standards for Alternative Fuels (TLU-5)
Arizona should promote more widespread acceptance of alternative fuels by
developing and enforcing a State standard for neat biodiesel (B100), biodiesel
blends, and ethanol blends to ensure fuel quality and good vehicle performance.
For biodiesel blends, the biofuel portion and the petroleum diesel portions of
the fuel are separately regulated through ASTM standards;58 however, no standard
is currently in place for the blended biodiesel. Similarly, for ethanol blends, E85
and the gasoline portion of ethanol blends are regulated by ASTM standards.
Arizona recently passed legislation in 2006 (House Bill 2590) that regulates
biodiesel blends and E85 blends. The base gasoline for ethanol blends must
meet the standards for gasoline sold in that area. This measure should now
focus on enforcement of the standard to ensure that fuel taxes are being paid
and that blenders are registered with the State. To reduce fraud, the measure
should ensure fuel that is delivered is as advertised, and eliminate consumer
problems. Enforcement of this standard would be led by the Arizona
Department of Weights and Measures. Certain exemptions might be acceptable
(e.g., a school district blending biodiesel for use in its own school buses and
not for outside sale).
Through the National Energy Act, growth in alternative fuels is expected in
the near term. This measure will ensure that these alternative fuels sold in
Arizona meet quality standards. This measure would also be broadened to
include other alternative fuels that may be sold in Arizona.
Hybrid Promotion and Incentives (TLU-7)
Arizona should adopt a combination of public education and information
efforts with financial incentives to promote the sales of light-duty vehicles with
hybrid gasoline-electric power trains. This could include reduction in fees and
taxes and giving preferential infrastructure access to hybrids on carpool lanes
or metered parking spaces.
Hybrid promotion and incentive programs should be implemented from
the time period between the near-term years when production is limited and
the medium-to-long term years when expansion of production capabilities
makes it more likely that promotion and incentive policies will have a significant effect on consumer choices. The State needs to study further the level
and design of incentives necessary to achieve the goal set forth here.
In the near term (2006-2008), the hybrid vehicle sales are constrained on
the producer side by an inability of automobile manufacturers to keep up with
already existing consumer demand. In the medium-to-long term (2009 forward
58

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).

y
72

for Arizona), automobile manufacturers are likely to increase production
capabilities for hybrid power train vehicles, and provide consumers with many
more choices of hybrid cars. As a result, hybrid promotion and incentive
programs are likely to have some incremental positive net effect on consumer
purchase behavior.
Feebates (TLU-8)
Arizona should initiate a cost-shared, multi-state study of “feebate” program
benefits and costs. At a minimum, the effort should include California and
New Mexico. Feebates would provide incentives for reduce GHG emissions by
creating:
1) fees on relatively high emissions/lower fuel economy vehicles and
2) rebates or tax credits on low emissions/higher fuel economy vehicles.
A multi-state approach is useful because of drawbacks in a single state
adopting feebates in isolation.
Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance (TLU-9)
Arizona should authorize insurance companies to offer “Pay-As-You-Drive”
(PAYD) auto coverage, under which a portion of auto insurance premiums are
linked to miles driven (while the remaining portion remains a “fixed cost” as
under current practice). Arizona should promote a PAYD pilot program in 2008,
evaluate the results, and, if successful, promote this form of auto insurance.
Assuming this pilot is successful, market penetration could increase to
100% by 2020. This could happen either through competitive pressure
(i.e., increasing numbers of companies offer it in order to stay competitive) or
through a change in State policy mandating PAYD insurance at some point
after it has been shown to work.
PAYD insurance has been promoted by a variety of groups for reasons that
include emissions reduction and safety (through decreased driving), and fairness
(by changing insurance costs to more closely track the portion of individuals'
risk that is created by miles driven).
Low Rolling Resistance (LRR) Tires and Tire Inflation (TLU-10)
Arizona should establish minimum energy efficiency standards for replacement
tires and require that greater information about high-efficiency “low-rolling
resistance” (LRR) replacement tires be made available to consumers at the
point of sale. Arizona should also promote proper inflation of tires by consumers
to improve mileage and reduce emissions.
Manufacturers currently use LRR tires on new vehicles, but they are not
easily available to consumers as replacement tires. When installing original
equipment tires, carmakers use low rolling resistance tires as a way to contribute
to meeting the federal automobile fuel economy (CAFE) standards. When
replacing the original tires, consumers often purchase less efficient tires.
Currently, tire manufacturers and retailers are not required to provide information
about the fuel efficiency of replacement tires. In addition, there is no current
minimum standard for fuel efficiency that all replacement tires must meet. A

y
73

combination of minimum standards and better consumer information could
lead to a gain in fuel efficiency of about 3%. Improperly inflated tires decrease
fuel efficiency and result in greater GHG emissions. Properly inflated tires will
improve mileage, decrease fuel consumption and reduce GHG emissions.
Accelerated Replacement/Retirement of High-Emitting Diesel Fleet (TLU-11)
Arizona should reduce GHG black carbon emissions from heavy-duty diesel
vehicles by developing and implementing an incentives program in Arizona to
accelerate the replacement and/or retirement of the highest-emitting diesel
vehicles.
Starting with the 2007 model year, the federal emission standards for new
heavy-duty diesel vehicles will be improved. In conjunction with these more
stringent emission standards, the sulfur content of diesel fuel is being lowered
from 500 parts per million (ppm) to 15 ppm. These measures will combine to
significantly reduce GHG black carbon emissions from heavy-duty diesel
trucks and buses. However, a large number of older, more-polluting diesel
vehicles will remain in the fleet. This measure is aimed at developing methods
to incentivize the owners of these older vehicles to retire their vehicles early
and replace them with vehicles meeting the 2007 emission standards.
The goal of this policy is to target 25% of vehicles from model years 1990
through 2006 (e.g., vehicles that still have over four years of expected useful life
and do not meet the 2007 emission standards) for early retirement/replacement.
Biodiesel Implementation (TLU-12)
Arizona should increase market penetration of biodiesel fuels sold within the
State. (Ethanol-related reductions are accounted for in the agriculture sector.)
The State should conduct a review of any technical impediments to biodiesel
use, and, if these are not significant, proceed to policies and measures that
significantly increase biodiesel use and substitution for conventional diesel fuel.
This program should be targeted to applications with the greatest likelihood of
success and with a certainty of obtaining significant GHG emission reductions.
This measure will help to ensure that Arizona is actively pursuing and meeting
or exceeding the alternative fuel penetration goals specified in the Energy
Security Act of 2005.
The goal of this program is to achieve a 75% penetration of B2 by 2010
(e.g., 1.5% total penetration of biodiesel). The State should review the program
success by 2015 and determine whether further penetration of biodiesel fuel is
desirable. This review should take into consideration the interactions of
biodiesel blends with the ultra-low sulfur diesel to be sold nationally by 2010
and the technologies used to meet the new diesel vehicle emission standards
starting in 2007. If the program is determined to be successful at that point and
if biodiesel supply is not an issue, a goal of 50% penetration of B20 by 2020
(e.g., 10% total penetration of biodiesel) should be set.
Implementation mechanisms for this measure should include information
on the benefits and potential performance issues associated with using
biodiesel fuels; voluntary agreements targeting certain fleet segments with
good likelihood of success in this program; a possible biodiesel use requirement

y
74

for fuel vendors; and an early pilot program for State diesel vehicles to begin
using B10 or B20.59
State Lead-By-Example via Vehicle Procurement and SmartWay (TLU-13)
Arizona state agencies should “lead by example” by enacting procurement
policies and/or joining the EPA SmartWay program to achieve a lower-emitting
vehicle fleet for the State. There are numerous activities Arizona could pursue
to participate fully in enacting procurement policies or programs such as
SmartWay. For example:
• State agencies with vehicle fleets could sign on as SmartWay carrier partners.
They would then measure their environmental performance with the FLEET
model and come up with a plan to improve that performance. The partnership provides information and suggested strategies to improve fuel economy
and environmental performance of vehicle fleets.
• State agencies that buy transportation services, or ship goods could sign on
as SmartWay shippers. As shipper partners, state agencies would seek to
select SmartWay partners when they purchase the services of carriers. One
way that the State could help would be to add SmartWay certification to the
list of factors that they may consider when selecting carriers. Alternatively,
they could just encourage the carriers that they do business with to join the
partnership. Shippers can also implement direct strategies, for instance
developing no-idle policies for their loading areas.
• State agencies could sign onto SmartWay as affiliates. As affiliates, they
would help to distribute information on the program to interested parties.
This could be as easy as putting a link on their web site, or it could involve a
more active role.
• State agencies should purchase only vehicles that are hybrids, meet low-GHG
emission standards, or use E-85, biofuels or other low-GHG alternative fuels.
• The State also should set a goal for replacement of the State vehicle fleet,
so that by a date certain (e.g., 2010), all State vehicles shall be hybrids,
meet low-GHG emission standards, or use E-85, biofuels or other low-GHG
alternative fuels.
60 mph Speed Limit for Commercial Trucks (TLU-14)
Arizona should reduce the speed limit for commercial trucks to 60 mph
on Arizona highways and freeways. Enforcement of this measure should
begin by 2008, with a goal of reducing the portion of Class 860 diesel truck
traffic currently traveling above speeds of 60 mph on interstates, freeways,
and major arterials by 50 percent.
This measure would primarily be implemented by requiring all interstates,
freeways, and major arterials in the State to be signed with a maximum speed
of 60 mph for Class 8 commercial trucks. Additionally, significant enforcement
resources will be needed for this measure to achieve the expected reductions.
59

Legislation adopted in 2006 allows fleets required to meet alternative fuel conversions to get credit
for biodiesel consumption. See www.azleg.gov/legtext/47leg/2r/laws/0388.htm.
60
Class 8 commercial trucks are those above 33,000 lb gross vehicle weight rating. They are primarily
trucks that pull one or more trailers of freight (i.e., the typical “18-wheeler”).

y
75

Education and outreach would also be needed to provide information to the
trucking industry and the general public emphasizing the fuel economy benefits
and resulting GHG emission reductions that are obtained when reducing
speeds from 70 mph to 60 mph. The associated fuel cost savings and
increased safety effects of this measure should also be emphasized.

y
76

Chapter 8
Agriculture and Forestry
Overview of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The agriculture and forestry (AF) sectors are directly responsible for only a
small amount of Arizona’s current GHG emissions. Net emissions are -2.4
MMtCO2e in 2000, reflecting 4.2 MMtCO2e emitted by the agricultural sector
and a forestry sink of -6.7 MMtCO2e. Agriculture emissions include methane
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from enteric fermentation, manure
management, agriculture soils, and agriculture residue burning. Emissions
from agriculture soils account for the largest portion (about 50%) of agricultural
emissions; this category includes N2O emissions resulting from activities that
increase nitrogen in the soil, including fertilizer (synthetic, organic, and livestock)
application and production of nitrogen fixing crops. Other important agricultural sources are methane emissions from enteric fermentation in cattle
and manure management at dairies.
Forestland emissions refer to the net CO2 flux61 from forested lands in
Arizona, which account for about 16% of the state’s land area. Recent U.S.
Forest Service estimates suggest that Arizona forests and the use of forest
products sequestered on average 6.7 MMtCO2e per year from 1987 to 2002.
Figure 8-1 shows historical and projected AF GHG emissions. The graph
shows that no growth in the agricultural sector is assumed beyond 2004.
Similarly, for the forestry sector, no change in carbon sequestration rate was
assumed beyond 2002.
Figure 8-1

1990-2020 GHG Emissions by Sectors: Agriculture

61

“Flux” refers to both emissions of CO 2 to the atmosphere and removal (sinks) of CO 2 from
the atmosphere.

y
77

Opportunities for GHG mitigation in the AF sector involve measures that
can reduce emissions within the sector or reduce emissions in other sectors.
For example, production of liquid fuels can offset emissions in the transportation
sector, while biomass energy can reduce emissions in the energy supply or
RCI sectors. The primary opportunities for GHG mitigation are as follows:
• Production of renewable fuels: production of renewable fuels, such as
ethanol from crops, crop residue, forestry residue or municipal solid waste,
can produce significant reductions, when they are used to offset consumption
of fossil fuels (gasoline consumption in the transportation sector);
• Beneficial use of forest biomass: expanded use of biomass removed from
forested areas during treatments to reduce fire risk can achieve GHG benefits
by offsetting fossil fuel consumption (either to produce electricity or heat);
• Control and utilization of CH4 at dairies: methane emissions from manure
management can be reduced through the use of anaerobic digesters or
other technology. The methane captured can then be used to create
electricity, steam, or heat to offset fossil fuel use;
• Protection of forest and agricultural land from conversion to developed use:
by protecting these areas from development, the carbon in above-ground
biomass and below-ground soil organic carbon can be maintained and
additional emissions of CO2e to the atmosphere can be avoided; and
• Restoration of forested lands: a great deal of forested land has been lost to
wildfire and disease in recent years. To the extent that the forests on these
lands can be restored, the carbon sequestration potential of the land can
also be restored.
Additional opportunities for reducing GHGs include: the use of agricultural
residues, such as orchard trimmings and wheat straw, as biomass energy for
the production of electricity, steam or heat; and programs to support local
farming, which seek to reduce the amount of food trucked for long distances
and the associated GHGs.

Key Challenges and Opportunities
In the forestry sector, restoration of forested areas has the potential for
GHG benefits (0.1 MMtCO2e/yr by 2020). However, the CCAG recognizes that
restoration projects in many cases could be limited by available precipitation.
Additional analysis is needed to identify areas where restoration programs are
likely to be successful. Fairly significant GHG benefits were also estimated for
utilization of biomass energy from forest treatment projects (to reduce fire
risk). These benefits will total nearly 0.7 MMtCO2e/yr in 2010 and 2020
based on current levels of treatment. Success will be achieved through close
cooperation between Arizona, federal agencies (USFS), and private industry to
identify biomass resources and effective end uses for the resource. Through
recommendation of the option to support development of biomass gasification and combined cycle technology (BGCC), the CCAG recognized the need to
promote efficient biomass energy resource utilization.

y
78

In the agricultural sector, production of ethanol was found to offer the
most substantial GHG reduction potential (range of 0.6 to 4.0 MMtCO2e/yr
depending on the level of production targeted). While the policy recommendation
is technology neutral, cellulosic ethanol production offers much larger GHG
benefits than starch-based production. Available information on cellulosic
production technology was used to estimate the benefits and costs for the
policy recommendation. Additional information on the ethanol issues can be
found in Appendix J. Combining the agricultural and forestry land protection
options, 0.5 MMtCO2e/yr in GHG savings is estimated to be saved by 2020.
To achieve these reductions, the State will need to work closely with local
planning agencies, land owners, and non-governmental organizations to identify
lands suitable for acquisition/conservation easements and funding mechanisms. Another benefit to these options, which was not quantified, is the
reduction in vehicle-miles traveled due to more efficient development patterns.

Overview of Policy Recommendations and Estimated Impacts
The CCAG recommends a set of 11 policy options for the AF sectors.
These options are shown in Table 8-1 below. These policy recommendations
could lead to emissions savings from reference case projections of nearly 6
MMtCO2e per year by 2020 and cumulative savings of over 51 MMtCO2e
from 2006 through 2020. The weighted average cost of saved carbon from
the policy options for which quantitative estimates of both costs and savings
were prepared was $2 per metric ton of CO2 equivalent.
The emissions savings from the AF options are primarily a combination of
reduced carbon dioxide and methane emissions. The carbon dioxide reductions
come mainly from avoided gasoline or other fossil fuel emissions (e.g., from
gasoline offset by ethanol produced within the State or other fossil fuels offset
by biomass energy). Emissions are also reduced through forestry measures
that protect or enhance Arizona forests in sequestration of carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere. Methane emissions are reduced mainly from dairy
operations. None of the other GHGs emitted by the AF sectors (e.g., nitrous
oxide) are significantly affected by these options.
The estimated impacts of the AF policies recommended by the CCAG are
shown in Figure 8-2.. As shown in this graph, the effects of the recommended
AF policies begin to appear prior to 2010 on the “Net Emissions + AF Policies”
line. This line shows historical to 2005 net emissions (agricultural emissions
plus forestry sinks) and the subsequent effects of recommended options. The
net negative emissions of about -2.4 MMtCO2e in 2005 begin to decrease to
an estimate of -8 MMtCO2e by 2020.

y
79

Table 8-1

CCAG Recommended Policy Options, By Sector

AGRICULTURE (A) AND FORESTRY (F)

CCAG Policy Option

2010
2020
2007-2020
Annual GHG Annual GHG Cumulative
Reduction
Reduction Reduction
(MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e) (MMtCO2e)

Cost or Cost
Savings Per Ton
GHG Removed
($/tCO2e)

Level of
CCAG
Support

A-1

Manure Management –
Manure Digesters

0.2

0.5

3.8

$1

Unanimous

A-2

Biomass Feedstocks for
Electricity or
Steam Production

0.05

0.1

4.5

-$8

Unanimous

A-3

Ethanol Production and Use

0.5

4.0

28.0

$0

Unanimous

A-7

Convert Agricultural Land to
Forest or Grassland

A-8

Reduce Conversion of
Farm & Rangelands to
Developed Uses

0.1

0.2

1.6

$65

Unanimous

A-9

Programs to Support Local
Farming/Buy Local

0.01

0.02

0.1

$6

Unanimous

F-1

Forestland Protection from
Developed Uses

0.3

0.3

3.7

$17

Unanimous

F-2

Reforestation/Restoration
of Forestland

0.02

0.1

0.6

$44

Unanimous

F-3a

Forest Ecosystem
Management
– Residential Lands

0.5

0.5

6.4

-$21

Unanimous

F-3b

Forest Ecosystem
Management – Other Lands

0.2

0.2

2.9

-$21

Unanimous

F-4

Improved Commercialization
of Biomass Gasification and
Combined Cycle

Total all options
adjusted for overlap and interaction

Unanimous

Not available

Not Quantified

1.8

5.9

y
80

51

Unanimous

Figure 8-2

Impact of Policy Recommendations on AF Emissions

Agriculture and Forestry (AF) Sectors Policy Descriptions
The Agriculture and Forestry (AF) Sectors include emissions and mitigation
opportunities related to use of biomass energy, protection, and enhancement
of forest and agricultural carbon sinks, control of agricultural methane emissions, production of renewable fuels, and reduction of transport emissions from
imported agricultural commodities. Fully detailed descriptions of the individual
Agriculture and Forestry policy options as presented to and approved by the
CCAG can be found in the Technical Appendix.
Manure Management - Manure Digesters (A-1)
Methane emissions from livestock manure should be reduced through the
use of manure digesters installed at dairies. Energy from the manure
digesters is used to create heat or power, which offsets fossil fuel-based
energy production and associated CO2 and black carbon emissions. The goal
is to manage dairy manure using anaerobic digesters and energy capture
technology (e.g., electricity generators) covering 15% of the state-wide dairy
population by 2010, and then increase this level to 50% of the dairy population
by 2020.
Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2)
Arizona should set a goal of using 20% of available biomass by 2010, and
50% of available agricultural biomass by 2020 to displace fossil fuel usage
through the use of agricultural waste (e.g., orchard trimmings, and other crop
residue) as a feedstock for electricity or steam production. The CO2 savings
occur as a result of displacing fossil fuel use in the production of electricity or
steam. There also would likely be a reduction in black carbon emissions to the
extent that coal-based combustion is offset.
Ethanol Production and Use (A-3)
The State should provide incentives for the production of ethanol from
crops, agricultural waste, or other materials to offset fossil fuel (gasoline) use.

y
81

Different incentive programs will be needed for crop (starch-based) ethanol
production versus agricultural waste (cellulosic) ethanol production processes.
Cellulosic production technology achieves much greater GHG benefits than
starch-based processes and was used to estimate the benefits of this option
(starch-based production is estimated to achieve about one-fourth the benefit
of cellulosic production).
The CCAG considered three production goal options:
• By 2010, produce enough ethanol to support the use of E10 (10% ethanol
by volume in gasoline) year round in areas that currently use it during the
winter season (Maricopa, northern Pinal, and Pima counties). This would
require the production of 207 MMgal/yr. (Year-round use would more than
double the current usage levels of ethanol in Arizona.)
• By 2020, produce enough ethanol to support alignment with the New
Mexico CCAG goal of 20% ethanol usage by volume in gasoline by 2012.
This would require the production of 858 MMgal/yr in 2020.
• By 2050, produce enough ethanol to support alignment with the New
Mexico CCAG goal of 40% ethanol by 2030. This would require production
of 3,450 MMgal/yr by 2050.
Note: Production from the new Pinal County facility is included in the
forecasted goals.
Convert Agricultural Land to Grassland or Forest (A-7)
Arizona should increase carbon sequestration in the state’s agricultural
land by converting marginal land used for annual crops to permanent cover,
either grassland or forests. The state would determine a goal of converting a
number of acres of marginal agricultural land to grassland or forest by 2010,
2020 and 2040. A loss of carbon to the atmosphere from tillage and fallow
land would result by converting land to permanent cover. This action would
have the effect of increasing soil carbon content and above-ground carbon
stocks would also be increased by converting to cover with a greater ability to
sequester carbon (i.e., higher biomass).
Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8)
The rate at which existing crop and rangelands are converted to developed
uses should be reduced. The carbon sequestered in soils and above-ground
biomass is higher in crop and rangelands than in developed land uses. The
2010 goal is to reduce the rate of crop and rangeland loss to 20% of the loss
rate that occurred from 1982-1997. By 2020, the rate of loss should be lowered
to 50% of that loss rate. Agricultural land protection is expected to occur
through the promotion of land acquisition or conservation easements.
Programs to Support Local Farming/Buy Local (A-9)
Arizona should promote consumption of locally-produced agricultural
commodities, which would offset consumption of commodities transported
from other states or countries. It includes the modification, enhancement,

y
82

and further development of local farm programs employed in Arizona to
reduce transport-related GHG emissions. The goal of this option is to increase
consumption of Arizona-grown commodities by 5% by 2010 and another 5%
by 2020 (total of 10% offset in 2020).
Forestland Protection from Developed Uses (F-1)
Arizona should reduce the rate at which existing forestlands and forest
cover are cleared and converted to developed uses or damaged by development
that reduces productivity.
The CCAG proposes that policy initiatives decrease the conversion of forest
and woodlands to urban and other developed uses to 50% or less of the rates
of loss to these uses during the 1987-1997 period by 2010 and continuing
through 2020. A 50% reduction would decrease the conversion rate from
380 acres/year to 190 acres/year. If the rangeland type were assumed to
include about 50% pinyon-juniper type, a 50% reduction in conversion rate
would decrease the conversion rate of woodlands to urban or developed uses
from 8,530 acres/year to 4,260 acres/year.
Reforestation/Restoration of Forestland (F-2)
Arizona should expand forest cover (and associated carbon stocks) by
regenerating or establishing forests in areas with little or no forest cover at
present.
The CCAG estimated the number of acres of previously forested lands to
be restored to their native forested state at 155,000 acres, with a stocking
rate of 35 tons of above-ground biomass per acre. Stocking this number of
acres at the specified rate from 2008-2020 would result in approximately
26,000 acres regenerated/established by 2010 and 130,000 acres between
2010 and 2020. This equals an average of about 12,000 acres per year.
Forest Ecosystem Management (F-3a & 3b)
Sustainable thinning or biomass reduction from residential forestlands
(intended to address fire and forest health issues) should be managed so that
harvested biomass is directed to wood products and renewable energy
instead of open burning or decay. F-3a is directed at residential lands (the
wildland-urban interface or WUI) and F-3b is directed at non-WUI areas.
Most efforts to reduce biomass in residential forests and woodlands for
forest health/sustainability and wildfire suppression include some emphasis
on using the extracted woody biomass for wood products and/or energy
production, rather than eliminating these materials through open burning, or
storage or decay off site. The CCAG recommends placing a greater emphasis
on wood products and/or energy production, through appropriate mechanisms,
incentives, etc. More specifically, the CCAG recommends:
• Using 50% or more of biomass extracted from residential lands for wood
products and/or energy production by 2010 and continuing through 2020.
• Accelerating current and planned fuels treatments in Arizona so that all
high priority areas (e.g., in wild land urban interface) are treated by 2015.

y
83

The Governor’s Forest Health Oversight Council and Forest Health
Advisory Council should review forest management practices and policies
aimed at GHG reduction and carbon sequestration.
Improved Commercialization of Biomass Combustion, Gasification and
Combined Cycle (F-4)
Carbon savings occur when biomass energy combustion processes are
converted from conventional technology to new technologies with greater
thermal efficiency and reduced emissions with lower pollution outputs.
Arizona should accelerate the rate of technology development and market
deployment of biomass combustion, gasification, and combined cycle (BGCC)
technologies. The State should set a goal of 10 megawatts of biomass energy
between 2006 and 2010, and an additional 25 megawatts between 2010
and 2020 (or the equivalent amount of new biomass thermal energy.

y
84

