May 2014

First Update to the

Climate Change
Scoping Plan
BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK
P URSUANT TO AB 32
THE CALIFORNIA GLOBAL WARMING
SOLUTIONS ACT OF 2006





First Update to the

Climate Change Scoping Plan
Building on the Framework

PURSUANT TO AB32
THE C ALIFORNIA G LOBAL WARMING S OLUTIONS A CT OF 2006

Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Governor

Matt Rodriquez
Secretary, California Environmental Protection Agency

Mary D. Nichols
Chairman, Air Resources Board

Richard W. Corey
Executive Offcer, Air Resources Board

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter Title & Section

3



Table of Contents

Executive Summary

ES1

I.

Introduction: Building on the Framework

1

A. AB 32: California’s Global Warming Solutions Act

2

B. Building on California’s Environmental Legacy

2

C. Initial Scoping Plan

4

D. Purpose of Update

4

E.

5

Process for Developing the Update

II. Latest Understanding of Climate Science

8

A. Continuing Evidence of Climate Change in California
in Agreement with Projected Changes

10

B. Achieving Climate Stabilization

12

C. Climate Pollutants

14

1.

Black Carbon

17

2. Methane

19

3. Hydrofuorocarbons

23

D. Greenhouse Gas Monitoring Efforts

23

E.

24

Adjusting the 2020 Statewide Limit

III. California’s Approach to Climate Change

25

A. Preserve the California Lifestyle

26

B. Foster Resilient Economic Growth

27

C. Strengthen the Natural Environment

30

D. Improve Public Health and Social and Environmental Justice

31

E.

Rely on Science and Foundational Research

32

F.

Charting a Path to 2050

33

IV. Accomplishments and Next Steps

35

A. Key Economic Sectors
1.

Energy

35
36

2. Transportation: Vehicles/Equipment, Sustainable
Communities, Housing, Fuels, and Infrastructure

46

3. Agriculture

57

4. Water

62

5. Waste Management

66



6. Natural and Working Lands (Formerly Referred to as Forest Sector)

70

7.

77

Short-Lived Climate Pollutants

8. Green Buildings

82

9. Cap-and-Trade Regulation

86

B. Progress to Date
1.

88

Key Accomplishments

89

2. GHG Emissions Trends

89

3. Emission Reductions to Meet the 2020 Statewide Limit

92

C. Next Steps

93

V. Achieving Success

100

A. Integrate and Coordinate Planning

100

B. Transportation, Land Use, and Housing Planning Development

103

C. Investments

104

D. Expanding Climate Actions

110

1.

Support Sustainable Choices by Households and Businesses

110

2. Enable Local and Regional Leadership

111

3. Coordinate with Subnational, Federal, and International Partners

113

VI. Evaluations

117

A. Economic Analysis

117

B. Climate Change and Public Health Assessment

123

C. Environmental Justice and Disadvantaged Communities

128

D. Environmental Analysis

132

VII.Conclusions

133



Executive Summary

California is a collection of farmers, surfers, factory workers, outdoor
enthusiasts, tech geeks, truckers, world-class researchers, celebrity actors, and
many more—who come from all around the world to live and work in one of the
most beautiful, vibrant, and ecologically and culturally diverse places on Earth.
We are sustained, in more ways than one, by the mountains, deserts, rivers,
streams, forests, farmlands, rangelands, coastline, and temperate climate that
form our natural environment and characterize our great State.
These resources, and their natural beauty, enable our continued economic and cultural growth.
They attract a wide array of businesses and workers who want to live here. They are a primary
reason that California is: the eighth largest economy in the world; home to the most small
businesses, Fortune 500 companies, and fastest-growing businesses in the United States; the
national leader in global trade and direct investment; and tops in the United States in many
economic sectors, including agriculture, biotech, clean energy, entertainment, high-tech,
manufacturing, tourism, and more.
Accordingly, Californians of all backgrounds and political persuasions have supported policies
and planning to protect our natural environment and the high quality of life it provides. The result
is a decades-long, broad commitment to ensuring clean air and water, an effcient and productive
use of energy and resources, a healthy workforce, and vital cities and towns. Our collective will
to protect the environment is a valuable resource in itself, whose benefts enhance economic
growth and prosperity in our state and help shape California’s distinct identity.
With climate change threatening our resources, economy, and quality of life, California is
squarely focused on addressing it and protecting our natural and built environments. Just
as California has done dozens of times before on other environmental issues, it is leading on
climate change, with an approach that will enable better, lasting economic growth and allow the
California lifestyle to endure.
The 2006 adoption of Assembly Bill 32 propelled California further into an international leadership
role in the fght against global climate change. By building on decades of successful actions
to cut pollution and promote cleaner and more effcient energy, AB 32 solidifed California’s
commitment to tackling climate change in a comprehensive way.
Since 2006, the State has continued to steadily implement a set of actions that are driving down
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, cleaning the air, diversifying the energy and fuels that power
our society, and spurring innovation in a range of advanced technologies. These efforts have put
California on course to achieve the near-term 2020 emissions limit, and have created a framework
for ongoing climate action that can be built upon to maintain and continue reductions beyond
2020 as required by AB 32.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary

ES1



California’s approach to climate change is not simply about reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
It is built upon the principle that economic prosperity and environmental sustainability are one
and the same. And it continues the State’s long and successful legacy of building a world-class
economy in concert with some of the most effective environmental and public health policies
on the planet.
By remaining steadfastly committed to this approach, we can not only do our part to tackle climate
change, we can also forge a cleaner, healthier, and more sustainable future for all Californians.
In the words of Governor Brown, our collective challenge is to “build for the future, not steal
from it.” That is what this Plan is designed to do.

First Update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan
This First Update to California’s Climate Change Scoping Plan (Update) was developed by the Air
Resources Board (ARB) in collaboration with the Climate Action Team and refects the input and
expertise of a range of state and local government agencies. The Update refects public input and
recommendations from business, environmental, environmental justice, and community-based
organizations provided in response to the release of prior drafts of the Update, a Discussion Draft
in October 2013 and a draft Proposed Update in February 2014.

Progress to Date
California is on track to meet the near-term 2020 greenhouse gas limit and is well positioned
to maintain and continue reductions beyond 2020 as required by AB 32. The set of actions the
State is taking is driving down greenhouse emissions and moving us steadily in the direction of a
cleaner energy economy. Many of these actions have been bold, ambitious, and truly trail-blazing.
Some are more recent, while others precede the passage of AB 32.
Collectively, these actions are evidence of California’s ability to show that it is possible to
break the historical connection between economic growth and associated increases in energy
demand, combustion of carbon-intensive resources, and pollution. We have shown it is possible
to break this chain by relying on cleaner technologies, more effciency, and more renewable
energy sources. And we know that preventing the worst impacts of climate change will require
accelerated development and diffusion of these technologies across the world. Stable, fexible,
yet durable policies like those developed under AB 32 are key.

Cleaner and More Effcient Energy
California continues to be a global leader in energy effciency. Since energy effciency efforts
began 40 years ago, Californians have saved $74 billion in reduced electricity costs. As the
State’s frst priority for providing for its energy needs, ongoing effciency efforts—like new green
building standards now in effect for homes and businesses and new standards for appliances,
televisions, and other “plug loads”—continue to reduce energy use and emissions, make our
businesses and economy more effcient, and cut energy costs.
California has also made tremendous strides in harnessing its abundant renewable energy
resources. Currently, about 23 percent of the State’s electricity comes from renewable power.
This will increase to at least 33 percent by 2020 under new requirements set in place by Governor
Brown and the Legislature in 2011. Renewable energy is rapidly coming down in cost and is
already cost-effective in California for millions of homes and businesses, and in certain utility
applications. Once thought of as exotic and alternative, renewable energy technologies have now
become an integral part of California’s energy mix.

ES2

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary



Figure ES1:

2009-2012 CA GDP
(S & Carbon Intensity
ventory)Trends

6%

4%
CA GDP (2005 $ million)

Percent Change

2%

0%

-4%
Carbon Intensity (MTCO2e/GDP $ Million)
-6%
2009

2010

2011

2012

‘Carbon Intensity,’ the amount of carbon pollution related to the State’s economy,
has fallen steadily over the last three years. California is getting more economic
growth for each ton of greenhouse gases emitted overall.
Source: DOF & 2012 GHG Inventory

Cleaner Transportation
California has taken a number of innovative actions to cut emissions from the transportation
sector. Collectively, the State’s set of vehicle, fuels, and land use policies will cut in half emissions
from passenger transportation and drivers’ fuel costs over the next 20 years.
California’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) is beginning to drive the production of a broad
array of cleaner fuels. Since its launch in 2011, the regulation has generated a multitude of unique
approaches for cleaner fuels. The LCFS is driving the necessary transition to cleaner fuels and
is providing California businesses and consumers with more choices for the fuels they use.
Companies in California and elsewhere are rising to the challenge by fnding innovative ways
to produce cleaner, low carbon fuels.
The cars on California’s roads are also undergoing a transformation. California’s vehicle GHG
standards—authorized by AB 1493 (Pavley) in 2002, frst approved in 2004, and extended in 2012—
are delivering both carbon dioxide (CO2) reductions and savings at the pump. These standards are
now federal law and the benefts of California’s policies will be realized nationwide, dramatically
scaling up emission reductions. The transition to a feet of lower-emitting, more-effcient
vehicles in California will continue beyond 2020, as these rules cover model years through 2025,
and turnover of the feet will deliver additional benefts from these rules for many more years.
Most recently, ARB is working with the U.S. EPA and the U.S. Department of Transportation’s
National Highway Traffc and Safety Administration (NHTSA) on national GHG standards and
corresponding fuel effciency standards for medium- and heavy-duty trucks.
California’s pioneering zero emission vehicle (ZEV) regulation is also driving a transformation
of the feet. As a result of ARB’s ZEV program and Governor Brown’s Executive Order B-16-12,
California will see 1.5 million zero emission vehicles on the State’s roads by 2025. Each day, more
and more zero emission vehicles and cleaner, more effcient cars are driving on our streets and
highways—visible signs of the transformation of California’s transportation sector.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary

ES3



California is also making major strides toward reducing the number of miles people drive,
through more sustainable local and regional housing, land use, and transportation planning.
To date, seven Metropolitan Planning Organizations have adopted Sustainable Community
Strategies. In addition to helping drive GHG emission reductions, these plans will help create
more livable communities that offer greater housing and transportation options; improved access
to resources and services; safer, more vibrant neighborhoods; and healthier lifestyles where
people can live, work, and play without having to travel long distances or sit through congestion.
Figure ES2:

2009-2012 CA GDP & ON-Road Gasoline Use Trends

6%

Percent Change (from 2009)

4%
CA GDP (2005 $ million)
2%

0%
Gasoline (Gallons)
-4%

-6%
2009

2010

2011

2012

The amount of gasoline used in California has steadily declined since 2009
while the the State’s economy grew by fve percent over the same time period.
Source: DOF & BOE

Cap-and-Trade Program
Last year, California successfully launched the most comprehensive greenhouse gas
Cap-and-Trade Program in the world. As the emissions cap is gradually reduced over time, and
as additional sources are brought under the cap to include the vast majority of emissions in the
State, the program will ensure that California remains on track to continually reduce emissions
and meet the 2020 limit. Looking out into the future, the Cap-and-Trade Program will play a critical
role in keeping California on the right emissions reduction trajectory to meet ongoing reduction
targets at the lowest possible cost. The program is also sending a clear signal that investment in
clean, low carbon technologies will pay off. This includes the millions of households and small
business customers of the State’s largest electric utilities who will see a twice a year “Climate
Credit” on their electricity bills. In April 2014, this credit averaged $35 throughout the State.
Investing this credit in simple items that improve energy effciency, such as energy effcient
LED light bulbs, can help customers save even more.
On January 1, 2014, California linked its Cap-and-Trade Program with Québec’s. By successfully
linking cap-and-trade programs across jurisdictions and increasing opportunities for emission
reductions, this linkage represents another important step in California’s efforts to collaborate
with other partners around the globe to address climate change.

ES4

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary



Building on the Framework
Through AB 32, California has established an effective framework for climate action. This Update
includes an in-depth discussion of climate change science, refecting the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change’s recently released Fifth Assessment and input from a distinguished
team of scientifc expert reviewers. The science clearly highlights the need for action—
greenhouse gas emissions must be cut 80 percent below 1990 levels by mid-century to stave
off the worst impacts of climate change. Setting a mid-term target and sector-specifc targets
will help guide our path.
Reaching our ultimate objective—reducing California’s greenhouse gas emissions to the
scientifcally recognized level necessary for climate stabilization— will require California to keep
building on the framework by continuing to pursue the maximum technologically feasible and
cost-effective actions that will steadily drive down greenhouse gas emissions over the coming
decades. It is also clear that many of these same actions are needed to reduce emissions of
smog-forming and toxic pollutants to meet federal air quality requirements and ensure that
all Californians have healthful air.
This Update lays out a set of new actions that will move the State further along the path to
a low-carbon, sustainable future, including specifc recommended actions with lead agency
assignments and anticipated due dates. Some of the actions are near-term, while others are
focused on longer-term efforts that will provide major benefts well into the future.
Every major economic sector in the State will need to play an increasing role in this effort.
Success will require the creation of new policies in some sectors, and expanding and refning
existing policies in others. We must continue working to fnd the right combination of policybased “push” and incentive-based “pull” to accelerate commercial markets for clean energy and
effciency. And we have to coordinate and align public investments in ways that most effectively
leverage private resources.

The Great Unifer
Climate change presents an unprecedented set of challenges for California. We are already
experiencing its impacts and know that they will only increase. But it can also be a great unifer.
It gives us the opportunity to focus on doing more with less; to work across programmatic,
policy and political boundaries; and to fgure out ways to achieve various goals more quickly
and more effectively. The task is to continue building on the steps we have already taken by
further integrating climate thinking and sustainability programming into the range of actions
we take to grow the economy, protect the environment and public health, and plan for the future.
The strategies we pursue to cut greenhouse gas emissions from our cars, trucks, buses, trains
and industries can support ongoing efforts to improve air quality up and down the State,
especially in our most heavily impacted communities. Effciency and conservation programs
in the water sector needed to cut emissions will also drive critically needed efforts to enhance
supply and reliability priorities. We can cut emissions from our waste stream while also
increasing home-grown sources of low-carbon energy and fuels. And we can manage our
natural lands and valuable agricultural resources in ways that both achieve climate objectives
and enhance their long-term sustainability.
With strategic investment and coordinated policy-making, California can slash emissions from
trucks and trains while at the same time building a world-class goods movement and freightdelivery system. We can modernize our rail and passenger transportation systems to move
people in ways that both reduce greenhouse gases and increase mobility options and safety.
We can take actions to cut emissions of potent short-lived climate pollutants that will also deliver
key public health benefts. And we can align strategies that both support reduction goals and
bolster our ability to deal with the impacts of climate change already underway.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary

ES5



The reality is that while climate change demands it, these and myriad other examples described in
this Update are exactly the types of actions California must take in any case to build for our future.

Mid-Term Target
As supported by many of California’s climate scientists and economists, a key step needed
to build on California’s framework for climate action is to establish a mid-term statewide
emission reduction target. Cumulative emissions drive climate change, and a continuum of
action is needed to reduce emissions not just to stated limits in 2020 or 2050, but also every
year in between. The target will ensure that the State stays on course and expands upon the
successes we have achieved to date so that we can achieve our long-term objective of reducing
California’s greenhouse gas emissions to the scientifcally recognized level necessary for climate
stabilization. A mid-term target, informed by climate science, will be critical in helping to frame
the additional suite of policy measures, regulations, planning efforts, and investments in clean
technologies that are needed to continue driving down emissions. It will also send a clear signal
that California is solidifying its commitment to a low-carbon future, giving businesses the longterm certainty they need to plan for the future.
Each of the major sectors highlighted in this Update must play a role in supporting the statewide
effort to continue reducing emissions. As steps are taken to develop a statewide target, sector
targets will also be developed that refect the opportunities for reductions that can be achieved
through existing and new actions, policies, regulations and investments.

Sector-Specifc Actions
Energy
The actions outlined in this Update support California’s efforts to build a state-of-the-art energy
generation, supply and distribution system that is clean, affordable and reliable. Many of the
actions expand upon existing policy frameworks that have made our State a global leader in
areas like energy effciency, demand response, and renewable energy generation. Others refect
the need to incorporate new and rapidly evolving technologies like energy storage, demand
response, and a smarter grid into the fabric of California’s energy system.
A core element of the Update is the development of a comprehensive greenhouse gas reduction
program for the State’s electric and energy utilities by 2016. This approach will enable California
to pull together and coordinate a range of policies, technologies, and investments needed to
achieve the most cost-effective emission reductions across the sector, in line with meeting
mid-term and long-term statewide targets. It also will give utilities, electricity providers and a
range of other businesses the fexibility and the right incentives to pursue the most innovative
strategies to cut emissions.

ES6

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary



Transportation, Land Use, Fuels, and Infrastructure
Over the past several decades, California has pioneered a host of innovative policies in the
transportation sector that have cut air pollution and greenhouse emissions. This Update builds
on a set of existing policies and lays out new strategies that will continue to push down emissions
and scale up clean, advanced technologies across the entire transportation sector. It calls for
targeted investment in critical infrastructure projects that will be necessary to keep California
on track to meet our ongoing climate objectives. And it recognizes the need to closely integrate
climate planning with efforts to meet California’s air quality goals.
Meeting California’s long-term air quality and climate objectives will require the State to
continue building on efforts underway to put more low and zero-emission vehicles on the road.
These efforts also need to be expanded to include an increasing focus on cleaner medium- and
heavy-duty vehicles. At the same time, we must continue working to fgure out the right mix
of policies and incentives for increasing reductions in the carbon content of transportation
fuels. And we must invest in building the cleanest, most advanced systems and infrastructure
to move people and goods in the State. Key approaches to this include high speed rail and the
Sustainable Freight Initiative.
Agriculture
California’s agricultural industry provides hundreds of thousands of jobs and tens of billions
of dollars in economic value to the State each year. The long-term sustainability of the sector is
vital to California’s economic future. This Update describes a set of actions to ensure California’s
agricultural sector continues to thrive in the face of a changing climate and plays a key role in the
State’s efforts to continue reducing greenhouse emissions.
There is a range of opportunities for greenhouse gas emission reductions and sequestration in
the agriculture sector. Technological advancements allow for more precise irrigation techniques,
which cut energy costs and preserve valuable water resources. Strategic approaches to
conservation will keep valuable agricultural lands in operation and help eliminate greenhouse gas
emissions that result from conversion. And capturing methane from agriculture operations will
provide climate benefts while also affording opportunities to produce bioenergy and biofuels.
The coordinated effort to develop the right mix of policies and incentives described in this Update
will help keep California’s agriculture sector thriving into the future.
Water
Water is the lifeblood of our State and economy, and integrally connected to our food supply and
energy systems. With the declaration of a drought emergency, the State needs to employ a range
of approaches that will cut emissions, maximize effciency and conservation, and enhance water
quality and supply reliability, while also addressing growing climate resiliency requirements.
A greater focus on integrated policy design in the water sector is needed as California
implements strategies that will support our State’s longer-term climate objectives. State policy
and regulatory frameworks must be developed that allow for, and incentivize, effective regional
integrated planning and implementation. We need to employ pricing policies that will maximize
effciency and conservation efforts in the water sector, and put in place mandatory conservation
measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and maintain water supply reliability during
drought periods.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary

ES7



Waste
California’s goal of reaching 75 percent recycling and composting by 2020 provides an
opportunity to achieve substantial GHG emission reductions across the waste sector, while
providing other signifcant economic and environmental co-benefts. Much of what is traditionally
considered “waste” can be a resource for other uses. California must take advantage of waste
materials to generate energy to power our homes and cars, and to improve our working lands.
Compostable organics represent over a third of California’s disposed waste, and are the primary
source of fugitive methane emissions at landflls. A new organics management approach for
California that will divert this material to minimize emissions at landflls and provide feedstock for
critically needed alternatives to agricultural amendments and for low carbon fuel manufacturing.
Achieving the 75 percent waste diversion goal will require substantial expansion of the collection,
recycling, and manufacturing industries within California. This Update sets forth a series of actions
to support this industrial growth and calls on California to manage its waste at home in ways that
will support greenhouse gas emission reductions, environmental co-benefts, and job growth.
Natural and Working Lands
Three-quarters of California’s landmass comprises biologically diverse landscapes such as
forests, woodlands, shrublands, grasslands and wetlands. These natural and working lands
provide a multitude of economic and environmental benefts, and must play an increasingly
important role in California’s efforts to prepare for and adapt to the impacts of climate change.
Natural and working lands must also play a key role to help achieve California’s long-term climate
objectives. We have to start investing now in strategies that ensure these lands are managed in
ways that maximize their carbon benefts while also ensuring landscape resilience; protecting
and enhancing the State’s water supplies; safeguarding the State’s wildlife, fsh, and plants; and
promoting sustainable rural communities.
This Update describes a series of policies, actions, and strategic investments to enhance, protect,
and conserve California’s natural and working lands in ways that will provide important climate
benefts as well as a more resilient California that is better prepared for climate risks such as
more frequent and severe wildfres, varying and unpredictable water availability, and stressors on
species and natural communities. A key element of this approach is the development of a “Forest
Carbon Plan” by 2016 that will set mid and long-term greenhouse gas reduction planning targets,
and identify funding and investment needs.
Short-Lived Climate Pollutants
Over the past several decades, California’s actions to improve air quality and protect public health
have resulted in signifcant reductions in potent short-lived climate pollutants, which include
black carbon, methane, and hydrofuorocarbons. These pollutants remain in the atmosphere for
shorter periods of time and have much larger global warming potentials compared to CO2.
While we must continue taking steps to rapidly reduce CO2 emissions, additional efforts to cut
emissions of short-lived climate pollutants can yield immediate climate benefts. In addition, fast
and sustainable actions to reduce these emissions can help to achieve other benefts though
avoided impacts on agriculture, water availability, ecosystems, and human health. The reduction
of methane would reduce background tropospheric ozone concentrations, which would help with
progress towards healthy air quality and avoid crop yield losses and forest damage due to the
direct action of ozone on plant growth. Black carbon impacts cloud formation and precipitation,
and black carbon deposits on glaciers and snowpack accelerate melting. Reducing black carbon
and methane emissions will help reduce the risk for premature deaths, air pollution-related
hospitalizations, and associated medical expenses each year.

ES8

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary



California is committed to continuing to reduce emissions of short-lived climate pollutants,
particularly where efforts will result in air quality and public health co-benefts. ARB will develop
a short-lived climate pollutant strategy by 2015 that will include an inventory of sources and
emissions, the identifcation of additional research needs, and a plan for developing necessary
control measures.
Green Buildings
Buildings in California represent a signifcant source of greenhouse gas emissions. Over the past
fve years, California has solidifed its commitment to green building; leading the way with State
buildings, improving building standards, continuing to raise the bar with voluntary programs
at the local level, and greening existing buildings. We must continue to build on this approach
by ensuring successful implementation of current initiatives and expanding the long term focus
towards zero-carbon buildings.
This Update describes a set of actions to continue cutting emissions from California’s building
sector including the development of a comprehensive greenhouse gas emission reduction
program for new construction, existing building retrofts, and operation and maintenance.
This Update describes a set of actions to continue cutting emissions from California’s building
sector including the development of a comprehensive greenhouse gas emission reduction
program for new construction, existing building retrofts, and operation and maintenance
of certifed green buildings.

Courage, Creativity, and Boldness
Climate change has presented us with unprecedented challenges—challenges that cannot be met
with traditional ways of thinking or conventional solutions. As Governor Brown has recognized,
meeting these challenges will require “courage, creativity, and boldness.”
It will require California to continue to lead the world in pioneering effective strategies toward
a cleaner, more sustainable economy. It will require us to continue sharing our successful
approaches to climate policy with others, including continuing to partner and collaborate with
other state, national, and global leaders as we work toward common goals. And it will require
further engaging California’s citizens, businesses, and its most creative minds to continue
building a state that provides low carbon, high-quality lifestyles.
As we take these steps, we understand that we don’t have all of the answers today. But, we
are on the right path. We have a framework for action in place that is driving down emissions,
spurring innovation across a range of clean and advanced technology sectors, improving the
air Californians breathe, and creating more livable communities. By building on this framework
with the set of actions outlined in this Update, we can do our part to meet the challenge of global
climate change, and in the process, continue to build the clean, sustainable future that
all Californians deserve.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Executive Summary

ES9



I.

Introduction: Building
on the Framework

This Scoping Plan Update builds upon the successful framework established
by the initial Scoping Plan by outlining priorities and recommendations for the
State to achieve its long-term climate objectives. The unifed approach in this
Update describes actions for California to undertake to ensure it continues on
a path toward a cleaner, more sustainable and prosperous future. This approach
is designed to ensure the State is able to meet its long-term climate objectives
that will achieve continual emission reductions in the most cost-effective ways,
while simultaneously supporting a range of economic, environmental, water
supply, energy security, environmental justice, and public health priorities.
Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32), the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32, Statutes
of 2006, Chapter 488) declares that global warming poses a serious threat to the economic wellbeing, public health, natural resources, and environment of California and charges the California
Air Resources Board (ARB) with “monitoring and regulating sources of emissions of greenhouse
gases that cause global warming in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases” (Health and
Safety Code section 38510). AB 32 provided initial direction on creating a comprehensive multiyear program to limit California’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions at 1990 levels by 2020 and
initiate the transformations required to achieve the State’s long-range climate objectives. One
specifc requirement is to prepare a “scoping plan” for achieving the maximum technologically
feasible and cost-effective GHG emission reductions by 2020 (Health and Safety Code section
38561(a)). ARB is required to update the plan for achieving the maximum technologically feasible
and cost-effective reductions in GHG emissions at least once every fve years (Health and Safety
Code section 38561(h)). The language of AB 32 is included in Appendix A.
The initial Scoping Plan was approved in 2008, as required by AB 32, and reapproved in 2011.
The initial Scoping Plan contained a mix of recommended strategies that combined direct
regulations, market-based approaches, voluntary measures, policies, and other emission
reduction programs calculated to meet the 2020 statewide GHG emission limit and initiate the
transformations needed to achieve the State’s long-range climate objectives. The passage of
the Global Warming Solutions Act, and its ongoing implementation, has put California on a
path to continually reduce GHG emissions by adopting and implementing regulations and other
programs to reduce emissions from cars, trucks, electricity production, fuels, and other sources.
While the path to limit emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 is transformative in its own right,
reducing emissions to meet the State’s long-range objectives will require continued progress
toward effcient clean energy in every sector of the economy and new opportunities to value
and integrate agricultural, natural, and working lands into a comprehensive climate policy
framework. The State’s 2050 objective of reducing emissions to 80 percent below 1990 levels,
as refected in Executive Order S-3-05 and Governor Brown’s Executive Order B-16-2012 (which
is specifc to the transportation sector), is consistent with an Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC)1 analysis of the emissions trajectory that would stabilize atmospheric
GHG concentrations at 450 parts per million carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) and reduce the
likelihood of catastrophic climate change.
1

The IPCC is the leading international body for the scientifc assessment of climate change established in 1988
under the auspices of the United Nations.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework

1



Continuing progress to the 2050 objective requires California to maintain and build upon its
existing programs, scale up deployment of clean technologies, and provide more low-carbon
options to accelerate GHG emission reductions, especially after 2020.

A. AB 32: California’s Global Warming Solutions Act
Under AB 32, California has established a unique, broad program of regulatory and market
mechanisms to achieve real, quantifable, cost-effective GHG emission reductions. Since 2006,
ARB has carried out the following specifc tasks required by AB 32:
• Determine the 1990 GHG emission level to serve as the 2020 emission
limit: In December 2007, the Board approved the 2020 limit of 427 million
metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MMTCO2e) GHG emissions.
• Adopt a regulation requiring GHG emission reporting: In December
2007, the Board approved a regulation requiring the largest industrial
sources in California to report and verify their GHG emissions.
• Identify and adopt regulations that could be enforceable by January 1, 2010: In 2007,
the Board identifed nine discrete early action measures, which have all been adopted.
• Develop a scoping plan for achieving the maximum technologically feasible and costeffective GHG emission reductions by 2020 and update the report every fve years to
continue to consider future achievement of maximum technologically feasible and
cost-effective GHG emission reductions: The frst Scoping Plan was approved by the
Board in 2008 and reapproved in 2011. This report is the frst update to the Scoping Plan.
• Maintain and continue GHG emission reductions beyond 2020:
This frst update presents the priorities and recommendations for
achieving the State’s longer-term emission reduction objectives.
Meeting the State’s climate objectives requires a coordinated and cohesive statewide strategy
based on informed decisions that draw upon research, technology, infrastructure, the State’s
policy priorities, and potential co-benefts. Planning must continue to further align the State’s
longer-term GHG reduction strategies with other State policy priorities, including those related to
economic development, water, waste, natural resources, agriculture, clean energy, transportation,
and land use.

B. Building on California’s Environmental Legacy
Just as California has done time and again over the past 40 years, the State is decoupling
economic growth from pollution and waste. Continually, California has implemented rational,
well-supported policies that have—among many other accomplishments—dramatically cut
pollution from new cars, made its new buildings and appliances the most effcient in the country,
phased out lead from gasoline and created the cleanest-burning transportation fuels in the world,
phased out dirty coal- and oil-burning power plants, and brought entire new industries to life and
clean technologies to market.
This progress did not come without battles, debates, or skepticism. But in each case, armed with
strong scientifc backing, California persevered, prevailed, and ultimately provided a case study
to the world that proved a conventional wisdom false: Economic growth is not inherently linked
to pollution, increasing energy consumption, or consumption of fossil resources.
California has successfully pioneered dozens of new energy and environmental policies that
repeatedly demonstrate that economic growth does not have to be one of a set of trade-off
considerations or come at a cost to future generations.

2

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework



California’s policy successes derive from the fact that, when faced with the certainty of
reasonable policy, businesses innovate and successfully cut pollution with consumer-oriented
solutions that drive their markets forward and continue economic growth. The result is fewer
emissions, improved public and environmental health, and better products that allow industries
and businesses to grow and fourish.
Many others throughout the world look to adopt or mimic California’s leading policies and build
similar markets for clean technologies. California is regarded as a global leader for developing
successful policy solutions to deal with pressing environmental problems—whether it is other
states or the federal government adopting California vehicle and fuel standards; subnational
governments in Canada and Mexico looking to do the same; or delegations from countries in
Europe, Asia, and Australia visiting to learn how we monitor and control air pollution, improve
vehicle and building effciency, develop smarter communities, and build markets for clean
energy and fuels.
Through the Global Warming Solutions Act, California is continuing to lead with effective policies
to address global climate change. Once again, we are proving conventional wisdom wrong, and
showing that we can dramatically reduce emissions of GHGs while growing our economy.
Since the initial Scoping Plan was released, California has put in place a number of measures
that have already led to signifcant emission reductions, and a transformation to a strong,
stable low-carbon economy in California is under way. We are on the right path. Our actions are
reducing GHG emissions, spurring innovation across a range of clean and advanced technology
sectors, improving the air Californians breathe, and creating more livable communities. All the
while, our economy continues to grow, and we continue to add jobs more quickly than the rest
of the country. By continuing down this path, California will do its part to meet the challenge
of global climate change, and in the process, continue to build the clean, sustainable future
all Californians deserve.

SUCCESS STORY
Propel Fuels Moves to California
Propel Fuels is a renewable biofuels company which relocated to
California specifcally because of the economic opportunities created
by AB 32’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). The LCFS encourages
investment in a wide variety of alternative transportation fuels, and
Propel specializes in providing E85 (ethanol) fex fuel and other fuels.
Part of Propel’s unique business model involves placing its fuel pumps
at already-existing gas stations. The company supplies individual
motorists, truck operators and commercial vehicle feets. Propel had
$4.5 million in revenue in 2012, and was 42nd on Forbes Magazine’s
list of “Most Promising Companies”.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework

3



However, we know we need to do more, and we need to move faster. The world is watching, just
as it always has, and is banking on our success to spur broader action. It is critical that California
continues to lead and implement successful policies that can expand beyond our borders.

C. Initial Scoping Plan
With the development of the initial Scoping Plan, California became the frst state in the nation
with a comprehensive set of GHG emission reduction strategies involving every sector of the
economy. The measures and policies in the Scoping Plan set California on a trajectory toward
a clean-energy future. The recommended reduction measures drive innovation, improve the
environment, enhance public health, and support the growth of clean energy technologies and
businesses. By moving frst, California is well-positioned to lead in the race to develop the clean
technology products, patents, and projects the global market demands and needs to address
climate change.
The comprehensive approach in the initial Scoping Plan addressed key criteria, including
technological feasibility, cost-effectiveness, overall societal benefts, and impacts on specifc
sectors such as small business and disproportionately impacted communities. The thorough
planning process underlying the initial Scoping Plan and this Update helps to ensure that
California meets its GHG reduction targets in a way that promotes and rewards innovation,
helps to foster economic growth, and delivers improvements to the environment and public
health, including in the most affected communities.
Key elements of the initial Scoping Plan included the following:
• Expand and strengthen energy effciency programs,
including building and appliance standards.
• Increase electricity generation from renewable resources to
at least 33 percent of the statewide electricity mix by 2020.
• Establish targets for passenger vehicle-related GHG emissions for regions throughout
California and pursue policies and incentives to achieve those targets. Included
with this strategy is support for the development and implementation of a high
speed rail system to expand mobility choices and reduce GHG emissions.
• Adopt and implement measures pursuant to existing State laws and policies,
including California’s clean car standards and the Low Carbon Fuel Standard.
• Develop a cap-and-trade program to ensure the target is met, while providing
fexibility to California businesses to reduce emissions at low cost.
The initial Scoping Plan identifed specifc GHG emission reduction measures that would assist
the State in meeting the 2020 limit. A discussion of the status of all of the Scoping Plan measures
is included in Appendix B.

D. Purpose of Update
This Update identifes the next steps for California’s leadership on climate change. While
California continues on its path to meet the near-term 2020 greenhouse gas limit, it must also set
a clear path toward long-term, deep GHG emission reductions. This report highlights California’s
success to date in reducing its GHG emissions and lays the foundation for establishing a broad
framework for continued emission reductions beyond 2020, on the path to 80 percent below
1990 levels by 2050.
This frst Update to the initial AB 32 Scoping Plan (Update) describes progress made to meet
the near-term objectives of AB 32 and defnes California’s climate change priorities and activities

4

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework



for the next several years. It also frames activities and issues facing the State as it develops an
integrated framework for achieving both air quality and climate goals in California beyond 2020.
Specifcally, this Update covers a range of topics:
• An update of the latest scientifc fndings related to climate change
and its impacts, including short-lived climate pollutants.
• A review of progress-to-date, including an update of Scoping Plan measures
and other state, federal, and local efforts to reduce GHG emissions in California.
• Potential technologically feasible and cost-effective actions
to further reduce GHG emissions by 2020.
• Recommendations for establishing a mid-term emissions limit that aligns with the
State’s long-term goal of an emissions limit 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.
• Sector-specifc discussions covering issues, technologies, needs, and ongoing State
activities to signifcantly reduce emissions throughout California’s economy through 2050.
• Priorities and recommendations for investment to support market and
technology development and necessary infrastructure in key areas.
• A discussion of the ongoing work and continuing need for improved methods and
tools to assess economic, public health, and environmental justice impacts.
Progressing toward California’s long-term climate goals will require that GHG reduction rates
be signifcantly accelerated. Emissions from 2020 to 2050 will have to decline at more than twice
the rate of that which is needed to reach the 2020 statewide emissions limit.
In addition to our climate objectives, California also must meet federal clean air standards.
Emissions of criteria air pollutants, including ozone precursors (primarily oxides of nitrogen,
or NOx) and particulate matter, must be reduced by, a currently estimated, 90 percent by 2032 to
comply with federal air quality standards. The scope and scale of emission reductions necessary
to improve air quality is similar to that needed to meet long-term climate targets. Achieving both
objectives will align programs and investments to leverage limited resources for maximum beneft.
Accelerating progress on this scale will require both continuation of existing policies and
implementation of new ones to help signifcantly scale market adoption of the cleanest, mosteffcient technologies. It will require a new approach to energy production and utilization, and
strong mid-term targets to measure and guide the State’s progress. This document outlines
the challenges we face to achieve this vision, which will be the subject of ongoing climate and
investment planning efforts in California in the coming years.

E. Process for Developing the Update
This Update was developed with input from State and local agencies, community and
environmental justice organizations, and other interested stakeholders in an open and
public process.
ARB held an initial public workshop in June 2013 to discuss preliminary concepts for this Update.
As part of the workshop, ARB and other State agency representatives provided a vision for each
focus area for 2050 and challenges that must be addressed to meet that vision. ARB and other
State agencies also co-hosted public regional workshops with local air districts and metropolitan
planning organizations throughout the State (Bay Area, South Coast, and San Joaquin Valley).
The workshops were convened to discuss preliminary concepts for this Update (similar to
the initial workshop) and to provide a local/regional perspective on both progress to date
and regional priorities for California’s climate program.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework

5



Climate Action Team
A discussion draft of the Update was released
for public comment on October 1, 2013. The
discussion draft was presented at a public
meeting and a Board hearing later that month
to further solicit public input. After consideration
of comments received, staff released a draft
Proposed Update on February 10, 2014, and
presented it to the Board for discussion at its
February 20, 2014, meeting. At that meeting, the
Board directed staff to make specifc changes to
the draft report. A draft environmental analysis
(EA) of the Proposed Update was released for
a 45-day public comment period on March
14, 2014. After considering public comments
received and Board direction, ARB staff released
a fnal First Update, along with the summary of
comments received on the draft EA and ARB’s
responses to those comments, and the fnal
EA on May 15, 2014.

California Environmental Protection Agency

Under the guidance of the Climate Action Team,
ARB and other State agencies collaborated
during the development of the Update to identify
and describe a long-term vision and near-term
activities to put California on the path to its
2050 emission reductions goal. To help guide
in this effort, ARB identifed six key focus areas
comprising major components of the State’s
economy to evaluate and describe the larger
transformative actions that will be needed
to meet the State’s more expansive emission
reduction needs by 2050.

Department of Transportation

Governor’s Offce of Planning and Research
California Air Resources Board
Business, Consumer Services, and Housing Agency
Government Operations Agency
California Natural Resources Agency
California Department of Public Health
Offce of Emergency Services
California Transportation Agency
California Energy Commission
California Public Utilities Commission
Department of Food and Agriculture
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
Department of Fish and Wildlife

Department of Water Resources
Department of Resources, Recycling and Recovery
State Water Resources Control Board

The focus areas include:
• Energy
• Transportation (Vehicles/Equipment, Sustainable Communities,
Housing, Fuels, and Infrastructure)
• Agriculture
• Water
• Waste Management
• Natural and Working Lands
State agency focus area workgroups were created in 2013 to conduct these evaluations. Various
State agencies took lead roles. For example, the California Energy Commission (CEC) took the
lead for the energy sector and ARB took the lead for transportation. Each workgroup developed
a working paper which formed the foundation upon which the agencies, with stakeholder
input, identifed recommendations for policy or program priorities for the next fve years.
Recommended action items for meeting the longer-term GHG emission reduction goals are
presented in Chapter IV. The working papers are included in Appendix C.
AB 32 requires ARB to convene an Environmental Justice Advisory Committee (Committee) to
advise it in developing the Scoping Plan and any other pertinent matters in implementing AB 32
(Health and Safety Code section 38591). The Board convened the Committee in 2007 to advise it

6

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework



on the development of the initial Scoping Plan. The Board reconvened the Committee to advise it
on the development of this Update. The Committee met four times from June 2013 to April 2014
to discuss the Update. The Committee focused their discussions on each Scoping Plan sector
and developed comprehensive recommendations that ARB considered in drafting this Update.
The Committee’s “Final Recommendations on the Proposed AB 32 Scoping Plan” provided
recommendations for each Scoping Plan sector and overarching environmental justice policy.
The fnal recommendations included the need for monitoring and assessing potential impacts
of the State’s climate programs; a call for a 2030 target of, at a minimum, 40 percent reduction
from 1990 levels and a 2040 target of, at a minimum, 60 percent reduction from 1990 levels; a call
for California to reduce its energy use and transition to 100 percent renewable energy; fnancial
support for transportation in disadvantaged communities; and amendments to the Cap-andTrade Regulation that would exclude direct allocation and offset credits. The Committee’s fnal
recommendations are included in Appendix E.
ARB also convened a panel of economic experts to serve as advisors during the development of
this Update and provide recommendations for evaluating the economic impacts associated with
AB 32. The advisors were invited to participate in teleconferences, review draft documents, and
provide feedback to ensure that the economic impacts of programs implemented under AB 32
are analyzed with the best available data and methods. ARB consulted with the advisors on
the best means of assessing economic impacts to date, as well as estimating future impacts of
existing or new emission reduction strategies. ARB will continue to seek expert economic advice
in the evaluation of the impacts of AB 32 and the Scoping Plan on California’s economy as the
program continues to be implemented.
In addition, a group of distinguished scientists with expertise in observed climate change in
California, projection of future climate change impacts, and short-lived climate pollutants,
provided input on the latest climate science discussion in the Update.
ARB also held numerous meetings and conference calls with individuals and stakeholder groups
such as industry associations, environmental groups, tribes, and small businesses on specifc
issues or recommendations to address in this Update.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter I: Introduction: Building on the Framework

7



II.

Latest Understanding
of Climate Science

The latest climate science further underscores the urgent need to accelerate
GHG emission reductions to avoid the most severe impacts of climate change.
Focusing on additional measures to reduce emissions of climate-warming
pollutants with shorter atmospheric lifetimes (known as short-lived climate
pollutants) could provide immediate air quality and public health benefts
while helping to slow the rate of human-caused climate change.
Climate scientists agree that global warming
trends and other shifts in the climate system
Scientifc Expert Reviewers
observed over the past century are almost
certainly attributed to human activities and
Dr. Daniel Cayan
Scripps Institution
are proceeding at a rate that is unprecedented
of Oceanography,
when compared with climate change that human
UC San Diego and
society has lived through to date. Climate
U.S. Geological Survey
change is measured by examining recent shifts
Dr. Michael Prather
UC Irvine
in the features (statistics, including extremes)
Dr. V. Ramanathan
Scripps Institution
that are associated with average weather, such
of Oceanography,
as temperature, wind patterns, and precipitation,
UC San Diego
plus long-term trends in the great ice sheets,
Arctic sea ice, and mean sea level. Since the
development of the Scoping Plan, even stronger
scientifc evidence continues to mount that
document that the climate is changing and that its impacts are widespread and occurring now.
This evidence includes rising temperatures, shifting snow and rainfall patterns, and increased
incidence of extreme weather events. To ensure that this new evidence on the impacts of
climate change is accurately summarized, this chapter was reviewed by a group of distinguished
scientists with expertise in observed climate change in California, projection of future climate
change impacts, and short-lived climate pollutants.
The recently released Summary for Policymakers (SPM)2 portion of Working Group I (WGI), the
frst in a series of reports comprising the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), affrms that the
planet is warming, that human beings are “extremely likely” (indicating 95 percent certainty) to
be the primary cause, and that some of the impacts of greatest concern, such as glacial melting,
are accelerating at a faster pace than documented in previous assessments.
This understanding of the climate system in AR5 results from combining observations,
theoretical studies of feedback processes, and model simulations. Compared to earlier reports,
more detailed observations and improved climate models now enable the attribution of
detected changes to human infuences in more climate system components and at higher spatial
resolution. The consistency of observed and modeled changes across the climate system,
including regional temperatures, the water cycle, the global energy budget, sea ice, and oceans
(including ocean acidifcation) point to global climate change resulting primarily from humancaused increases in GHG concentrations.
2

8

www.climate2013.org/images/report/WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



The IPCC report notes a continued rate of global warming along with the increasing radiative
forcing driven by greenhouse gases. The rate of global surface air temperature warming over
the past 15 years—about 0.05ºC per decade—has been slower than the average rate since 1951,
but the last decade is still the warmest observed, and each of the last three decades has been
successively warmer than any preceding decade since 1850. The key fndings include:
Increased certainty on humans’ role: Scientists are now more certain than ever that observed
warming can be attributed primarily to human activities such as exploitation of fossil fuels and
deforestation. The report underscores the growing body of scientifc evidence confrming the
serious detrimental impacts of increasing atmospheric GHG burden.
Accelerating impacts of climate change: Several indicators of climate change are advancing
faster than found in previous assessments.
• Ice Loss: Arctic summer sea ice retreat was unprecedented and sea surface temperatures
were anomalously high in comparison to at least the last 1,450 years. The melting of ice
sheets over the past decade is happening several times faster than it was in the 1990s.
Glacial melt has accelerated as well. There is high confdence that current glacier extents
are out of balance with current climatic conditions, indicating that glaciers, ice sheets, and
sea ice will continue to shrink in the future even without further temperature increases.
• Sea-Level Rise: The rate of sea level rise since the mid-nineteenth century has been
larger than the mean rate during the previous two millennia. Over the period 1901 to 2010,
global mean sea level rose by 7.48 inches (19 centimeters). Global mean sea level will
continue to rise during the twenty-frst century, and the rate of sea level rise will exceed
that observed during 1971 to 2010 due to increased ocean warming (leading to the thermal
expansion of the water) and increased loss of mass from glaciers and ice sheets.
• Ocean Acidifcation: Due to excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the
pH of seawater has decreased. This increased acidity poses risks to ocean
ecosystems—the development of many shellfsh, plankton, and other forms
of ocean life—as well as to people who depend on oceans for their livelihood.
• Heat Waves: It is likely that human infuence has already contributed to the
observed changes in the frequency and intensity of daily temperature extremes
on the global scale since the mid-twentieth century, and has signifcantly
increased the probability of occurrence of heat waves in some locations.
• Air Quality: There is high confdence that warming is decreasing baseline surface ozone
globally, but higher methane emissions are counteracting and overriding this impact.
There is medium confdence that locally higher surface temperatures in polluted regions
will increase peak levels of ozone and particulate matter 2.5 microns or smaller (PM2.5),
but a no confdence level is attached to the overall impact of climate change on PM2.5.
As documented in the AR5 report, accumulating observations underscore the fact that the
important parts of the climate system have a long memory. Continued emissions of GHG will
cause further warming and changes in all components of the climate system. Cumulative
emissions of CO2 largely determine global mean surface warming by the late twenty-frst
century and beyond. Most aspects of climate change will persist for many centuries, even if
CO2 emissions are radically reduced. This represents a substantial multi-century climate change
commitment created by past, present, and future CO2 emissions. Limiting climate change will
require substantial and sustained reductions of GHG emissions.
California is a large state that is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
The State is facing a range of impacts, including increases in extreme heat, wildfres, drought,
extreme storms, coastal fooding, and erosion, and reductions in the Sierra Nevada springtime
snowpack. Climate change also threatens to affect water availability. Climate and hydrological
models indicate that warming will likely diminish river discharge in the Colorado Basin as global

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

9



climate change advances over the next several decades. A new study 3 suggests that both the
California drought and the polar vortex, two persistent extreme weather outcomes observed this
past winter season, may be linked to the same underlying cause: climate change as a result of
warming from the accumulation of GHGs. California’s efforts to reduce GHG emissions and avoid
the worst impacts of climate change must occur in parallel with planning for and adaptation to
climate change that is already occurring, as well the climate change that is already in the pipeline
out to 2050 and beyond, immaterial of future mitigation.
The climate effects of emissions from different climate-forcing pollutants vary in terms of both
magnitude and duration. There is growing recognition, both from a scientifc and regulatory
perspective, that mitigation of short-lived climate pollutants would lead to immediate reductions
in the rate of climate change. Although there is no precise defnition of short-lived climate
pollutants, these include pollutants such as black carbon, tropospheric ozone, methane, and
hydrofuorocarbons, all of which will decay in the atmosphere on the order of days to decades.
These timescales are much shorter than centennial time scale for CO2, where about 40 percent
of currently emitted CO2 will remain in the atmosphere by 2100 and affect climate for centuries
beyond. Black carbon (as a component of PM2.5) and ozone are air pollutants with substantial
health effects, and reducing their emissions can offer signifcant improvements in air quality
and public health. In addition to the short-lived, local ozone precursors (NOX, VOCs), methane
is a global source of tropospheric ozone.

A. Continuing Evidence of Climate Change in California
in Agreement with Projected Changes
Important climate change impacts are already being detected in California. California’s Offce
of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment recently published the report, Indicators of Climate
Change in California, which tracks trends in GHG levels, changes in the state’s climate, and the
impacts of climate change on California’s environment and people.
Climate change is already affecting California’s infrastructure, natural resources, and
communities, with even larger impacts projected in the future.
Heat: More extreme hot days, fewer cold nights, and shifts in the water and growing cycles
are already being observed in California. Sheridan and Kalkstein4 project a marked increase
in the number and duration of heat waves over the remainder of this century. For example,
historically, in the populated areas of California, 14-day heat waves have occurred no more than
once per year, with most locations not having any. By 2050, the frequency of 14-day heat waves
is projected to increase up to tenfold. These increases will require a major effort to avoid heatrelated death and illness, and will have a substantial effect on water and energy usage. Increases
in ambient air temperature and the frequency of extreme heat events will reduce the effciency
of conventional power plants burning fossil fuels, and increase peak electricity demand for major
cities for air conditioning.
Air Quality: Many Californians still experience air pollution levels that exceed health-based air
quality standards. Climate warming would slow progress toward attainment of ozone air quality
standards and increase pollution control costs by increasing the potential for high ozone days.
A study5 found that California could experience as many as six to thirty more days with ozone
concentrations that exceed federal clean-air standards, depending on the extent of increased
temperatures. In the southern California region, projected changes in ozone concentrations due
3

4
5

10

Wang, S.-Y., L. Hipps, R. R. Gillies, and J.-H. Yoon (2014), Probable causes of the abnormal ridge accompanying
the 2013–2014 California drought: ENSO precursor and anthropogenic warming footprint, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
41, doi:10.1002/2014GL059748. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014GL059748/pdf
Sheridan, S., and L. Kalkstein. 2011. A Spatial Synoptic Classifcation Approach to Projected Heat Vulnerability in
California under Future Climate Change Scenarios. ARB contract #07-304. www.arb.ca.gov/research/apr/past/07-304.pdf.
Kleeman, M. J., S.-H. Chen, and R. A. Harley. 2010. Climate change impact on air quality in California: Report to the
California Air Resources Board. www.arb.ca.gov/research/apr/past/04-349.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



to climate change in the year 2050 could increase by 9 to 18 parts per billion. These studies refect
the increased effciency of ozone production in a warmer climate, the potential for increased
biogenic VOC emissions driven by higher temperatures, and increased tropospheric ozone levels
due to higher methane emissions.
Wildfre Risks: Forest and wildland fres are becoming more frequent and intense, in part because
dry seasons have started earlier and ended later. Since 1950, annual acreage burned in wildfres
has been increasing in California. The three largest fre years occurred in the last ten years.6
A recent study7 estimated future wildfre activity over the western United States during the
mid-twenty-frst century (2046–2065). The results show that the fre season is expected to
lengthen by 23 days in the warmer and drier climate at mid-century. Besides the damage to
natural and managed systems, it was indicated that wildfre emissions would increase levels
of summertime short-lived climate and air pollutants such as black carbon and PM2.5.
Sea Level Rise: Sea levels have risen by six inches or more along much of the California coast
over the last century, increasing erosion and pressure on the State’s infrastructure, water
supplies, and natural resources.8 A 2012 report by the California Climate Change Center presented
the state of the climate affairs in California, and discussed their impacts on the State’s natural
resources.9 The report noted that, in addition to sea level rise and associated seawater intrusions,
possible fooding from increased storm runoff from mountain catchments, and storm surges
threaten freshwater supplies in the Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta. Flooding also threatens
existing levees and many low-lying areas in the Delta and Central Valley.10 Critical infrastructure
such as roads and highways, ports, harbors, airports, wastewater treatment facilities, and power
plants are located in low-lying coastal areas. Coastal habitats such as beaches, dunes, cliffs, and
bluffs could be lost to erosion, while groundwater aquifers could be impacted more widely than
today by seawater intrusion and wetlands and bays could face permanent inundation.11
Sea level rise and increased storm frequency and intensity could also affect the operations
of coastal power plants and coastal petroleum, natural gas, and transportation-related
fuels infrastructure.
Agriculture: Agriculture is especially vulnerable to altered temperature, changing rainfall
patterns, and new pest problems. Several scientifc studies have been conducted that document
the adverse impact that climate change is likely to have on crops and food supply. California
agriculture is a nearly $40 billion dollar industry, and it generates at least $100 billion in related
economic activity.12
Water Supply: Increased temperatures with decreased winter snowfall, as well as earlier
snowmelt and greater rainwater runoff occurring earlier in the year, threaten the State’s major
water supply—the Sierra Nevada snowpack and timed downstream reservoir releases. Reduced
snowpack puts greater pressure on the State’s other major storage components, including water
stored in reservoirs and groundwater aquifers. Lowering groundwater levels in turn create
a greater energy demand to pump water from deeper wells and further reduce groundwater
6
7
8
9

10
11
12

Offce of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, California Environmental Protection Agency. Indicators
of Climate Change in California. August 2013. www.oehha.ca.gov/multimedia/epic/2013EnvIndicatorReport.html.
Yue, Xu et al. 2013. “Ensemble projections of wildfre activity and carbonaceous aerosol concentrations over
the western United States in the mid-21st century.” Atmospheric Environment 77: 767-780.
National Research Council Report. 2012. Sea-Level Rise for the Coasts of California, Oregon, and Washington:
Past, Present, and Future. National Academies Press. www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13389.
California Climate Change Center. 2012. Our Changing Climate 2012, Vulnerability & Adaptation to the Increasing
Risks from Climate Change in California. California Climate Change Center.
www.energy.ca.gov/2012publications/CEC-500-2012-007/CEC-500-2012-007.pdf.
Knowles, N. 2010. “Potential inundation due to rising sea levels in the San Francisco Bay region.”
San Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science 8:1.
Cayan, D., M. Tyree, and S. Iacobellis. 2012. Climate Change Scenarios for the San Francisco Region.
California Energy Commission. Publication number: CEC-500-2012-042.
Jackson, L. E., et al. 2011. “Case study on potential agricultural responses to climate change in a California
landscape.” Climatic Change 109 (Suppl 1): S407–S427.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

11



contribution to rivers and streams exacerbating other impacts. Reduced Sierra Nevada
snowpack and diminished runoff and water fows in late spring and summer will adversely
affect hydroelectric generation and operation of the California State Water Project.13
As California continues to reduce GHG emissions, it is also taking steps to prepare for the impacts
of climate change. In 2009, the California Resources Agency developed the frst Climate Change
Adaptation Strategy for California in response to Executive Order S-13-2008. The Agency released
a draft of California’s climate adaptation strategy in December 2013.14 The update summarizes
current science on potential climate change impacts in California and outlines possible solutions
that can be implemented within and across State and local agencies.
To effectively address the challenges that a changing climate will bring, policies to reduce
emissions and prepare for climate impacts should be coordinated and complementary. In fact,
some of the same strategies provide both mitigation and adaptation benefts. For example, better
forest management reduces the incidence of catastrophic wildfre, which reduces emissions of
GHGs and also increases the carbon sequestration capacity of the forests.

B. Achieving Climate Stabilization
Scientifc research indicates that an increase in the global average temperature of 2°C (3.6°F)
above pre-industrial levels, which is only 1.1°C (2.0°F) above present levels, poses severe risks to
natural systems and human health and well-being. Considering knowledge from the paleo-climate
record with changes currently observed in the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, we can expect
substantial sea level rise, 0.4 to 0.8 meters, with upper end uncertainties approaching one meter
above present day during the 21st Century and continued substantial increase after 2100 even with
stringent mitigation of emissions to achieve 2°C stabilization. Increased climate extremes, already
apparent at present day climate warming (~0.9°C), will no doubt be more severe. To have a good
chance (not a guarantee) of avoiding temperatures above those levels, studies focused on a goal
of stabilizing the concentration of heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere at or below the 450 parts
per million (ppm) CO2-equivalent (CO2e, a metric that combines the climate impact of all wellmixed GHGs, such as methane and nitrous oxide, in terms of CO2).
The CO2e target is a somewhat approximate threshold, and the exact level of CO2e is not precisely
known because the sensitivity of the climate system to GHGs has uncertainty. Different models
show slightly different outcomes within this range. An example of a pre-IPCC assessment
study (Meinshausen et al. 2009)15 which has synthesized many studies on climate sensitivities,
concluded that we would need to stabilize at about 400 ppm CO2e in order to likely avoid
exceeding the 2°C threshold (even at that stabilization target, there is still about a 20 percent
chance of exceeding the temperature target). Further, a recent paper by an international team
of scientists (Hansen et al. 2013)16 asserts that the widely accepted target of limiting human-made
global climate warming to 2°C above preindustrial levels is likely too high and may subject future
generations and nature to irreparable harm. Recognizing this fact, the international community
agreed in meetings in Cancun in 2012 to review, by 2015, progress to the 2°C target and consider
whether it should be strengthened to a 1.5°C threshold.
What is important to recognize in these studies of warming thresholds is the critical importance
of non-CO2 gases, particularly the short-lived climate pollutants. For example, to avoid 2°C
warming at a 66 percent confdence level, total carbon emissions (as CO2e) must be kept to
13
14
15
16

12

California Energy Commission. 2009. Potential Impacts of Climate Change on California’s Energy Infrastructure
and Identifcation of Adaptation Measures. January. CEC-150-2009-001.
Safeguarding California: Reducing Public Risk Plan, public draft available at
http://resources.ca.gov/climate_adaptation/docs/Safeguarding_California_Public_Draft_Dec-10.pdf.
Meinshausen, M., N. Meinshausen, W. Hare, S. C. B. Raper, K. Frieler, R. Knutti, D. J. Frame, and M. Allen. 2009.
“Greenhouse-gas emission targets for limiting global warming to 2 °C.” Nature 458:1158 1162.
Hansen, J., P. Kharecha, M. Sato, V. Masson-Delmotte, F. Ackerman, et al. 2013. “Assessing ‘Dangerous Climate
Change’: Required Reduction of Carbon Emissions to Protect Young People, Future Generations and Nature.”
PLoS ONE 8(12): e81648. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081648.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



1000 GtC. Considering that we have already emitted about 500 GtC, which leaves 500 GtC to be
divided up among nations. If the non-CO2 gases are included then the total CO2e emissions are
at 790 GtC, leaving only 210 GtC to be emitted. Thus, there is a compelling case to reduce the
short-lived climate pollutants.
In early May 2013, the Mauna Loa monitoring station, which has been shown to provide
excellent measurements of CO2 throughout the global atmosphere, recorded atmospheric CO2
of 400 ppm,17 substantially higher than the 316 ppm recorded when the station made its frst
measurements in 1958. The monitoring station offers the longest-running record of atmospheric
CO2 measured directly from the air. This recent reading will take a few years to become the
international average; however, reaching 400 ppm at Mauna Loa is signifcant and has surpassed
a worrisome milestone.
Although stabilizing atmospheric GHG concentration below 450 ppm CO2e is important, it does
not mean that once that level is reached, temperatures will immediately level off. Because of time
lags inherent in the Earth’s climate, the initial warming that occurs in response to a given increase
in the concentration of CO2 (“transient climate change”) refects only about half the eventual total
warming (“equilibrium climate change”).
Observational data reveal that, in recent decades, some climate extremes are already increasing
in response to relative modest warming; these extremes would likely increase considerably with
warming of 2°C or more. While the fndings suggest that even at relatively low levels of global
warming the world will have to face signifcant sea level rise, the studies also demonstrate that
the potential impacts are substantially greater if we allow warming to reach a level as high as
2°C. If they occur, changes such as these would not rapidly reverse, as even if the atmospheric
CO2 amount declines, it would take many centuries for the deep ocean to cool.
To prevent exceeding 450 ppm CO2e, developed countries must substantially reduce their
emissions in the near term. The 2008 World Energy Outlook suggests that Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries must reduce emissions by about
40 percent below 2006 levels by 2030.18 The Union of Concerned Scientists has suggested a 2030
emissions target for the United States of 56 percent below 2005 levels (44 percent below 1990
levels).19 A governmental study from the Netherlands fnds that Europe would have to reduce
emissions by 47 percent below 1990 levels and the United States would have to reduce emissions
by 37 percent below 1990 levels by 2030.20 The International Energy Agency comes to a similar
conclusion, fnding that the United States would have to reduce emissions by about 38 percent
below 1990 levels by 2030.21 Note that percent reductions by 2030 depend on the assumed overall
trajectory of emissions, including the amount after 2030.
Because of the cumulative effects of GHG emissions and resultant changes to the earth’s energy
balance and the inertia in the climate system, delaying efforts to reduce emissions will likely mean
that global average temperature will increase by more than 2°C, increasing the costs associated
with combatting climate change. Reducing the global concentration to 450 ppm CO2e after delaying
mitigation actions for ten more years is estimated to cost an additional $3.5 trillion, compared to
levels of investment needed now if low-carbon strategies were to be adopted immediately.22
17
18
19
20

21
22

R. Monastersky (2013). Global carbon dioxide levels near worrisome milestone. Nature News:
www.nature.com/polopoly_fs/1.12900%21/menu/main/topColumns/topLeftColumn/pdf/497013a.pdf.
IEA. 2008. World Energy Outlook 2008. International Energy Agency.
www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/2008-1994/.
Cleetus, R. et al. 2009. Climate 2030: A National Blueprint for a Clean Energy Economy. Union of Concerned
Scientists. May. www.ucsusa.org/blueprint.
Hof, A. et al. 2012. Greenhouse gas emission reduction targets for 2030. Conditions for an EU target of 40%.
The Hague: PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency. www.pbl.nl/sites/default/fles/cms/
publicaties/PBL_2012_Greenhouse-gas-emission-reduction-targets-for-2030_500114023.pdf.
IEA, 2012. Energy Technology Perspectives 2013: Pathways to a Clean Energy System.
International Energy Agency. www.iea.org/etp/etp2012/
IEA. 2013. Redrawing the Energy Map: World Energy Outlook Special Report. International Energy Agency.
June 10. www.worldenergyoutlook.org/energyclimatemap.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

13



C. Climate Pollutants
The standard defnition of greenhouse gases includes six substances identifed in the Kyoto
Protocol – carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofuorocarbons (HFCs),
perfuorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafuoride (SF6) – plus chlorofuorocarbons and other
chlorine or bromine-containing gases phased out under the Montreal Protocol. Other GHGs
include synthetic gases recently added to the IPCC’s AR5 report such as nitrogen trifuoride (NF3)
and sulfuryl fuoride (SO2F2). Tropospheric ozone (O3), a short-lived, not-well-mixed gas, and black
carbon are also important climate pollutants. Carbon dioxide is undoubtedly the most important
GHG, and collectively CO2, CH4, and N2O amount to 80 percent of the total radiative forcing from
well-mixed GHGs.
Carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide concentrations have increased in the atmosphere
since pre-industrial times, and this increase is the main driver of climate change. Globally, CO2
increased by 40 percent from 278 ppm circa 1750 to 390.5 ppm in 2011. During the same time
interval, CH4 increased by 150 percent, from 722 ppb23 to 1,803 ppb, and N2O by 20 percent, from
271 ppb to 324.2 ppb in 2011. The increase of CO2, CH4, and N2O is caused by anthropogenic
emissions from the use of fossil fuel as a source of energy, fertilizer usage, and from land use
and land use change—in particular, agriculture.
For each GHG, a global warming potential (GWP) has been calculated to refect how long
emissions remain in the atmosphere and how strongly it absorbs energy on a per-kilogram basis
relative to CO2. GWP is a metric that indicates the relative climate forcing of a kilogram
of emissions when averaged over the period of interest (both 20-year and 100-year horizons are
used for the GWPs shown in Table 1). Other important climate-forcing species not listed under
the Kyoto Protocol with large human sources are tropospheric ozone and particulate matter
(PM, including black carbon and other absorbing organic carbon aerosols).
Tropospheric ozone can act as a direct GHG and as an indirect controller of GHG lifetimes. Ozone
is not emitted directly into the atmosphere, but rather formed by photochemical reactions. Its
average atmospheric lifetime of a few weeks produces a global distribution highly variable by
season, altitude, and location. The radiative forcing of tropospheric ozone is primarily attributed
to emissions of methane, but also to carbon monoxide, volatile organics, and nitrogen oxides that
eventually form ozone.
Unlike other GHGs, the three main categories of fuorinated gases (HFCs, PFCs, and SF6) have no
natural sources and only come from human-related activities. Chlorofuorocarbons (CFCs) and
hydrochlorofuorocarbons (HCFCs) are also potent climate-forcing fuorinated gases, but they are
regulated under the Montreal Protocol because of their role in the destruction of the protective
stratospheric ozone layer. The fuorinated gases are used as refrigerants, foam-blowing agents,
or for a variety of industrial processes such as aluminum and semiconductor manufacturing. Many
fuorinated gases have very high GWPs relative to other GHGs, so relatively low atmospheric
levels can have large effects on global temperatures. They can also have long atmospheric
lifetimes, lasting thousands of years in the case of SF6. Recently, two new climate pollutants
were added to the list of climate pollutants of concern in the IPCC’s AR5 report. These gases are
NF3, used in the electronics industry, and SO2F2, used as a fumigant to replace methyl bromide.
Both have rapidly increasing emissions (growing from almost zero in 1978), but they currently
contribute only about 0.0001 watt per square meter (W/m2) and 0.0003 W/m2, respectively, to
anthropogenic radiative forcing. For comparison, industrial era radiative forcing for CO2 alone
is about 1.82 W/m2 and CO2 is the component with the largest global mean radiative forcing.

23

14

Note: one part-per-million (ppm) = 1,000 parts-per-billion (ppb)

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



Globally, CO2 is the fastest increasing GHG in terms of absolute CO2-equivalents. In California,
since CO2 emissions are decreasing due to AB 32 and other regulations, the fastest growing
sector of GHG emissions are the high-GWP substitutes to ozone-depleting substances, primarily
the HFCs. An important outcome of conducting a state or regional specifc F-gas emission
inventory (rather than relying on scaled-down national estimates) was highlighted by the
discovery of a regional anomaly of relatively high GHG emissions in California from sulfuryl
fuoride. In 2006, the reported SO2F2 pesticide use in California represented 37–56 percent of the
global usage estimate and 41–75 percent of the U.S. usage estimate.24 Gallagher, et al.25 estimated
that, in 2008, SO2F2 contributed 4.6 MMTCO2e, or nine percent of all Fgas emissions in California
(51.0 MMTCO2e). Nitrogen trifuoride’s contribution was only 0.17 MTCO2E, or 0.3 percent of all
F-gas emissions in California.
Short-Lived Climate Pollutants: As mentioned above, GHGs have different atmospheric lifetimes,
ranging from less than a year to thousands of years (see Table 1). Some GHGs, such as CO2 and
N2O, are long-lived GHGs, and so contribute to long-term climate change. Other substances have
shorter atmospheric lifetimes because they are removed fairly quickly from the atmosphere.
Therefore, their effect on the climate system is similarly short-lived. Together, these shortlived climate forcers are responsible for a signifcant amount of current climate forcing from
anthropogenic substances.
The differentiation between long- and short-lived GHGs is not well defned, and here we
defne it to be gases with lifetimes less than 20 years so that a substantial fraction of emissions
(>60 percent) decays within a 20-year horizon, and thus mitigation of emissions will rapidly
reduce the warming caused by these chemical species. Properties of these short-lived climate
pollutants (SLCP)—including black carbon, methane, and some hydrofuorocarbons (HFCs)—are
contrasted with the other Kyoto GHGs in Table 1. Key SLCPs are described in more detail in the
following sections.

24

25

Mühle, J., J. Huang, R. F. Weiss, R. G. Prinn, B. R. Miller, P. K. Salameh,C. M. Harth, P. J. Fraser, L. W. Porter,
B. R. Greally, S. O’Doherty,and P. G. Simmonds. 2009. Sulfuryl Fluoride in the Global Atmosphere. J.Geophys.
Res. 114.D5: D05306.
Gallagher, G.; Zhan, T.; Hsu, Y-K.; Gupta, P.; Pederson, J.; Croes, B.; Blake, D. R.; Barletta, B.; Meinardi, S.; Ashford,
P.; Vetter, A.; Saba, S.; Slim, R.; Palandre, L.; Clodic, D.; Mathis, P.; Wagner, M.; Forgie, J.; Dwyer, H.; Wolf, K. 2014.
High-global Warming Potential F-gas Emissions in California: Comparison of Ambient-based versus Inventorybased Emission Estimates, and Implications of Refned Estimates. Environ Sci. Technol., 48, 1084−1093.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

15



Table 1:

Global Warming Potential for Selected Greenhouse Gases*
Pollutant

Lifetime
(years, except for BC)

Global Warming
Potential (20 -year)

Global Warming
Potential (100 -year)*

Long-Lived
Carbon dioxide

~100**

1

1

Nitrous oxide

121

264

265

Nitrogen trifuoride

500

12,800

16,100

Sulfur hexafuoride

3,200

17,500

23,500

Perfuorocarbons

3,000–50,000

5,000–8,000

7,000–11,000

days to weeks

270–6,200

100–1,700

Short-Lived (<20 years)
Black Carbon***
Methane

12

84

28

Hydrofuorocarbons****

(<1 to >100)

~100–11,000

~100–12,000

*

The 20- and 100-year global warming potential estimates are from the IPCC 2013 Fifth Assessment
Report (AR5), 26 which includes the independent scientifc assessment of the black carbon radiative
forcing published early this year.27
** CO2 has a variable atmospheric lifetime and cannot be readily approximated as a single number.
*** BC climate effects are highly uncertain, in large part because they depend on the conditions
under which they are emitted (i.e., location and time of year). This type of uncertainty does
not apply to the Kyoto greenhouse gases.
****HFCs have a wide range of lifetimes—some long, some short by this defnition.
Correspondingly, they have a wide range of GWPs.

Mitigation of the four SLCPs (methane, HFCs, tropospheric ozone, and black carbon), even if we
are restricted to available technologies, can reduce the probability of exceeding the 2°C barrier
before 2050 to less than ten percent, and before 2100 to less than 50 percent.28,29 In addition,
mitigation of CO2 along with SLCPs can keep the twenty-frst century warming below 2oC and
21th Century sea level rise below one meter.30 However, the most immediate health and climate
benefts would accrue regionally to the nations undertaking actions to mitigate SLCPs. For
example, reducing black carbon emissions would help to minimize soot deposition on snowpacks
and glaciers, which is known to accelerate snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada snowpack.31,32

26

27
28
29
30

31

32

16

Myhre, G., D. Shindell, F.-M. Bréon, W. Collins, J. Fuglestvedt, J. Huang, D. Koch, J.-F. Lamarque, D. Lee, B.
Mendoza, T. Nakajima, A. Robock, G. Stephens, T. Takemura, and H. Zhang. 2013. Anthropogenic and Natural
Radiative Forc¬ing. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T. F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner,
M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659–740.
Bond, T. C., S. J. Doherty, D. W. Fahey, et al. 2013. “Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system:
A scientifc assessment.” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres doi:10.1002/jgrd.50171.
Ramanathan, V., and Y. Xu. 2010. “The Copenhagen Accord for limiting global warming: Criteria, constraints,
and available avenues.” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107 (18) 8055–8062. www-ramanathan.ucsd.edu/fles/pr175.pdf.
UNEP/WMO. 2011. Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone.
Available at www.unep.org/dewa/Portals/67/pdf/BlackCarbon_report.pdf.
Hu, A., Y. Xu, C. Tebaldi, W. M. Washington, and V. Ramanathan. 2013. “Mitigation of short-lived climate pollutants
slows sea-level rise.” Nature Climate Change 3(5): 1–5, doi:10.1038/nclimate1869.
www-ramanathan.ucsd.edu/fles/pr194.pdf.
Hadley, O. L., C. E. Corrigan, T. W. Kirchstetter, S. S. Cliff, and V. Ramanathan. 2010. “Measured black carbon
deposition on the Sierra Nevada snow pack and implication for snow pack retreat.” Atmos. Chem. Phys.
10: 7505–7513, doi:10.5194/acp-10-7505-7513.
Qian, Y., W. I. Gustafson, Jr., L. Y. R. Leung, and S. J. Ghan. 2009. “Effects of soot-induced snow albedo change
on snowpack and hydrological cycle in western United States based on Weather Research and Forecasting
chemistry and regional climate simulations.”Journal of Geophysical Research D. (Atmospheres) 114:D03108.
doi:10.1029/2008JD011039.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



Figure 1 shows the relative GWP-weighted contributions of 2010 California emissions of different
climate pollutants for 100-year and 20-year time horizons. Note that Figure 1 does not include
other SLCPs such as NOX, CO, VOCs, and organic aerosols, which have both positive and negative
GWPs, as described in the 2013 IPCC AR5. Use of a global annual average GWP for BC may
signifcantly over- or under-estimate the contribution of California’s BC emissions. Individual
HFC species are aggregated according to their specifc emissions and GWPs. The 20-year GWP
is a better refection of what can be achieved in the near term by mitigation.
Figure 1:

Carbon Dioxide Equivalent Climate Pollutant Emissions for 2010
in California Using (a) 100-year and (b) 20-year Horizon GWPs
2010 (a)

2010 (b)
2%

Nitrous Oxide

2%

Nitrous Oxide

3%

Hydro˜uorocarbons

5%

Hydro˜uorocarbons

9%

Methane

19% Methane

6%

Black Carbon

15% Black Carbon

80% Carbon Dioxide

59% Carbon Dioxide

Many short-lived climate pollutants are already regulated by ARB, either as part of the air
quality and toxics program or under the Scoping Plan. The following sections describe the major
short-lived climate pollutants and ARB’s past programs to reduce emissions. For many of these
pollutants, ARB is proposing additional action to investigate and potentially require additional
emission reductions prior to 2020. In addition to actions under way, described in Chapter IV,
ARB will develop a short-lived climate pollutant strategy by 2015 that will include an inventory
of sources and emissions, the identifcation of additional research needs, and a plan for
developing necessary control measures. ARB will consult with external experts in the
development of this strategy.

1.

Black Carbon

Black carbon is the most strongly light-absorbing component of particulate matter (PM) emitted
from burning fuels such as coal, diesel, and biomass. ARB identifed diesel PM as a toxic air
contaminant in 1998, and PM that can be inhaled (PM10 and PM2.5) is a criteria pollutant, which is
regulated by both the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and ARB. Black carbon
contributes to climate change both directly by absorbing sunlight and indirectly by depositing
on snow and by interacting with clouds and affecting cloud formation. Reducing black carbon
emissions globally can have immediate economic, climate, and public health benefts.33, 34, 35
Short-lived species, like BC, vary spatially and, consequently, it is very diffcult to quantify their
global-warming forcing. Due in large part to the difference in lifetimes between BC and CO2, the
relative weight given to BC as compared to CO2 (or other climate forcers) is very sensitive to the
formulation of the metric used to make the comparison. Several leading scientists have reported
33
34

35

UNEP and WMO. 2011. Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone. United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
Shindell, D., J. C. I. Kuylenstierna, E. Vignati, R. van Dingenen, M. Amann, Z. Klimont, S. C. Anenberg, N. Muller,
G. Janssens-Maenhout, F. Raes, J. Schwartz, G. Faluvegi, L. Pozzoli, K. Kupiainen, L. Höglund-Isaksson, L.
Emberson, D. Streets, V. Ramanathan, K. Hicks, N. T. K. Oanh, G. Milly, M. Williams, V. Demkine, and D. Fowler. 2012.
“Simultaneously Mitigating Near-Term Climate Change and Improving Human Health and Food Security.” Science
335 (6065): 183–189. doi: 10.1126/science.1210026.
Wallack, J., and V. Ramanathan. 2009. “The Other Climate Changes, Why Black Carbon Also Matters.”
Foreign Affairs Sept/Oct 2009: 105–113. www-ramanathan.ucsd.edu/fles/pr168.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

17



estimates of the GWP for BC emissions from different sources. Most of the regional differences
in GWP are caused by differences in the lifetime of BC. In general, in the published literature,
there are signifcant variations in the GWP values for BC emissions assigned to different regions.
This indicates that the role of BC in warming requires close attention to the geography of
emissions. Black carbon may also indirectly cause changes in the absorption or refection of solar
radiation through changes in the properties and behavior of clouds, e.g., BC localized warming in
the lower atmosphere can prevent cloud formation.
Figure 2 shows the statewide contribution from black carbon emissions sources in 2010. The
main sources of black carbon in California are wildfres, off-road vehicles (locomotives, marine
vessels, tractors, excavators, dozers, etc.), on-road vehicles (cars, trucks, and buses), freplaces,
agricultural waste burning, and prescribed burning (planned burns of forest or wildlands).
Wildfres are a highly intermittent but signifcant source—almost 50 percent of the total black
carbon emissions. Emissions in this category may grow signifcantly in the future if climate
change results in increased wildfres, as predicted in many climate model scenarios. Projections
suggest that the frequency and size of forest fres is expected to increase, perhaps several fold,
by the end of the century.
Figure 2:

California Black Carbon Emissions Sources (2010)
2% Agricultural Burning
2% Prescribed Burning
9% Fireplaces
3% Cooking
5% Other
12% On-Road Vehicles
15% Off-Road Vehicles
52% Wildÿres

California has been an international leader in reducing emissions of black carbon, with close
to 95 percent control expected by 2020 due to existing programs that target reducing PM from
diesel engines and burning activities.
Due to the health concerns from PM exposures, both ARB and local air districts have developed
programs to reduce emissions from these sources (Table 2). These efforts have concurrently
resulted in signifcant reductions of black carbon and GHG emissions.
ARB estimates that the annual black carbon emissions in California decreased about 70 percent
between 1990 and 2010, in direct proportion to declining diesel PM emissions—a beneft of ARB’s
regulations on diesel fuel and engines. PM emissions from other categories of diesel engines,
such as off-road (e.g., agricultural and construction equipment), building equipment, generators,
ships, and harbor craft are also projected to decline signifcantly by 2020. Continued efforts
to better manage agricultural, forest, and range land burning operations are also expected
to continue to reduce black carbon emissions.

18

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



Table 2:

Programs Resulting in Black Carbon Emission Reductions
Program Area

Adoption Dates

Prescribed and Agricultural Burning
(ARB, Districts)

1970, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1976, 1991, 1997, 2004

Fireplaces and Fire Pits (Districts)

1986, 1993, 1995, 1996, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2013

Heavy-Duty On-Road Engine Particulate
Standards (ARB, U.S. EPA)

1987, 1997, 2000, 2001

Diesel and Gasoline Fuel Specifcations
(ARB, U.S. EPA)

1988, 1991, 1999, 2003

Low Emission Vehicle Programs (LEV I, II, III) (ARB) 1990, 1998, 2012
Off-Road Engine Standards (ARB, U.S. EPA)

1994, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2009

Smog Check Program (ARB and Bureau
of Automotive Repair)

1984,1998, and 2013

Local Commercial Charbroiling Rules (South Coast,
San Joaquin Valley, and Ventura Air Districts)

1997, 2002, 2004

Diesel Clean-up Incentive Programs – Carl Moyer,
AB 118 Air Quality Improvement Program,
Proposition 1B (ARB, Districts)

1998, 2007

In-Use Fleet Rules (Drayage and Truck/Bus) (ARB)

2000, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009

Ship Engine and Fuels Standards
(ARB and U.S. EPA)

1999, 2002, 2007, 2008, 2010

Federal Diesel Emission Reduction Act (DERA)
Incentive Programs (U.S. EPA)

2008

Federal Environmental Quality Incentives Program
(EQIP) (U.S. Department of Agriculture)

2008

California is committed to continuing to reduce emissions of black carbon, to meet ongoing
air quality and climate targets. Regulations requiring diesel particulate retrofts and legacy feet
turnover are critical for obtaining necessary reductions. However, advanced technologies in the
freight system, including zero- or near-zero emission vehicles and fuels, will also be needed to
meet future air quality and climate goals.

2.

Methane

Methane (CH4) is the principal component of natural gas and is also produced biologically
under anaerobic conditions in ruminants, landflls, and waste handling. Atmospheric methane
concentrations have been increasing as a result of human activities related to agriculture, fossil
fuel extraction and distribution, and waste generation and processing. The radiative effciency of
CH4 per unit concentration is relatively large in comparison to CO2, and coupled to the signifcant
increase in its concentration, methane is the second most important anthropogenic GHG in
the atmosphere. Anthropogenic warming will likely lead to enhanced CH4 emissions from both
terrestrial and oceanic clathrates, but it is unclear if this will signifcantly increase atmospheric
CH4 abundances.
Methane contributes to background tropospheric ozone levels. Photo-oxidation of both methane
and carbon monoxide lead to net production of global ozone. With multi-decadal full-chemistry
transient simulations in the MOZART-2 global model of tropospheric chemistry model, Fiore et
al36 show that tropospheric ozone responds approximately linearly to changes in CH4 emissions.
Controlling methane emissions may be a promising means of simultaneously mitigating climate

36

Fiore, A.M., J.J. West, L.W. Horowitz, V. Naik, and M.D. Schwarzkopf (2008), Characterizing the Tropospheric Ozone
Response to Methane Emission Controls and the Benefts to Climate and Air Quality , J. Geophys. Res. , 113,
D08307, doi:10.1029/2007JD009162.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

19



change and reducing global ozone concentrations.37, 38Tropospheric ozone can also act as a direct
GHG and as an indirect controller of GHG lifetimes. Concentrations of ozone have risen by around
30 percent since the pre-industrial era and it is now considered by the IPCC to be the third most
important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide.39
As noted in Table 1, the current methane GWP for a time horizon of 20 years is 84 (from the IPCC
2013 Fifth Assessment Report), which, combined with its large emissions, makes it an attractive
target for near-term climate mitigation policies. Although the methane GWP traditionally includes
the methane indirect effects on the concentrations of ozone and stratospheric water vapor, it does
not take into account the production of carbon dioxide from methane oxidation. Recent studies
argue that this CO2-induced effect should be included for fossil sources of methane, which adds
about three to the GWP values for all time horizons. Boucher et al. recommend somewhat larger
values for the methane GWP than suggested by the IPCC 2007 Fourth Assessment report (AR4).40
When the methane comes from fossil sources, the 100-year GWP would be about 30. Holmes
et al. also provide a new estimate of the indirect components of methane climate forcing.41
Tropospheric ozone contributes 30–50 percent of the direct methane climate forcing, compared
to 25 percent that has been used in previous IPCC assessments. Hence, accounting for the
indirect effect of methane emissions could have an even larger relative impact. In the IPCC AR5
report, when feedbacks are included, the GWP for methane was increased, from 25 to 28 over
a 100-year timespan, and from 72 to 84 over a 20-year timespan.
The State’s largest anthropogenic methane-producing sources are enteric fermentation (belching
by animals), manure management, landflls, natural gas transmission, and wastewater treatment
(Figure 3). Methane emissions also come from non-anthropogenic sources such as wetlands,
oceans, forests, fres, terrestrial arthropods (such as termites), and geological sources (such as
submarine gas seepage, micro seepage over dry lands, and geothermal seeps). Methane gas
from production and distribution is a growing source of emissions in many countries, including
the United States, due to increased exploration and use of natural gas for energy.
Methane is generated in landflls during the natural process of bacterial decomposition of organic
material. Many factors infuence the quantity and composition of the gas generated, including
the types and age of waste buried in the landfll, the quantity and types of organic compounds in
the waste, and the moisture content and temperature of the waste. California has adopted several
measures focused on controlling methane emissions from landflls and other sources (Table
3). Local air districts have adopted rules to implement the federal New Source Performance
Standards and National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for municipal solid
waste (MSW) landflls, which also require installation of gas collection and control systems.
These district rules target reductions in ozone precursors and hazardous air pollutants, but also
provide supplemental methane reductions. In 2009, ARB adopted a regulation to reduce methane
from MSW landflls. The regulation requires owners and operators of certain uncontrolled MSW
landflls to install gas collection and control systems, and requires existing and newly installed
gas and control systems to operate in an optimal manner. Complementary to the control of
methane emissions from landflls themselves, the Mandatory Commercial Recycling Regulation
37

38

39

40
41

20

Anenberg S, Schwartz J, Shindell D, Amann M, Faluvegi G, Klimont Z, Janssens-Maenhout G, Pozzoli L, Van
Dingenen R, Vignati E, et al. Global Air Quality and Health Co-benefts of Mitigating Near-Term Climate Change
through Methane and Black Carbon Emission Controls. ENVIRON HEALTH PERSP. 2012;120 (6):831-839.
Shiri Avnery, Denise L. Mauzerall, Arlene M. Fiore. Increasing global agricultural production by reducing ozone
damages via methane emission controls and ozone-resistant cultivar selection Glob Change Biol, Vol. 19, No. 4.
(1 April 2013), pp. 1285-1299, doi:10.1111/gcb.12118.
Kirtman, B., S. B. Power, J. A. Adedoyin, G. J. Boer, R. Bojariu, I. Camilloni, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, A. M. Fiore, M.
Kimoto, G. A. Meehl, M. Prather, A. Sarr, C. Schär, R. Sutton, G. J. van Oldenborgh, G. Vecchi, H. J. Wang. 2013.
Chapter 11: Near-term Climate Change: Projections and Predictability. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of WGI to the 5th AR of the IPCC [Stocker, T. F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K.]
Holmes, C. D., M. J. Prather, O. A. Sovde, and G. Myhre. 2013. “Future methane, hydroxyl, and their uncertainties:
Key climate and emission parameters for future predictions.” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13: 285–302.
Boucher, O., P. Friedlingstein, B. Collins, and K. P. Shine. 2009. “The indirect global warming potential and global
temperature change potential due to methane oxidation.” Environmental Research Letters, 4, 044007.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



(AB 341; Chesbro, Chapter 476, Statutes of 2011) was adopted in 2012 to further reduce landfll
methane emissions via upstream organic material diversion from landfll disposal. ARB and
CalRecycle continue to assess new information on landfll methane emissions to determine
whether additional actions in support of GHG emissions and the 75 percent goal are warranted.
Methane is also emitted from oil production and the natural gas industry. Natural gas
transmission involves high-pressure, large-diameter pipelines that transport gas long distances
from feld production areas to distribution systems for ultimate customer use. Methane is emitted
from venting and leaks of processing equipment and pipelines.
California Methane Emission Sources (2012)

.

. . . .ltll

Figure 3:

0.03
0.11
0.41
0.69

Agricultural Residue Burning
Electricity Generation
Composting
General Fuel Combustion

1.20

Rice Cultivation

1.68

Wastewater

3.66

Leakage/Evap/Venting

7.97

Landÿll Waste Disposal

10.61

Manure Management

11.78

Enteric Fermentation

2012

MMTCO2e

Methane is 8.3%
of total emissions

ARB’s Cap-and-Trade Program includes an offset protocol to reduce methane from dairies.
The Compliance Offset Protocol Livestock Projects provides methods to quantify and report
GHG emission reductions associated with the installation of a biogas control system for manure
management on dairy cattle and swine farms. The protocol is designed to ensure complete,
consistent, transparent, accurate, and conservative quantifcation of GHG emission reductions
associated with a livestock digester project for generating ARB offset credits.
In addition, ARB’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard incentivizes the capture and use of natural gas
from landflls and digesters for transportation fuel.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

21



Table 3:

Programs Resulting in Methane Emission Reductions
Program Area

Adoption Dates

Control of landfll emissions (local air districts)

Varies

Standards of Performance for Municipal Solid Waste
Landflls (U.S. EPA)

1996

Landfll Methane Control Measure (ARB)

2009

Methane inclusion in Low Carbon Fuel Standard (ARB)

2009

Dairy digester protocol for offsets in Cap-and-Trade Program (ARB)

2011

Landfll waste diversion, Assembly Bill 341 (CalRecycle)

2011

Proposed oil and gas production, processing,
and storage regulation (ARB)

In progress, expected 2014

Several recent analyses of atmospheric measurements suggest that actual methane emissions
may be 1.3 to 1.7 times higher than estimated in ARB’s emission inventory.42, 43 Recent research
suggests that methane emissions from a broad variety of sources could be higher than previously
expected, including leaks in natural gas distribution systems, oil and gas extraction facilities,
and natural seeps such as the La Brea Tar Pits. Underestimations may explain the discrepancies
between the inventory and atmospheric measurements. With the greater GWP assessed in recent
IPCC and other studies, reductions in methane emissions will have greater benefts.
ARB is continuing to research potential sources of methane emissions to determine the source
of higher-than-expected ambient methane measurements, and whether additional controls are
technologically feasible and cost-effective.
42
43

Y.-K. Hsu, T. VanCuren, S. Park, C. Jakober, J. Herner, M. FitzGibbon, D. R. Blake, and D. D. Parrish. 2010.
“Methane emissions inventory verifcation in southern California.” Atmospheric Environment 44: 1 7.
S. M. Miller, S. C. Wofsy, A. M. Michalak, E. A. Kort, A. E. Andrews, et al. 2013. Anthropogenic
emissions of methane in the United States. PNAS doi/10.1073/pnas.1314392110.

SUCCESS STORY
Only 24 ounces of the most commonly used automobile air
conditioning refrigerant captures as much heat in the atmosphere as
a ton of carbon dioxide. Thanks to California’s regulations, automakers
are now beginning to use a refrigerant for vehicle air-conditioning
system that is 350 times less damaging to the climate. The 2004
Pavley regulations—the frst standards designed to reduce GHGs
from vehicles—created credits for less climate-damaging coolants.
The European Union later followed suit. As a result, Du Pont developed
“HFO-1234yf,” a refrigerant with a global warming potential only
four times that of carbon dioxide. The new refrigerant is now being
introduced by General Motors and Chrysler, including models such
as the 2014 Dodge Dart, Dodge Charger, Chrysler 300 and Ram 1500.
22

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



3.

Hydrofuorocarbons

Hydrofuorocarbons are synthetic gases used in refrigeration, air conditioning, insulating foams,
solvents, aerosol products, and fre protection. They are primarily produced for use as substitutes
for ozone-depleting substances which are being phased out under the Montreal Protocol.
Currently, HFCs are a small fraction of the total climate forcing (<1 percent), but their emissions
are growing relatively more rapidly than those of CO2. Recent scientifc studies project substantial
growth in the use of HFCs in the coming decades, primarily driven by the increased demand for
refrigeration and air conditioning in developing countries. Recently, the United States, China,
and 24 other countries agreed to work to phase out the use of HFCs.
ARB has implemented several measures to reduce HFC emissions (Table 4). These include
low-GWP requirements for aerosol propellants, a deposit-return recycling program for small cans
of motor vehicle air-conditioning (AC) refrigerant, and the Refrigerant Management Program. In
addition, beginning with 2017 model year vehicles, the national Clean Cars Initiative is expected
to signifcantly reduce motor vehicle air-conditioning refrigerant emissions.
Table 4:

Programs Resulting in HFC Emission Reductions
Program Area

Adoption Dates

Semiconductor regulation (ARB)

2007

Refrigerant Management Program (ARB)

2009

High global warming potential gas ban for non-essential
consumer products (ARB)

2009

Regulation for small containers of automotive refrigerant (ARB)

2009

Ozone depleting substance protocol for offsets under the Cap-and-Trade Program (ARB)

2011

Advanced Clean Car credit for mobile air-conditioning systems (ARB)

2012

D. Greenhouse Gas Monitoring Efforts
Monitoring and measurement efforts are a crucial component of the regulatory process, because
they provide objective measures to identify the need for regulatory action and to verify the
performance of implemented regulations.
Since the adoption of the original Scoping Plan, ARB has spearheaded and participated in various
measurement-based research studies to verify statewide GHG emission inventory, identify and
understand unknown GHG emission sources and under-inventoried sectors, identify possible
measures for emission mitigation, and evaluate program effectiveness through monitoring
long-term trends. The most signifcant part of these efforts is the Greenhouse Gas Research
Monitoring Network that was initiated by ARB in 2010. Network participants evaluate the regional
and statewide inventories to support the AB 32 program and study the regional GHG emissions
trends throughout the state and provide data at a regional level to monitor AB 32-related
reductions and effectiveness. The network currently has seven ARB-operated monitoring
stations, and four additional stations are operated by leading researchers throughout the state.
The network captures real-time GHG data throughout the state in high temporal and spatial
resolution and uses high-precision analyzers to study CH4, N2O, and CO2 emissions.
Data from this network have been used for monitoring and verifcation, and for inverse receptororiented modeling to estimate natural and anthropogenic sources and sinks of GHGs. These types
of highly accurate and consistent measurements have been immensely valuable to evaluate and
improve ARB’s GHG emission inventory. For example, the results suggested that the current
CH4 inventory may be underestimated by a factor of 1.3 to 1.7, and the current N2O inventory
may be underestimated by a factor of up to 2.7. A range of research studies in the state have
also identifed potential sources of under-estimation in the inventory. Those studies suggest that

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science

23



livestock and landflls may be the largest sources of underestimated GHG emissions in California’s
Central Valley; whereas, the fossil fuel sector, primarily from natural gas transmission and
distribution systems, may be responsible for a larger fraction of CH4 emissions in the South Coast.
ARB is also actively participating in the Megacities Carbon Project44, which plans to develop
and test methods for monitoring GHG emissions from megacities, with the ultimate aim of
establishing a global urban monitoring framework. The Megacities project relies on sustained
monitoring of the various GHGs and applies scientifcally robust analyses for linking monitored
concentrations to emission activity. The goal is to provide decision makers with critical
information for assessing the ultimate effcacy of emission mitigation policies, and to review
the progress in reducing carbon emissions from cities. The Megacities team has partnered with
ARB to use the GHG Research Monitoring Network data in the South Coast Air Basin. ARB is also
helping the Megacities team coordinate project planning, identify potential sites for adding their
monitoring locations, and analyze concentration trends.
ARB has also expanded its Mobile Measurement Platform program to monitor and measure
GHGs from various under-reported and un-inventoried sources to improve the existing emissions
inventories. These efforts include quantifying GHG emission fuxes from various sources in
the feld, developing and comparing emission factors against the inventory data, and providing
emissions data for ARB inventory groups for regulatory and mitigation planning. In the recent
past, this program has been successful in verifying GHG emission rates of complex sources such
as natural gas compression stations and landflls. ARB is also expanding the program to include
fux chambers and controlled tracer release studies to study large area sources such as landflls,
wastewater treatment plants, oil and gas extraction felds, natural gas leakage from pipelines,
and other fugitive emission sources. These wide-ranging collaborations and the integration of
various methods will continue to provide a comprehensive approach to evaluate and validate the
California GHG inventory and identify possible measures for emission mitigation in the future.

E. Adjusting the 2020 Statewide Limit
The Scoping Plan relied on the IPCC’s 1996 Second Assessment Report (SAR) to assign the global
warming potentials (GWPs) of greenhouse gases. Recently, in accordance with the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), international climate agencies have agreed
to begin using the scientifcally updated GWP values in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report
(AR4)45 that was released in 2007. ARB is beginning to transition to the use of the AR4 100-year
GWPs in its climate change programs. ARB has recalculated the 1990 GHG emissions level
with the AR4 GWPs to be 431 MMTCO2e, therefore the 2020 GHG emissions limit established in
response to AB 32 is now slightly higher than the 427 MMTCO2e in the initial Scoping Plan. More
information is provided in Chapter IV, Section B(3). The IPCC AR5 was just completed (September
2013), and the scientifc updates have again altered the GWPs, as discussed above. Use of AR5
GWPs will be considered in subsequent reports.

44
45

More information on the Megacities Carbon Project is available at: http://megacities.jpl.nasa.gov/portal.
IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4), Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report;

GWP values and lifetimes from 2007 IPCC AR4

Lifetime (years)

GWP time horizon
20 years

100 years

500 years

Methane

12

72

25

7.6

Nitrous oxide

114

289

298

153

HFC-23 (hydrofuorocarbon)

270

12,000

14,800

12,200

HFC-134a (hydrofuorocarbon)

14

3,830

1,430

435

Sulfur hexafuoride

3200

16,300

22,800

32,600

www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm

24

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter II: Latest Understanding of Climate Science



III. California’s Approach
to Climate Change
California’s commitment to addressing climate change is born of necessity.
As described in Chapter II, our State, economy, and rural and urban
communities are especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
Many studies have shown that the costs of inaction or delayed action to reduce
GHG emissions far outweigh the costs—and come with none of the benefts—
associated with reducing emissions today by deploying clean technologies,
diversifying energy supplies, and strengthening and preserving natural lands.
But our commitment is not just a defensive one focused on minimizing the
costs or inevitable impacts of climate change within our State.
California is taking a proactive approach to climate change policy, through integrated policy
and planning that will build a higher-quality, resilient economy while continually reducing
GHG emissions. The State is continuing its legacy of creating a future where a strong economy,
environmental protection, improved public health, and a higher quality of life increasingly
reinforce one another. After decades of progress, the realization of a clean energy economy
is the enviable future that we must create if we are to adequately address climate change.
California has asserted, and reasserted, its commitment to responsible climate policy and
planning through the passage and implementation of AB 32, the overwhelming rejection
of Proposition 23 in 2010, and through numerous other state and local policies, corporate
commitments, and individual actions to reduce emissions.
Climate change is a continuous, global phenomenon, defned by cumulative emissions, rather
than emissions at a given point in time. Policies and measures put in place and implemented
today – and the continued implementation of already adopted measures – will affect emissions
levels after 2020; additional planning is needed now to begin designing policies to continue
reducing GHG emissions in order to achieve our long-term climate goals. With climate change
already upon us and scientifc consensus-based targets only suffcient to avert its very worst
impacts, a continuum of action is needed to achieve the maximum technologically feasible
and cost-effective emission reductions available at any given time—and to work toward nearzero emissions as soon as possible. Each incremental, cost-effective emission reduction puts
California closer to its essential, sustainable future—where economic growth is unencumbered
by environmental, resource, or health constraints.
California is not alone in its commitment to reduce emissions. Many other states— including
Oregon, Washington, the northeast states in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, and others—
are taking concrete steps to reduce GHG emissions. The United States is on track to meet the
goals of the Obama Administration to reduce emissions to 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020,
and numerous other national and subnational governments in Canada, Mexico, China, Australia,
Europe, and elsewhere are pricing carbon emissions, establishing markets for clean energy
technologies, and taking other steps to reduce GHG emissions.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

25



But California is alone in its depth of vision, scope of planning, and degree of leadership in
demonstrating effective climate policies to decouple GHG emissions from economic growth
and ensuring the State reduces emissions at a rate consistent with scientifcally based targets
on an ongoing basis. California’s approach is one frmly grounded in science and public process,
built from coordinated, integrated planning and cost-effective policy design, and accomplished
through consistent, fair policy implementation. Continuing to build on this successful framework
will foster broader action and continued progress on a global scale to address climate change—
and deliver even greater benefts to California’s economy, environment, and quality of life.

A. Preserve the California Lifestyle
California is a collection of farmers, surfers, factory workers, outdoor enthusiasts, tech geeks,
truckers, world-class researchers, celebrity actors, and many more—who come from all around
the world to live and work in one of the most beautiful, vibrant, and ecologically and culturally
diverse places on Earth. We are sustained, in more ways than one, by the mountains, deserts,
rivers, streams, forests, farmlands, rangelands, coastline, and temperate climate that form our
natural environment and characterize our great State.
These resources, and their natural beauty, enable our continued economic and cultural growth.
They attract a wide array of businesses and workers who want to live here. They are a primary
reason that California is: the eighth largest economy in the world; home to the most small
businesses, Fortune 500 companies, and fastest-growing businesses in the United States; the
national leader in global trade and direct investment; and tops in the United States in many
economic sectors, including agriculture, biotech, clean energy, entertainment, high-tech,
manufacturing, tourism, and more.
Accordingly, Californians of all backgrounds and political persuasions have supported policies
and planning to protect our natural environment and the high quality of life it provides. The result
is a decades-long, broad commitment to ensuring clean air and water, an effcient and productive
use of energy and resources, a healthy workforce, and vital cities and towns. Our collective will to
protect the environment is a valuable resource in itself, whose benefts enhance economic growth
and prosperity in our state and help shape California’s distinct identity.

SUCCESS STORY
The City of Benicia

THE

CITY

OF

B~ti\~JA
26

How can Government work to reduce GHG emissions in a manner that does not
burden business with onerous regulations? The City of Benicia has found a solution.
Benicia has budgeted $625,000 to incentivize businesses to make resource and
management improvements to reduce energy, water, solid waste, recycling, and
fuel costs. The program furnishes businesses a comprehensive energy assessment,
and if the energy savings are great enough, can provide grants and loans to help
with recommended improvements. As of November 2013 the program has assisted
ten businesses for annual cumulative annual savings of nearly $140,000 while
reducing annual GHG emissions by 135 metric tons.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change



With climate change threatening our resources, economy, and quality of life, California is
squarely focused on addressing it and protecting our natural and built environments. Just
as California has done dozens of times before on other environmental issues, it is leading on
climate change, with an approach that will enable better, lasting economic growth and allow
the California lifestyle to endure.

B. Foster Resilient Economic Growth
We are addressing climate change head on because we must, but the necessity of action should
not imply lost opportunity or economic compromise. The supposition that the status quo,
characterized by relatively ineffcient use of fnite fossil resources, represents a preferred or
lower-cost energy system is a false one. The imperative of climate change and an unwavering
commitment to meet the challenge through innovation will drive technology development and
advance social progress. They provide clear signals that encourage businesses to grow and invest
in ways that do not come at the expense of future generations, but instead, provide even more
opportunity for growth in the future. Investments that allow us to do more with less and unlock
the availability of clean, renewable energy only push out the boundary of our future potential.
The transition to a clean energy future presents us with a tremendous opportunity to continue
economic growth. In particular, since the adoption of AB 32, California’s clean energy companies
have grown faster and shown greater resilience than the State’s overall economy.46 We
have emerged as the national dominant player in both clean energy jobs and clean energy
investment.47, 48, 49 These jobs offer better-than-average wages and provide needed employment
opportunities in the construction and manufacturing sectors.50, 51, 52 California’s policy approach to
climate change is supporting continued growth in these sectors, and the good, high-paying jobs
that it brings.
Through AB 32 and related policies, California has implemented a suite of policies that is reducing
emissions by both reducing energy demand and cleaning up energy supply. Taken together,
our effciency and clean energy policies are reducing not only GHG emissions, but also energy
costs for consumers. For example, while the State moves toward 33 percent renewable energy
in its electricity supply mix, it continues to outpace the rest of the country on energy effciency.
The State’s building and appliance energy effciency standards have saved Californians $74
billion in energy costs since 1977. California has the fourth lowest per-capita energy-related GHG
emissions in the country and produces twice as much economic value for every unit of electricity
used. California households also pay the ninth lowest electricity bills in the country (see Figure 4).

46
47
48
49
50
51
52

Next 10, 2013. 2013 California Green Innovation Index, Figure 35, Employment Growth Relative to 2001,
pp. 42, 51, 55. Available at http://next10.org/2013innovation and www.greeninnovationindex.org
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013. “Employment in Green Goods and Services – 2011,”
USDL-13-0476. Available at www.bls.gov/ggs
Thomson-Reuters, 2012. “National Venture Capital Association Yearbook.”
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, “National Venture Capital Association MoneyTree Report.”
Brookings-Battelle, 2010. “Sizing the Clean Economy: A National and Regional Green Jobs Assessment.”
Next 10, 2013. 2013 California Green Innovation Index, Figure 40, p. 46. Green Establishments Database,
Data analysis: Collaborative Economics.
Collaborative Economics, 2012. “Seven Growth Sectors Driving California’s Clean and Effcient Economy,”
May 2012. Available at www.edf.org/sites/default/fles/EDFSevenSectors-5.24.2012pdf.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

27



Average Household Expenditures on Electricity and Associated
GHG Emissions in the United States and California53
Household electricity costs 2012

Household electricity emissions 2012

$1,600

7
$1,322

6

6.5

$1,200

5

$1,004

4

$800

3
2.2

$400

2
1

$0

Metric ton CO2 per HH

Figure 4:

0
U.S.

CA

U.S.

CA

Sources: U.S. Energy Information Administration [EIA] and ARB

The same holds true for the transportation sector. The results of California’s collection of clean
vehicles and fuels policies are dramatic reductions in GHG and criteria air pollution, technology
innovation, and declining transportation costs. The combination of California’s vehicle GHG and
Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) standards and policies adopted under AB 32—including the Low
Carbon Fuel Standard, SB 375, and Cap-and-Trade—will reduce per-capita fuel costs and GHG
emissions from light-duty vehicles and fuel use by about 30 percent from current levels in 2020,
and by about 50 percent in 2035 (see Figure 5). Additional measures to reduce emissions could
further reduce fuel costs, as well.
Figure 5:

(a) Per-Capita Fuel Costs and (b) Passenger Transportation GHG Emissions
in California as a Result of the Existing Suite of California Climate Policies
A: Per-capita fuel costs (existing policies)

B: Passenger transportation GHG emissions

$2,000

200
156
150

$1,437
$1,012

$1,000

114

$919

$812

100

$784

86

78

$500

50

$0

0

2012

53

28

100

2020

2025

2030

2035

2012

2020

2025

2030

2035

California GHG emissions include imported electricity.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

Million metric tons CO2

$1,500



This is not to say that there are no
costs associated with transitioning to
clean technologies. Any technology or
infrastructure change comes with initial
costs. And pricing GHG emissions,
as California’s Cap-and-Trade Program
does, inherently adds a cost at sources of pollution.
But many of the technologies needed to meet our
current policies are already cost-competitive today,
and prices continue to decline. In some parts of
the country, new renewable power generation
is competitive with new fossil generation, and
in some cases, even competitive with existing
fossil generation. For millions of households and
businesses in California, adding rooftop solar is
already reducing their energy costs. With attractive
lease prices, electric vehicles are among the most
affordable new cars on the market for consumers
today. Multiple studies confrm that plug-in cars are
already more affordable than conventional vehicles
on a total cost of ownership basis.54 And the cleaner
alternatives to gasoline and diesel that are available
on the market today either cost about the same as
petroleum fuels (in the case of biodiesel, ethanol,
and renewable gasoline and diesel), or cost far less
than the petroleum fuels they replace (in the case of
natural gas, renewable natural gas, or electricity).
As costs of these technologies continue to decline
and additional energy effciencies are achieved,
energy costs for consumers will continue to fall,
along with GHG emissions.
Avoided energy costs are pumped back into the
economy elsewhere, boosting growth further.
Many more opportunities exist to capture additional
effciencies and productivity gains that will create
new businesses and industries, save consumers
money, and make many existing businesses and
industries in California more competitive. Multiple
studies show that businesses in the U.S. could
collectively cut GHG emissions by more than one
gigatonne (Gt) annually by 2020, representing more
than 20 percent of current energy-related emissions,
and generate several hundreds of billions of dollars
in net savings.55, 56 The National Academies found
54

55

56

For example, see: EPRI. 2013. Total Cost of Ownership
Model for Current Plug-In Electric Vehicles.
Electric Power Research Institute.
WWF and CDP. 2013. The 3% Solution. World Wildlife
Fund and the Carbon Disclosure Project.
http://worldwildlife.org/projects/the-3-solution.
McKinsey & Company. 2009. Unlocking Energy Effciency
in the U.S. Economy. McKinsey & Company.
www.mckinsey.com/client_service/electric_power_and_

SUCCESS STORY

Anheuser-Busch InBev
Anheuser-Busch’s
Fairfeld,
California
facility is covered by the Cap-and-Trade
Program. Cap-and-Trade is designed to
encourage energy effciency and clean
energy development. Anheuser-Busch is
the world’s largest operator of Bio-Energy
Recovery Systems that turn the nutrients
in wastewater from the brewing process
into renewable biogas. The use of biogas
at the Fairfeld brewery accounts for 15
percent of on-site fuel needs. In addition,
the Fairfeld brewery has installed a large
(1.5 MW) wind turbine on site and estimates
about 11 percent of the plant’s electricity
is wind power. A planned second turbine
will approximately double that supply. The
turbines join a system which includes a 1.3
MW solar array. The company estimates the
plant will get about 25 percent of its power
from renewable sources with completion of
the entire project. Over the next 20 years the
shift will reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by six million tons and save $2.5 million.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

29



that U.S. manufacturing could reduce industrial energy usage by as much as 22 percent in 2020,
using only technologies that yield at least a ten percent internal rate of return or a return that is
greater than the company’s cost of capital plus a risk premium.57 And the Alliance Commission
on National Energy Effciency Policy has found that trillions of dollars of cost-effective energy
effciency potential is available in the United States, and that capturing it could double energy
productivity by 2030, save households over $1,000 annually, add over one million jobs, and cut
CO2 emissions by one-third.58
Reducing GHG emissions is good business because it not only saves on energy costs, but also
cuts maintenance costs, improves productivity and safety, and provides value as a hedge against
future fuctuating energy prices.59 It builds competitive, resilient businesses that are less exposed
to risk from volatile energy prices and are better situated to provide lasting economic value and
growth. And it diversifes energy supplies and reduces the costs that oil dependence imposes on
our economy—up to half a trillion dollars per year across the United States in lost productivity
and wealth transfer, alone.60
The Obama Administration has set a goal to double energy productivity in the United States by
2030. California is well on its way to achieve this goal as one of the most energy productive states
in the country. Our commitment and approach to address climate change will continue to make
our economy more effcient and productive; it will keep us ahead, while reducing emissions.

C. Strengthen the Natural Environment
In California and elsewhere, climate policy has primarily focused on reducing the energyrelated GHG emissions from the built environment that account for over 85 percent of the
GHG emissions in California and the United States. This includes all the buildings, cars, trucks,
tractors, machines, and industrial operations that make our economy go. Accordingly, since AB
32 was passed, California has begun to build an effective framework for reducing energy-related
emissions on an ongoing basis.
California has a number of policies and incentives in place to reduce emissions from agriculture,
water management, and natural and working lands, as well. But additional research and policy
development is needed to adequately and fairly incorporate the natural environment into an
effective, lasting climate policy framework. California is committed to strengthening the role
of the natural environment in climate policy. Continued work among agencies, researchers,
stakeholders, and others is needed to further incorporate agriculture, natural, and working
lands into the State’s policy framework.
Moving forward, as energy-related emissions continue to decline in California and the developed
world, the role of the natural environment in managing GHG emissions will only increase.
Still, whatever its fraction of total GHG emissions, the importance of incorporating the natural
environment into climate policy and planning outstrips its contribution to the State’s GHG
inventory. In addition to preserving California’s lifestyle and economy, natural capital provided
by our environment is crucial for providing safe and reliable water supplies, clean air, ecological
habitat, and protection against climate change impacts. Strong and healthy coastlines, forests,
waterways, marshlands, agricultural lands, and rangelands are crucial not only to support our
agricultural and tourism-based economies, but also to reinforce and buffer our State from the
57
58
59
60

30

natural_gas/latest_thinking/unlocking_energy_effciency_in_the_us_economy.
NAS. 2009. America’s Energy Future: Technology and Transformation. National Academies Press.
www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12091.
ASE. 2013. Energy 2030. Alliance to Save Energy. www.ase.org/policy/energy2030.
PwC. 2013. Less and be more: better for the bottom line and the environment. 10Minutes series on eco-effciency.
www.pwc.com/en_US/us/10minutes/assets/pwc-10minutes-eco-effciency.pdf.
Greene. 2013. “Low Carbon Transportation: A Crucial Link to Economic and National Security.”
www.arb.ca.gov/research/lectures/speakers/greene/greene.htm.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change



increasing impacts of climate change, including drought, food, and forest fres. Strengthening
our natural environment makes it, and consequently our economy, more resilient to the impacts
of climate change and protects our built environment.
Adequately accounting for the natural environment in our climate framework requires an
integrated approach that values natural resources, not just as emission sources or sinks, but
also for the other values they provide. It requires coordinating plans to reduce emission impacts
from the natural environment with plans to strengthen it and prepare for climate change impacts.
This is the approach California will take as we continue to build our climate policy framework.
The approach will not only contribute emission reductions and build emission sinks necessary
to manage climate change, but also strengthen the natural environment that drives our economy
and supports our quality of life.

D. Improve Public Health and Social
and Environmental Justice
The impact of climate change and California’s policy approach to address it reaches beyond
environmental protection and economic opportunity. If done appropriately, addressing climate
change provides tremendous opportunity to improve the health and well-being of all of
California’s citizens and to help unravel many of the patterns of environmental, health, and social
inequalities within our communities.
Cleaner and more effcient power plants, industrial facilities, cars and trucks, modernized freight
systems, and reduced travel demand are already greatly reducing air pollution and cancer risks
in California, particularly in environmental justice communities. Strengthening our natural
environment, including those areas surrounding the most impacted urban and rural communities,
will further improve public health.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

31



Ongoing planning to create more sustainable communities in the State is providing expanded
mobility options, including greater access to walking and biking facilities, increased access to
employment and services, and more vibrant surroundings. Energy effciency,
green buildings, and other clean energy technologies and climate policies are creating more
comfortable, safer homes and transportation options, and are saving families money. Efforts to
improve industrial, manufacturing, and agricultural effciency and productivity will strengthen
these sectors and make the communities and jobs they support more resilient to national or
global economic downturns and climate impacts. All of these aspects of California’s climate
policy approach bring economic, health, and other benefts to all of California’s communities.
Yet, innovative public policy brings unknowns. As California continues to lead on climate change
and pioneer new policy and technology strategies to avert the worst impacts of global warming,
we must continue to monitor and assess the health and environmental justice impacts of our
programs and policies, making changes when necessary to maximize benefts. Capturing
the opportunities of climate policy to improve health and quality of life in all of California’s
communities is a critical aspect of our leadership and is building a successful and lasting climate
policy framework. Delivering on those opportunities will serve to expand policy action beyond
the State’s borders.

E. Rely on Science and Foundational Research
California’s environmental policy successes are built on a strong foundation in science.
Successfully addressing climate change and planning to achieve targeted emission reductions
over time similarly requires a dependence on foundational research.
Climate policy in California has been supported, and advanced, by our State’s world-class
research institutions, which have made California perhaps the most studied region in the world
when it comes to GHG emissions and climate policy. As a result, we have a strong sense of the
mix of technologies needed to reduce emissions through 2050, especially in the energy sector,
and a valuable research apparatus to support ongoing policy planning and implementation.
A number of studies look to 2050 in California and provide a snapshot of the mix of technologies
necessary to reduce energy-related emissions in California to 80 percent below 1990 levels by
2050.61 They share many common conclusions, including the overarching conclusion that the 2050
emissions target is achievable, mostly with technologies that are commercially available today.
Together, they show that achieving the 2050 target will require energy demand reduction through
effciency and activity changes; large-scale electrifcation of on-road vehicles, buildings, and
industrial machinery; decarbonizing electricity and fuel supplies; and rapid market penetration
of effciency and clean energy technologies that requires signifcant efforts to deploy and scale
markets for the cleanest technologies immediately. The studies agree that large effciency
61

32

For example, see: Greenblatt, J., et al. 2011. California’s Energy Future, The view to 2050: Summary report.
California Council on Science and Technology (CCST). www.ccst.us/publications/2011/2011energy.pdf.
Williams, J. H., et al. 2011. “The Technology Path to Deep Greenhouse Gas Emissions cuts by 2050: The pivotal
role of electricity.” Science Express 335 (6064): 53–59. [E3] www.sciencemag.org/content/335/6064/53.
Wei, M., et al. 2013. “Deep carbon reductions in California require electrifcation and integration across economic
sectors.” Environmental Research Letters 7: 1–9. http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/1/014038/.
[LBNL-1] Wei, M., et al. 2012. “California’s Carbon Challenge (CCC): Scenarios for Achieving 80% Emissions
Reduction in 2050.” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. October 31. http://rael.berkeley.edu/sites/default/fles/
California%20Carbon%20Challenge%20Report%20Nov%201_2012.pdf. [LBNL-2]
Jacobson, M. Z., et al. 2013. Evaluating the technical and economic feasibility of repowering California for all
purposes with wind, water and sunlight. www.stanford.edu/group/efmh/jacobson/Articles/I/CaliforniaWWS.pdf. [Stanford]
McCollum, D., et al. 2012. “Deep greenhouse gas reduction scenarios for California – Strategic implications from
the CA-TIMES energy-economic systems model.” Energy Strategy Reviews 1(1):19–32.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211467X11000083. [UCD-1]
Yang, et al. 2009. “Meeting an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from transportation by 2050:
A case study in California.” Transportation Research Part D 14.
www.internationaltransportforum.org/pub/pdf/10FP03.pdf. [UCD-2]

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change



improvements can be achieved in transportation, buildings, and industry; that the electricity
sector will have to be essentially zero carbon; and that electricity or hydrogen will have to power
much of the transportation sector, including almost all passenger vehicles, and that near-zero
carbon biofuels will have to power most other vehicles. They recognize a need for the natural
environment to play an important role, providing carbon sinks to offset emissions, and a need
to integrate and coordinate policy across a number of objectives and planning processes.
The studies vary in several important assumptions, however, which offer opportunities to pursue
additional emission reductions or select alternative policy and technology paths forward—
depending on population and economic growth in the State, technology and market development,
and changing activity and behavior patterns. California will need to monitor the market and
technology progress alongside emissions, and continue to rely on strong supporting research as
it builds on its climate policy framework. One thing is clear; many prominent California scientists
and economists support a mid-term target to meet California’s long term climate goals.62

F.

Charting a Path to 2050

Achieving the low-carbon future described in these studies will require that the pace of GHG
emission reductions in California accelerate signifcantly. Emissions from 2020 to 2050 will have
to decline several times faster than the rate needed to reach the 2020 emissions limit (Figure 6).
Figure 6:

Framing the Path to 2050
Pre-2020 and Post-2020 emissions trajectories

500
California annual GHG emissions (MMT CO2e)

-4.7 MMT CO2e per year
-1.0% per year
400

-11.4 MMT CO2e per year
300
-5.2% per year

200

100
Constant percentage reduction
Constant MMT reduction
0
2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Ultimately, climate change is affected by cumulative emissions. As described in Chapter II,
the world must keep within scientifcally determined “carbon budgets” to achieve climate
stabilization. Accordingly, different paths to the same 2050 emissions levels will result in
different climate impacts. Tackling global warming requires us to reduce and minimize total
emissions, not just reach stated targets.

62

An Open Letter on Climate Change from California Climate Scientist and Economists:
www.arb.ca.gov/lists/com-attach/10-proposed-sp-ws-AHUFYFIgVCkEclQw.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change

33



Appropriate action on climate change requires a continuum of action to capture cost-effective
emission reductions opportunities wherever possible, on an ongoing basis. We need to meet
strict, science-based targets not just in 2020 and 2050, but at every point in between, as well.
California’s leadership will be defned not just by its emissions level in 2050, but also by the
pathway it takes to get there.
As described in Chapter IV, California will develop a mid-term target to frame the next suite
of emission reduction measures and ensure continued progress toward scientifcally based
targets. This target should be consistent with the level of reduction needed in the developed
world to stabilize warming at 2°C (3.6°F) and align with targets and commitments elsewhere.
The European Union has adopted an emissions reduction target of 40 percent below 1990 levels
by 2030. The United Kingdom has committed to reduce its emissions by 50 percent below 1990
levels within the 2022–2027 timeframe, and Germany has set its own 2030 emissions target of
55 percent below 1990 levels. The United States, in support of the Copenhagen Accord, pledged
emission reductions of 42 percent below 2005 levels in 2030 (which, for California, translates
to 35 percent below 1990 levels).
This level of reduction is achievable in California. In fact, if California realizes the expected
benefts of existing policy goals (such as 12,000 megawatts [MW] of renewable distributed
generation by 2020, net zero energy homes after 2020, existing building retrofts under AB 758,
and others) it could reduce emissions by 2030 to levels squarely in line with those needed in
the developed world and to stay on track to reduce emissions to 80 percent below 1990 levels
by 2050.63 Additional measures, including locally driven measures and those necessary to meet
federal air quality standards in 2032, could lead to even greater emission reductions.
Setting a strong mid-term target that aligns with scientifcally established needs is an important
next step in California’s climate policy leadership. Such a target will provide greater levels of
market certainty in the near term, while allowing fexibility to review and adjust our course based
on future technology and market conditions. Planning and effectively implementing policies to
achieve a mid-term target in a manner that advances economic growth, public and environmental
health, and quality of life in all of the State’s communities will further demonstrate California’s
successful policy approach and create an enviable framework that others will look to follow.

63

34

Greenblatt, J. 2013. Estimating Policy-Driven Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trajectories in California:
The California Greenhouse Gas Inventory Spreadsheet (GHGIS) Model. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
http://eetd.lbl.gov/publications/estimating-policy-driven-greenhouse-g

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter III: California’s Approach to Climate Change



IV. Accomplishments
and Next Steps
California must continue to build on the framework established in the initial
Scoping Plan as we look toward meeting our long-term climate goal of GHG
emissions of 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. A mid-term statewide
emission limit will ensure that the State stays on course to meet our
long-term goal and continues the success it has achieved thus far in reducing
emissions. The mid-term statewide limit will help frame the additional suite of
policy measures, planning efforts, and investments in clean technologies that
California will need to continue to drive down emissions and grow a cleaner,
more sustainable economy.
This chapter provides a discussion of GHG emission reduction mitigation strategies for
each of California’s major economic sectors. It identifes the activities, policies, and other
accomplishments, primarily over the last fve years, that address climate change to reduce GHG
emissions to meet the 2020 statewide limit. It also identifes longer-term strategies that the State
must undertake to continue to reduce GHG emissions into the future to ultimately meet our
long-term climate goal.
Each major sector highlighted in this chapter must play a role in supporting the statewide effort
to continue to reduce emissions. Planning must begin now in order to implement our longer-term
strategies. Specifc recommendations for steering the State down this path are summarized, by
sector, at the end of this chapter. As the statewide mid-term target is developed, sector targets
will also be developed that refect the opportunities for reductions that can be achieved through
existing and new measures, actions, and investments.

A. Key Economic Sectors
The initial Scoping Plan recommended specifc GHG emission reduction measures in nine major
economic sectors to better defne, organize, and determine control strategies for each. In this
Update, six key areas of the State’s economy were identifed (energy, transportation, agriculture,
water, waste management, and natural and working lands), along with short-lived climate
pollutants, green buildings, and the Cap-and-Trade Program. The subsections below describe our
progress in reducing GHG emissions and what will be required to better evaluate GHG emission
reduction actions within California’s broad economy to meet the State’s more expansive
longer-term emission reduction goals.
These key areas have overlapping and complementary interests that will require careful
coordination in the State’s future policies and strategies. The areas were chosen based on their
ability to address concerns that underlie all sectors of the economy. As such, each focus area
is not contained to a single economic sector, but has far-reaching impacts within many sectors.
For example, much of the transportation sector will need to be electrifed in the future. This
creates demand for more electrical generation, but also provides an opportunity to take
advantage of broader systems effciencies as sectors interact in new ways.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

35



Another example is the interaction between water delivery and energy use in California.
Since water delivery is very energy-intensive, implementing programs that strongly support
water conservation can reduce GHG emissions in the electricity sector by reducing the need for
electricity to move, treat, and heat water. Water conservation is also critical to making the State’s
water supply more reliable and drought resistant. Producing electricity requires large volumes
of water. Promoting a system that maximizes appropriate cooling technologies (e.g., reclaimed
water and dry cooling towers), energy effciency, and conservation can greatly reduce water
demands and make those water savings available for agriculture and other essential needs.
The way that communities and infrastructure are designed and built can signifcantly reduce
California’s impact on natural lands, minimize vehicle miles traveled, reduce water needs, and
provide many other benefts for the State as a whole.

1.

Energy

California’s energy sector includes a complex system of electricity and natural gas production,
transmission and distribution, utility service operations, and consumption by diverse end
users—including residential, commercial, and industrial activities. Energy is a common
thread that runs through all sectors of California’s economy. It’s also one of the State’s largest
contributors to GHG emissions. Presently, about 50 percent of the State’s total GHG emissions
are associated with the energy sector; therefore, efforts to reduce energy-related emissions are
a key component of the Scoping Plan. Additionally, energy-sector emission reduction efforts will
become increasingly important as more economic activities such as transportation and freight
movement are electrifed.
Reducing energy-sector emissions to near zero over the long-term will require wholesale
changes to the State’s current electricity and natural gas systems. The energy sector will
generally need to adapt to a system consisting of near-zero carbon buildings (refer to Section
8 of this chapter for more discussion of zero net carbon buildings), highly effcient businesses
and industry, low-carbon electricity generation, sustainable bioenergy systems, smarter and
localized generation, a fexible and modernized transmission and distribution system, more
compact land use, and electricity substitutes for fuels currently used for transportation, space
heating, and industrial processes.
Achieving these emission reduction goals will require that a number of important administrative,
fnancial, and technological changes are undertaken to guide energy investments and planning
toward the most appropriate combination of conservation, effciency, and clean-energy
technologies to decarbonize the State’s energy systems at the lowest cost.

Electricity and Natural Gas
California has made remarkable progress in developing and implementing new policies and
strategies to reduce GHG emissions within the State’s energy sector. California has a track record
of decades of rigorously evaluated, cost-effective energy effciency improvements across all
sectors of the economy. The initial Scoping Plan continued these priorities by advancing a host of
innovative and aggressive building, appliance, electronic, and water-effciency standards that are
certain to maintain California’s leadership in this area.
An example of California’s leadership in the energy sector is SB 1368 (Perata, Chapter 598,
Statutes of 2006), which created the nation’s frst emission performance standard for centralized
power generation. SB 1368 prevents the State’s electric utilities from making long-term
investments in high GHG-emitting baseload power plants. The U.S. EPA is following California’s
lead by proposing a GHG emission performance standard for the nation’s power plants.

36

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Consistent with the State’s loading order,64 the California Energy Commission (CEC) and California
Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) have adopted several programs and regulations since 2008
that are driving efforts to reduce electricity-sector GHG emissions. Many of these programs are
implemented at the local electric utility level. Below is a discussion of efforts being undertaken
to reduce GHG emissions from the energy sector in accordance with the State’s loading order.
Energy Effciency
A variety of appliance (including electronics) and building energy effciency programs and
initiatives represent the State’s top priority in reducing the need to develop new energy
resources to meet California’s electricity and natural gas demand. The CEC continues to provide
a leadership role in developing and adopting new appliance and building effciency standards
for the State. Building effciency standards were updated in 2013 and are now 25 percent
more effcient for residential construction and 30 percent more effcient for non-residential
construction.65 The CEC also adopted aggressive energy effciency standards for televisions in
2009, and frst-in-the-nation energy effciency standards for battery chargers in 2012.66
The CEC is currently considering additional appliance categories to cover under its appliance
energy effciency standards. Those under consideration include consumer electronics, lighting,
water appliances, and several others. Future updates to these standards and collaborative work
with the U.S. Department of Energy should focus on realizing both cost-effective energy savings
and incorporating features that can assist in grid resilience and responsiveness.
In addition to the State’s energy effciency Standards, California’s investor-owned utilities (IOUs)
regulated by the CPUC have a long history of implementing energy effciency programs that
target both residential and non-residential sectors. The State’s self-regulated publicly owned
utilities (POUs) also have energy effciency programs. The POU programs vary signifcantly
between the individual utilities, but in some cases can be more aggressive than the IOU goals.
The CPUC’s evaluation activities have focused on verifying utility savings claims and improving
savings estimates via feld-based research. Findings and recommendations from these studies
have been critical to continued improvement of energy effciency programs in the State. The
CPUC has recently opened a new rulemaking in which it has signaled its intent to provide grid
planners and effciency markets with greater certainty regarding the State’s commitment to these
programs. Similar progress and initiatives should be made in all POU territories.
Funding from the California Clean Energy Jobs Act (Proposition 39), approved by California voters
in November 2012 and subsequently refned through Senate Bill 73 (Skinner, Chapter 29, Statutes
of 2013), will provide a signifcant source of new revenue (an estimated $2.5 billion over fve
years) to support energy effciency and clean energy projects in California’s public schools
(K–12) and community colleges.
At the local government level, several communities have created property-assessed clean energy
fnancing districts (PACE programs) that allow residential and commercial property owners to
fnance renewable on-site generation and energy effciency improvements through voluntary
property tax assessments.
Governor Brown took specifc action in 2012 to improve the energy effciency of state-owned
buildings through Executive Order B-18-12, which directs State agencies to reduce their
grid-based energy purchases by at least 20 percent by 2018. This Executive Order also directs
State agencies to reduce the GHG emissions associated with the operating functions of their
64
65
66

The “loading order” is California’s preferred sequence for meeting electricity demands: energy effciency and
demand response frst; renewable resources second; and clean and effcient natural gas-fred power plants third.
Computed from California Energy Demand, 2012–2022 Final Forecast, June 2012, Form 2.2 on
Committed Energy Impacts.
CEC. 2013. California Energy Commission 2012 Accomplishments.
www.energy.ca.gov/releases/2013_releases/2012_Accomplishments.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

37



SUCCESS STORY

buildings by ten percent by 2015, and
20 percent by 2020.67 State agencies
have been able to achieve a four
percent reduction in total energy
use despite a 12 percent increase
in building space since 2003.
Fifty-fve percent of existing residential
buildings and 40 percent of non-residential
buildings were constructed before California’s
building energy effciency standards were
established. California’s legislature recognized the
opportunity and importance of upgrading existing
residential and commercial buildings and passed
Assembly Bill 758 (Skinner, Chapter 470, Statutes
of 2009), which requires the CEC to develop and
implement a comprehensive energy effciency
plan for all of California’s existing buildings.
The CEC is currently drafting an AB 758 Action
Plan to accomplish the following:
• Improve code compliance rates with
Title 24 Building Standards for existing
building upgrade projects.

Kaiser Permanente
Between 2010 and 2011, Kaiser Permanente
installed solar panels that increased its
on-site renewable generation capacity
to 11 megawatts at 12 facilities across
California, creating one of the largest health
care solar installations in the country.
The panels generate clean, renewable
energy for Kaiser Permanente hospitals
and buildings, avoiding approximately
7,600 metric tons of CO2 emissions
annually since 2012. Kaiser Permanente
also deployed four megawatts of natural
gas-powered fuel cell generation capacity,
thus avoiding approximately 5,700 metric
tons of CO2 emissions in 2012, while
reducing the organization’s reliance on the
public electric grid and helping to diversify
energy sources.

• Develop energy disclosure approaches and
programs that build on existing efforts and
expand the types of applicable buildings,
including State buildings in alignment with
Governor Brown’s Executive Order B-18-12.
• Collaborate with the real estate and
property management industries to craft
aggressive, but practical, solutions to achieve
effciency upgrades in existing buildings.
• Enhance usability of Title 24 Building
Standards as applied to additions and
alterations of existing buil dings.
Achieving the State’s zero net energy (ZNE) building
goals is an important effort under way to assist with
achieving climate targets. In 2008, the CPUC set
forth ZNE goals in its long-term Energy Effciency
Strategic Plan and implementation roadmap for the
Big Bold Energy Effciency Strategies, which was
later updated in 2011. The CPUC’s Big Bold Energy
Effciency Strategies set policy goals to achieve ZNE
in all new residential buildings by 2020, and all new
commercial buildings by 2030.
The CEC has made progress toward achieving
the State’s ZNE goals for new residential and new
commercial buildings through triennial updates to
the State’s building energy effciency standards.
67

38

Executive Order B-18-12, issued on April 25, 2012.
See http://gov.ca.gov/news.php?id=17508.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Working with the CPUC, the CEC adopted a defnition for ZNE code-compliant buildings that
was published in the 2013 Integrated Energy Policy Report. Building on this effort, ARB and
CEC should analyze68 zero and near-zero GHG alternatives for heating, cooking, and commercial
energy use and assess the potential economic and technological barriers to switching to these
alternatives. ARB is committed to building upon the recent policies and goals adopted by the
CPUC and CEC and supporting the development of statewide programs, such that all new
residential and commercial buildings are zero net energy by 2020 and 2030, respectively.
Recent effciency initiatives that overlap across agencies, such as American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA)-funded whole-house upgrades and Proposition 39 schoolsfocused activities, have revealed inconsistencies in the accounting and evaluation methods
for estimating, verifying, and valuing energy effciency savings across State agencies. These
differences may be driven by the historic policy drivers for the energy effciency activities. Since
the methods of measuring, verifying, and valuing energy effciency can impact the scope of future
effciency programs and the resulting GHG savings, efforts should be undertaken to improve the
effcacy of these efforts by emphasizing consistency, transparency, credibility, and timeliness.
Demand Response
Demand response is also at the top of California’s loading order for meeting the State’s electricity
demand. Demand response is provided primarily by utilities or third-party demand-response
providers (DRPs), also known as aggregators, through programs or contracts that are supported
by $1 billion in ratepayer funding (over three years). Demand response has traditionally been
used to reduce peak demand and there is currently approximately 2,000 MW of demand-response
capacity in IOU territories. Some programs are used to mitigate emergency situations, while
others are used to address economic conditions, such as high wholesale energy prices
The CPUC recently initiated a new rulemaking69 for demand response for the purpose of
enhancing its role in meeting the State’s resource planning needs and operational requirements.
Specifcally, the rulemaking states that demand response needs to improve its reliability
and usefulness as the State’s grid needs continue to evolve. For example, demand-response
resources are not bid into California Independent System Operator (CAISO) wholesale energy
markets, thereby reducing their visibility and dispatchability to CAISO’s grid operators. The
CPUC’s rulemaking and its concurrent efforts to approve “direct participation” rules in 2014 (also
known as Rule 24) are the frst steps of many that will lead to the bidding of demand response
resources into wholesale markets.
The rulemaking also recognizes that demand response has potential value as a fexible capacity
resource for renewable integration (through increasing or decreasing demand), a balancing
energy and ancillary service resource, and an alternative to transmission upgrades. Demand
response as a renewable integration resource carries signifcant implications for GHG reduction
goals. Renewable resources such as wind and solar are variable, and thus grid operators must
rely on load-following resources to maintain grid stability. Those load-following resources are
typically quick-start fossil-fuel generation plants. If demand response can provide the needed
reliability for variable renewable resources, the State will have less need for quick-start
fossil-fuel generation plants.
However, existing demand response resources do not yet have the speed, fexibility, or reliability
to achieve this potential. One purpose of the CPUC rulemaking is to determine, in close
collaboration with CAISO, the specifc qualities demand response resources will need in order to
address these new grid needs. Once these qualities have been set, market participants can then
be directed to provide the “next generation” of demand-response resources through appropriate
procurement mechanisms. The CAISO’s Flexibility Resource Adequacy Criteria and Must-Offer
68
69

The CEC is required by Title 24 to use a lifecycle cost-effectiveness analysis methodology.
R.13-09-011, issued on September 25, 2013:
http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M077/K151/77151993.PDF

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

39



Obligation (FRACMOO) stakeholder process and its anticipated demand response Standard
Capacity Product stakeholder process are key CAISO initiatives in setting specifc design and
operational details for future demand response resources.
While development of DR as a renewable integration resource is a critical next step for California,
the CPUC rulemaking also signals the importance of refning demand-response resources that
cannot be bid into CAISO markets but are benefcial to the State’s goals of reducing energy
consumption during peak hours. These resources, referred to as load-modifying demand
response, can reduce California’s demand curve over time through strategies such as time-ofuse rates and permanent load-shifting programs. The impact of these programs could potentially
reduce the need for gas-fred generation resources in future planning processes. Additionally,
the rulemaking will be exploring how demand response can be better coupled with other
demand-side resources such as energy effciency and distributed generation, so that retail
customers see all their options and make well-informed decisions, thereby expanding
demand-side resources collectively.
Renewable Energy
In 2011, the Legislature passed and Governor Brown signed a bill creating the nation’s most
aggressive renewables portfolio standard (RPS) program. The program requires California’s
investor-owned and publicly owned electric utilities, as well as all other retail sellers of electricity,
to serve 33 percent of their customers’ electricity needs with clean renewable energy by 2020.
As part of his Clean Energy Jobs Plan, Governor Brown set an aggressive target of adding 8,000
MW of centralized, large-scale renewable facilities (of which 3,900 MW has come online since
2010) and 12,000 MW of distributed renewable generation by 2020. Of the 12,000 MW distributed
renewable generation goal, 4,400 MW has already come online.

e

California has made substantial progress in developing new renewable resources to support
the RPS and the governor’s goals. The large investor-owned utilities report that they have met the
20 percent RPS goal for 2011–2013, are on track to meet the requirement of 25 percent renewables
by 2016, and are well-positioned to meet the 33 percent target by 2020. The publicly-owned
utilities have also contributed to meeting these targets and are progressing about as fast, and
in some cases faster, than the investor-owned utilities.
Approximately 2,000 MW of new renewable capacity came online in 2012;70 1,600 MW of which
is wind generation. Another 3,300 MW of renewable capacity is estimated to have come online
statewide before the end of 2013. A total of 3,500 MW of solar (thermal and photovoltaic, or PV)
and 5,700 MW of wind has been installed to date. California is now the nation’s second largest
producer of wind power.71
California leads the nation in the amount of solar PV capacity.72 In 2012, California became the frst
state to install more than 1,000 MW of new solar capacity in a single year, from a combination
of utility-scale projects and customer installations.73 In 2013, the State added over 2,600 MW
of solar PV; 2,300 MW from wholesale solar PV and 300 MW from self-generation PV. Solar PV
programs74 codifed by Senate Bill 1 in 2006 (SB 1, Murray, Chapter 132) are driving much of the
self-generation installation in California. SB 1 set a target for 3,000 MW of self-generation solar,
70
71
72

73
74

40

California Public Utilities Commission. 2012. Renewables Portfolio Standard Quarterly Report, 3rd and 4th Quarter
2012. www.cpuc.ca.gov/NR/rdonlyres/2BC2751B-4507-4A38-98F5-F26748FE6A95/0/2012_Q3_Q4RPSReportFINAL.pdf
Wiser, Ryan, and Mark Bolinger. 2012. 2011 Wind Technologies Market Report. Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratories. U.S. Department of Energy. DOE/GO-102012-3472. August.
Dutzik, Tony, and Rob Sargent. 2013. Lighting the Way: What We Can Learn From America’s Top 12 Solar States.
Environment America Research and Policy Center. July.
www.environmentamericacenter.org/sites/environment/fles/reports/Lighting_the_way_EnvAM_scrn.pdf
Marshall, J. 2013. California Still Tops in Renewable Energy Rankings.
www.pgecurrents.com/2013/08/22/california-still-tops-in-renewable-energy-rankings/. Accessed August 23, 2013.
California’s solar PV programs include the CPUC’s California Solar Initiative, the Energy Commission’s New Solar
Homes Partnership, and publicly owned utility solar incentive programs.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



including solar water heating, by 2017, of which 1,570 MW have been installed. Additionally,
about 300 MW were installed prior to SB 1 as result of the Emerging Renewable Program, the
Self Generation Incentive Program, and POU solar incentive programs. In total, about 1,900 MW
of self-generation solar was installed in California by the end of 2013.
Energy Storage
While taking steps to minimize integration needs, the State must also advance energy storage
technologies to help integrate increasing amounts of renewable resources. An energy storage
device is a technology capable of absorbing energy, storing it for a period of time, and
dispatching the energy as needed. Energy storage devices can store energy during times of low
demand or over-generation and can then provide energy stored back into the grid during times
of peak demand or when the grid is stressed.
Storage technologies can be applied on transmission and distribution systems and can help
maintain a reliable and effcient transmission grid. Storage can also provide load‐following
capabilities to manage frequent and wide variations in solar and wind energy due to their fast
ramp rates (megawatts of power delivered per minute). Storage can also complement demand
response programs. In October 2013, the CPUC adopted an energy storage procurement
framework and design program which requires the investor-owned utilities to procure
1,325 MW of energy storage by 2024.75
Combined Heat and Power
Combined heat and power systems (CHP), also referred to as cogeneration, generate on-site
electricity and useful thermal energy in a single integrated system. Combined heat and power
systems are typically used in industrial, commercial, and institutional applications where both
electricity and steam are required. Governor Brown set a goal for 6,500 MW of additional CHP
capacity by 2030 as part of his Clean Energy Jobs Plan. This goal builds upon the Scoping Plan’s
goal for emission reductions equivalent to 4,000 MW of new CHP generation by 2020.
Through the implementation of the 2007 Waste Heat and Carbon Emissions Reduction Act
(also known as AB 1613, Blakeslee, Chapter 713, Statues of 2007), the CEC and CPUC have taken
steps to create effciency guidelines and market pricing incentives for small (<20 MW) CHP
system owners. The CPUC also adopted the CHP “Settlement Agreement” in 2010,
75

CPUC. Decision Adopting Energy Storage Procurement Framework and Design Program.
October 17, 2013. http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M078/K912/78912194.PDF.

SUCCESS STORY
California’s electric grid is becoming more effcient through improved
communications and control software that allow operators to check
energy fow every few seconds and more accurately balance supply and
demand. This also improves the ability of California grid operators to
bring more energy from renewable sources into the state’s electricity mix.
Other in-building “smart” technology developments allow for more
effcient energy usage and for real-time communication between
consumers, their appliances, and electricity suppliers. A study by the
Pacifc Northwest National Laboratory estimated that these “smart
grid” improvements can reduce GHG emissions from electricity
generation by as much as 12 percent by 2030.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

41



which created a new CHP program requiring that California’s three largest investor-owned electric
utilities procure a minimum of 3,000 MW of CHP capacity until 2015 and reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by 4.8 MMTCO2e.
Despite these policy actions and incentives for CHP, signifcant installation barriers for CHP
systems still remain and very few new CHP systems have been installed since the initial Scoping
Plan was released. Indeed, due to older system retirements, the State’s overall CHP capacity may
be lower now than it was in 2008. ARB is committed to working with the CPUC, CEC, and CAISO
to assess existing barriers to expanding the installation of CHP systems and propose solutions
that help achieve climate goals. A future CHP measure could establish requirements for new or
upgraded effcient CHP systems.

©@8

Industry
In the initial Scoping Plan, the industry sector was discussed in a separate sector; however, in this
Update it has been included within the energy-sector discussion because its GHG emissions are
primarily due to energy use.
California industry includes a broad and diverse range of sources, including cement plants,
refneries, power plants, glass manufacturers, and oil and gas production facilities. Industrial
sources play a signifcant role in the State’s vast economy and accounted for about 20 percent
of California’s total GHG emissions.
Most emission reductions from industry will be realized through California’s Cap-and-Trade
Program, which includes large industrial sources (i.e., sources emitting more than 25,000
MTCO2e per year). (See Section 9 of this chapter for a discussion of the Cap-and-Trade
Program.) As with other activities covered by the Cap-and-Trade Regulation, ARB also assessed
the potential for direct regulation measures that could be implemented at these facilities. In
addition, fugitive emissions from industrial facilities (primarily methane emissions) are not part
of the Cap-and-Trade Program. Therefore, direct regulations were also considered for industrial
sources with signifcant fugitive GHG emissions—oil and gas extraction, natural
gas transmission, and refneries.
Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) is another option to reduce emissions from electricity
generation and industrial emitters. ARB is currently working with researchers from the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) to evaluate existing quantifcation methodologies related
to the sequestration portion of CCS in the context of California geological and regulatory
considerations. ARB will continue to work with the Division of Oil, Gas & Geothermal Resources
(DOGGR), CEC, and CPUC for future development of a quantifcation methodology for California
GHG emissions sources.
In 2010, ARB approved the energy effciency assessment regulation requiring California’s
largest industrial facilities to conduct a one-time assessment of the facility’s fuel and energy
consumption and emissions of GHGs, criteria pollutants, and toxic air contaminants. The
assessments were to include the identifcation of potential energy effciency improvement
projects. ARB subsequently received assessment reports from 43 industrial facilities covering
fve industrial sectors: refnery, cement, hydrogen production, power generation, and oil and
gas/mineral production. ARB is currently developing public reports for each industrial sector,
summarizing the information provided by the facilities. ARB will use these fndings to identify
the best approaches to secure energy effciency improvements and the associated emission
reductions at California’s largest facilities.
Regarding fugitive emissions, ARB undertook a survey of the oil and gas extraction sector, on
items such as compressor seals, storage tanks, valves, fanges, and connectors, to improve the
emission inventory. The key fndings of this survey are infuencing ARB’s approach to developing
a new measure in 2014 to reduce fugitive GHG emissions from these operations.

42

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Current data indicate that methane emissions in California may be undercounted and that one
potential source of these emissions is the natural gas transmission and distribution system.
Based on a 2008 survey, the vast majority of the GHG emissions from this sector are expected
to come from distribution pipeline leaks. Field measurements of fugitive emissions from natural
gas distribution pipelines in California are currently being conducted to update the emission
factors for this sector. The feld study is expected to be completed by 2015. ARB will use the study
results to determine the cost-effectiveness of developing a regulation to reduce fugitive GHG
emissions from these operations.
Methane has historically been exempt from the local air districts’ volatile organic compound
(VOC) regulations, such as refnery leak detection and repair regulations, because it has very low
photochemical reactivity and, thus, does not contribute signifcantly to smog formation. However,
because methane is a powerful GHG and short-lived climate pollutant, ARB is working with local
air district staff to determine the benefts of incorporating amendments to their existing leak
detection and repair rules to include methane leaks from refneries and other industrial sources
with a potential for fugitive methane emissions.76
Oil and Natural Gas Production
California has a signifcant oil and natural gas industry. Currently, our existing rules (LCFS,
Cap-and-Trade and others) and proposed new measures, such as for hydraulic fracturing
(fracking), oil and gas production, and other short-lived climate pollutants measures, will lead
to best-in-industry practices to minimize GHG, criteria and toxic pollutant emissions associated
with the production and refning of oil and gas.

Maintaining Momentum
California will be unable to achieve the needed GHG emissions within the energy sector by simply
continuing or modestly expanding upon current energy conservation, effciency, and generation
decarbonizing program efforts. In addition, no single agency or entity has complete responsibility
for the energy sector. As previously noted, a reworked and comprehensive State program will be
required that addresses all affected energy entities and is specifcally designed to ensure that the
proposed emission reductions are achieved.
For example, in addition to calling for more localized generation and smart grid technologies, the
energy sector should support “smarter generation.” This includes advanced energy technologies
and distributed generation, as well as regional grid management to allow for pooling of diverse
resources. Planning for regional (west-wide) grid management is occurring through the Energy
Imbalance Market (EIM), led by CAISO. It allows California to use a regional approach to increase
grid reliability by allowing the State’s energy system to pull from a more diverse set of resources
to meet demand and renewable integration needs.
At the electricity distribution level, actions to expedite the deployment of small-scale storage
systems, as well as microgrid and “smart-grid” technologies, are essential to maximize
renewable and distributed resource integration. Strengthening and expediting California’s
policies for ZNE homes and businesses and maximizing energy conservation and demandresponse participation in the consumer electricity market should also be a priority. The role and
functions of utilities may need to evolve as California increasingly shifts toward more renewable
and distributed energy integration.
The State will need a comprehensive and aggressive (but fexible) program to drive energy
utilities toward providing zero and near-zero GHG energy resources. At the same time, the State
will need to ensure that new or expanded economic development activities are designed to
incorporate the most advanced energy-effcient technologies and energy-conserving practices.
76

In addition, CEC is mandated by AB 1257 (Bocanegra, Chapter 749, Statutes of 2013) to identify strategies
for evaluating the lifecycle GHG emissions from the natural gas sector every four years.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

43



State agencies should collaborate toward developing a comprehensive and enforceable GHG
emission reduction program for the State’s electric and energy utilities. The CEC, CPUC, and
ARB will all have a role in developing and implementing the most technologically appropriate
and cost-effective suite of strategies to achieve the State’s emission reduction goals.
The program should maintain consistency with the State’s broader energy policies, such as those
articulated in the loading order and the initial Scoping Plan, and be designed to further advance
key State energy programs and needs such as energy effciency and demand-response efforts,
renewable energy development, energy storage systems, smart-grid and microgrid deployment,
and distribution and transmission system upgrades and expansion.
The program should contain monitoring mechanisms to ensure reasonable progress is being
made in achieving emission reduction goals and broader energy policies. The program should
include mid-term targets (including a GHG emission target and other targets that support
meeting broader energy policies) designed to spur and gauge progress toward meeting a fnal
2050 GHG emission target and broader energy policies. The program should be established
through a process which includes extensive stakeholder and public input.
In addition to facilitating the creation of the comprehensive emission reduction program, the
State’s energy agencies should pursue a series of key proceedings to further advance energy
effciency and conservation programs that hold great potential for reducing GHG emissions
within the energy sector.
Several key actions are summarized below to drive the State toward developing and deploying
the most appropriate market, resource, technology, and design options to achieve longer-term
GHG emission reductions within the energy sector.

44

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions
for the Energy Sector
State agencies will develop comprehensive and enforceable GHG emission reduction
requirements for the State’s electric and energy utilities to achieve near-zero GHG
emissions by 2050. Program development to be completed by end of 2016, and
incorporate the following principles:
• Thoroughly account for the carbon intensity and air quality impacts of
various energy resources, generation technologies, and associated fuels.
• Maximize local and regional benefts of energy facilities.
• Minimize emissions of criteria and toxic air pollutants.
• Avoid disproportionate impacts to disadvantaged communities.
• An enforceable program for all energy and electricity service providers.
• Recordkeeping and reporting mechanisms to monitor and
enforce the GHG emission reduction requirements.
State’s energy agencies pursue a series of key proceedings, including the following:
• Develop criteria and rules for fexible demand response resources
to participate in wholesale markets and integrate variable renewable
resources, reducing the need for new fexible fossil generation.
• Expand participation of regional balancing authorities in the CAISO Energy
Imbalance Market and other potential methods of balancing authority cooperation,
which provide low-cost, low-risk means of achieving real-time operational effciency
and fexibility needed for greater penetration of variable renewable resources,
while ensuring support for greenhouse gas emission reduction programs.
• Through the AB 758 process, CEC will develop a plan to encourage energy
assessments—particularly when done at the time a building or unit is sold or
by a predetermined date—as well as energy use disclosure requirements.
• Enhance energy effciency and demand response programs, including development
of education/outreach programs, and develop robust methodologies to monitor
and evaluate the effectiveness of these programs. Methodologies developed by
end of 2015 with the enhanced program proceedings completed by end of 2016.
• A CPUC proceeding to continue to streamline state jurisdictional
interconnection processes to create a ministerial low-cost interconnection
process for distributed generation completed by the end of 2015. The CEC
to explore similar streamlined processes for interconnecting distributed
generation in publicly owned utility systems. The CPUC and CEC consult
as appropriate with the CAISO as part of these proceedings.

, I '

•

• ARB will assess existing barriers to expanding the installation of CHP systems
and propose solutions (in consultation with the State’s energy agencies) to achieve
the Governor’s objectives and that of the initial Scoping Plan for CHP to reduce
GHG emissions. A future CHP measure could establish requirements
for new or upgraded effcient CHP systems.
• Evaluate the potential for CCS in California to reduce emissions of CO2 from
energy and industrial sources. Working with DOGGR, CEC and CPUC, ARB
will consider a CCS quantifcation methodology for use in California by 2017.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

45



2.

Transportation: Vehicles/Equipment, Sustainable
Communities, Housing, Fuels, and Infrastructure

California’s transportation system accounts for about 36 percent of California’s GHG emissions
and is the primary source of smog-forming and toxic air pollution in the State. Mandatory
regional criteria pollutant reduction targets will be established in the 2016 State Implementation
Plans (SIPs) with expected reductions on the order of 90 percent below 2010 levels in the South
Coast and similar reductions in the San Joaquin Valley by the year 2032. Many of the strategies
employed to reduce GHG emissions will also work to meet the national ambient air quality
standard for ozone in 2032.
Achieving California’s long-term criteria pollutant and GHG emissions goals will require four
strategies to be employed: (1) improve vehicle effciency and develop zero emission technologies,
(2) reduce the carbon content of fuels and provide market support to get these lower-carbon fuels
into the marketplace, (3) plan and build communities to reduce vehicular GHG emissions and
provide more transportation options, and (4) improve the effciency and throughput of existing
transportation systems.
As one of the most signifcant sources of GHG and criteria pollutant emissions, the transportation
system represents one of the greatest needs for emission reductions in California, and one of the
greatest opportunities to build an economy that aligns stable economic growth with the need for
ever-improving public health and environmental protection. Reducing transportation emissions,
including those from heavy-duty diesel engines, will have dramatic air quality and public health
benefts—especially in many of California’s environmental justice communities. Improving vehicle
effciency will continue to cut consumer fuel bills. Diversifying fuel supplies will further decouple
economic growth in California from volatile global oil prices and keep more of Californians’
fuel expenditures in our own communities. Planning and building communities to reduce travel
demands and designing more productive transportation systems will cut transportation costs
for California’s workers and make the State’s freight distribution system more competitive in the
global marketplace.
Building on California’s Existing Policy Framework
California already has many of the elements necessary for an effective framework to address
transportation emissions. The actions identifed in this Update represent a natural extension
of existing policies, including targeted investment, strategic market support, and coordinated
planning for more sustainable development. These recommendations are based on technologies
currently available or expected in the near term, and on planning and investment steps that can
be taken now. However, to achieve the needed transportation GHG emission reductions and the
corresponding 2032 ozone standards, the market uptake of advanced technologies will need
to be accelerated. Additional strategies are needed over the next fve years to defne the paths
for longer-term change. As all these actions and policies are implemented, they will need to be
consistent with principles and criteria, as recommended by the Environmental Justice Advisory
Committee (EJAC), that ensure access, equity, and benefts to vulnerable communities.
To illustrate these additional paths toward signifcant emission reductions, a number of forwardlooking strategies are described in this chapter. These paths envision the use of technologies that
require further development. In addition, the market structures, investment strategies, businesses
models, regulatory actions, and fnancial resources to support the very large-scale transition to
these technologies need to be identifed and put in place.
California’s regulatory programs and planning efforts provide a basic foundation to build lasting
markets where vehicle/equipment manufacturers, suppliers, and fuel providers who make large,
smart investments are handsomely rewarded for developing leading technologies. Standards
should drive technologies to higher volumes, lower prices, and ultimately, become marketwinning solutions, rather than compliance approaches.

46

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Effcient Vehicle and Engine Technology and Zero Emissions Technology Development
California has made tremendous progress pushing clean vehicle technologies. This progress
has led to emission reductions throughout the United States and has pushed market development
for clean and zero emission technologies throughout the world. California was the frst state in
the nation to require reductions of GHGs from motor vehicles when, in 2004, ARB adopted what
is commonly referred to as the Pavley regulations resulting from Assembly Bill 1493 (Pavley,
Chapter 200, Statutes of 2002). These regulations formed the foundation for the federal GHG
and fuel-economy programs for light-duty vehicles for the 2012–2016 model years.
California continues its leadership
through ARB’s Advanced Clean Cars
program, which was developed in part
through collaboration with the U.S. EPA
and National Highway Traffc Safety
Administration (NHTSA). This set of
regulations will reduce GHG emissions
from new light-duty vehicles by about
4.5 percent per year, from 2017–2025,
such that by 2025 a new vehicle will emit
about half the GHG compared to today’s
feet mix. The Advanced Clean Cars
program also included tighter criteria
pollutant requirements which, in 2025,
will result in cars emitting 75 percent
less smog-forming pollution
than the average new car sold today.

SUCCESS STORY
Broadband Internet service is now used to
save vehicle miles driven for medical care in
the South Lake Tahoe area. The California
Telehealth Network (CTN), a service available
statewide, has collaborated with the UC
Davis Health System to upgrade broadband
and bring telemedicine equipment to Barton
Memorial Hospital. CTN now averages more
than 200 patient consultations each month.

As part of the Advanced Clean Cars program, the Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Regulation requires
about 15 percent of new cars sold in California in 2025 to be a plug-in hybrid, battery electric,
or fuel cell vehicle. Ten other states have adopted California’s ZEV Regulation, increasing the
reach of California’s policy to about a quarter of the U.S. vehicle market. California currently has
60,000 ZEVs (primarily light-duty vehicles, including battery electric, plug-in hybrid, and fuel
cell vehicles) on its roadways—more than any other state. Continuing to support and develop
zero emission vehicle markets within California and elsewhere is critical to achieving California’s
emissions reduction requirements. California has outlined several steps in the State’s ZEV Action
Plan,77 to further support the market and accelerate its growth. Committed implementation of the
actions described in the plan will help meet Governor Brown’s 2012 Executive Order (EO) B-16-12,
which—in addition to establishing a more specifc 2050 GHG target for the transportation sector
of 80 percent from 1990 levels—called for 1.5 million ZEVs on California’s roadways by 2025.
Continuing progress on light-duty vehicles beyond the scope of the Advanced Clean Cars
program with a LEV IV standard targeted at achieving additional GHG emission reductions of
about fve percent per year beyond 2025 would reduce new vehicle emission standards to about
125 grams of carbon dioxide equivalent per mile (gCO2e/mi) in 2030 and to below 100 gCO2e/mi
by 2035. Furthermore, commercially available technologies, such as fuel effcient passenger
vehicle tires, can be utilized by both new and in-use vehicles in the near-term to achieve GHG
emission reductions. Deployment of fuel effcient vehicle tires for in-use vehicles could include
limited incentives, followed by ratings and then standard setting to permanently shift the market.
Achieving our long-term climate goal and 2032 ozone standards will require a much deeper
penetration of ZEVs into the feet. As outlined in the 2009 ZEV Review78 and the 2012 Vision for
77
78

The ZEV Action Plan can be found at
http://opr.ca.gov/docs/Governor%27s_Offce_ZEV_Action_Plan_%2802-13%29.pdf.
www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/2009zevreview/2009zevreview.htm (Refer to Attachment B)

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

47



Clean Air,79 and several independent studies (See Chapter III), the light-duty vehicle segment will
need to become largely electrifed by 2050 in order to meet California’s emission reduction goals.
For the heavy-duty segment, ARB recently approved a regulation establishing GHG emission
reduction requirements for all medium- and heavy-duty vehicles and engines manufactured for
use in California, harmonizing with the GHG emission reduction rule adopted by the U.S. EPA
in 2011. For Class 8 heavy-duty vehicles, this “Phase I” GHG standard will reduce new vehicle
emissions by four to fve percent per year from 2014–2018.
ARB is working with U.S. EPA on Phase 2 GHG standards for heavy-duty vehicles to continue
these reductions beyond 2018. U.S. EPA is planning to fnalize Phase 2 standards in 2016. ARB
believes additional annual improvements of around fve percent through 2025 can be achieved
from Class 8 heavy-duty vehicles using commercially available technologies and advanced
transmissions, hybridization, improved trailer aerodynamics, and other technologies. In addition,
signifcant, ongoing vehicle effciencies can be achieved in Class 3–Class 7 trucks during the same
time frame. These effciencies will be partly enabled by improvements in light-duty vehicles; the
challenge is to move these technologies from the light-duty sector to the heavy-duty on-road and
off-road sectors in order to reach commercialization in the necessary time frame. ARB is working
to ensure Phase 2 standards are set at the lowest feasible levels, to accelerate the introduction
and deployment of the advanced technologies necessary to meet the State’s air quality and
climate policy objectives.
While the Phase 2 standards will be an important next step in reducing GHG emissions from
heavy-duty trucks, signifcantly greater reductions will be needed to meet California’s climate
change goals. To continue reducing emissions, zero and near-zero emission technologies will need
to be deployed in large numbers. In addition to clean NG trucks, BEV and FCV technology could
be deployed in urban feet applications and medium-heavy classifcations. This is particularly
true for feets that have a central fueling hub. For the heavier classifcations with moderate range,
strategies could include plug-in hybrid technology with catenary electric infrastructure along
transport corridors. For heavy, long-range applications where electrifcation is not practical,
low-carbon sources of energy, such as renewable fuels and hydrogen FCVs, will be necessary.
For successful implementation of these strategies, California needs to make similar commitments
to develop zero emission vehicle markets for heavy-duty vehicles and equipment. Many zero
emission technologies for trucks have progressed at least to the demonstration phase, and in
the case of smaller trucks, battery-powered vehicles are available commercially in small volumes.
However, ZEV technology for Class 7 and 8 vehicles, which account for most of heavy-duty vehicle
emissions, has not progressed as far as it has for light-duty vehicles. Where the technology
is available or being demonstrated, near-term challenges exist in terms of cost, vehicle range,
payload, and the need for associated infrastructure. ARB is proposing larger efforts to demonstrate,
pilot, and deploy ZEV technologies for heavy-duty vehicles with Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds.
Low-Carbon Fuels
California has an effective, scalable framework in place for fuels to ensure ongoing emission
reductions. The Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS), adopted in 2009, requires the carbon intensity
of transportation fuels to be reduced by at least ten percent in 2020. While the primary goal
is reducing carbon intensity and concomitant greenhouse gas emissions, implementation will
also necessarily diversify the fuel portfolio, reducing the economic impact in California from
gasoline and diesel price spikes resulting from volatile global oil price changes. As a result of
California’s leadership, other states and countries are pursuing the development of carbonintensity fuel measures. In addition, fuels will come under California’s Cap-and-Trade Program
in 2015. Together, LCFS and Cap-and-Trade provide a structure to ensure that necessary emission
reductions are achieved and provide an effective market signal to accelerate innovation and
79

48

www.arb.ca.gov/planning/vision/vision.htm

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



development of cleaner fuels. Continuing these policies beyond 2020 will ensure that fuel carbon
intensity continues to decline and that low-carbon alternatives to petroleum are available in
suffcient quantities in the long term. Research that further refnes our understanding of fuel
carbon intensity is similarly important and should include an assessment of methane emissions
from natural gas systems. Achieving the GHG and air quality goals will require a renewable
portfolio of transportation fuels—including electricity and hydrogen—well beyond the current
policy trajectories. Accordingly, in 2014 ARB will consider extending the LCFS, with more
aggressive targets for 2030.
Transportation, Land Use, and Housing
As a result of Senate Bill (SB) 375 (Steinberg, Chapter 728, Statutes of 2008), the Sustainable
Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008, California has developed a critical, unique
policy mechanism for reducing transportation-sector GHG emissions. Regional and local
planning agencies are responsible for developing Sustainable Communities Strategies (SCS)
as part of the federally required Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), and also responsible for
developing State-required general plan housing elements to help meet these targets. The
goal of SB 375 is to reduce GHG emissions from passenger vehicles through better-integrated
regional transportation, land use, and housing planning that provides easier access to jobs,
services, public transit, and active transportation options.
Sustainable Communities Strategies promote more travel and housing choices through greater
access to alternative forms of transportation (including public transit, biking, and walking) and
development patterns where people can live, work, and play without having to drive. All seven
metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) that have adopted SCS so far have met or exceeded
the ARB-set targets. Successful implementation of these SCS is the critical next step in achieving
the associated GHG emission reductions.
Implementation of these strategies hinges on local actions to realize the GHG emission
reductions envisioned in the regional SCS. The State must encourage new and targeted
strategies to reduce emissions throughout California’s diverse communities. The State’s role
is to provide ongoing support, through access to fnancial resources and incentives, guidance
documents, housing element certifcation, planning tools, and other forms of technical
assistance. California has a number of important planning tools available to reduce vehicle travel
demand, expand mobility options, and improve goods movement; however, these tools will need
to be enhanced and new tools will need to be developed, including but not limited to land use
models, health models, and scenario planning tools. With appropriate coordination among local
and State agencies—including ARB, the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), the
Strategic Growth Council (SGC), and the Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD)—California can ensure that the expected GHG emission reductions are achieved or
exceeded. The State must also support integration of the planning, development, and funding of
transportation systems, including recognition of the impacts and interactions between passenger
and freight transportation.
In 2014, ARB will review the advancements in data, models, analytical methodologies, and
technologies that have taken place since 2010 to inform the need for and timing of revised MPO
targets. This technical review will provide the foundation for a future target revision, consistent
with each MPO’s time frame for updating its RTP under federal law. Future updates to SCS
targets, along with other new transportation strategies, will help provide further emission
reductions needed to achieve long-range reductions in transportation-related emissions.
Coordinated, comprehensive planning is critical to achieving deep emission reductions in
the transportation sector, and must include the development of the 2014 California Freight
Mobility Plan (Caltrans), the 2014 Sustainable Freight Strategy (ARB), the 2040 California

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

49



Transportation Plan in 2015 (Caltrans), the 2016 SIP (ARB, SCAQMD, 80 SJVAPCD81), and all
future regional sustainable community strategy and Regional Transportation Plan development
and implementation. These planning efforts will need to identify the infrastructure, including
fueling and intelligent transportation infrastructure, needed to support full-scale deployment of
advanced technologies, improved throughput, and expanded access to rail, public transit, and
active transportation.
As State agencies proceed with GHG emission reduction planning, it is necessary to integrate the
need for signifcant NOx reductions by 2032 to meet the national ambient air quality standards
for ozone. Tools developed to support these planning efforts should emphasize the needs of
vulnerable communities, as recommended by EJAC. These needs include, but are not limited
to: access to affordable public transit, electric vehicle charging, or other low-carbon fueling
infrastructures; accessible affordable housing; and localized public health benefts.
California is implementing a large-scale rail modernization program, which includes the nation’s
frst true high-speed rail (HSR) system. Europe’s experience with high-speed rail is illustrative
of its mode-shift potential; after high-speed rail launched in Europe, air trips were cut in half
from Paris to London. In Spain, for the 315-mile trip from Barcelona to Madrid, more than 60
percent of air travelers have switched to the 2½-hour rail ride. The frst construction contract to
begin California’s high-speed rail system was awarded in August 2013, for work in the Central
Valley. Additionally, environmental work is proceeding to electrify the Caltrain corridor in the
Bay Area by 2019 as part of the high-speed rail system. High-speed rail will provide a new, clean,
interregional transportation option and increase ridership on integrated regional rail and local
transit systems, reducing single-occupancy vehicle trips.
Systems Effciencies
California is at the forefront of developing additional strategies to reduce emissions from existing
vehicles and systems. In fact, many system effciency strategies identifed in the initial Scoping
Plan have been implemented or are still under development such as ship electrifcation at ports,
tire pressure, fuel-effcient tires, and low friction motor oils. These strategies go beyond just
vehicle improvements; for example, Caltrans has initiated several strategies that achieve GHG
emission reductions from the existing system, including modifcation to concrete specifcations,
alternative asphalt pavements, and adoption of the Caltrans Complete Streets Implementation
Action Plan82, which spurred a series of comprehensive edits to its Highway Design Manual.
However, California must do more to capture signifcant potential emission reductions from
existing systems that could also improve safety, reduce congestion, and improve economic
productivity and workforce and businesses competitiveness. For example, improved pavement
engineering—including surface smoothness, rigidity, and durability—can reduce GHG emissions
through improved fuel effciency. Smart phone and vehicle “apps” that provide real-time travel
information and eco-routing or eco-driving suggestions can reduce emissions from existing
vehicles. Coordinating signal timing and providing real-time information to drivers about signal
status can reduce emissions in urban driving by up to ten percent. Utilizing adaptive cruise
control, a global positioning system (GPS), and camera technologies to enable truck “platooning”
can reduce GHG emissions and fuel consumption from those vehicles by about 15 percent.
Myriad existing and emerging technologies will lead to an increasingly connected and automated
transportation system and could have dramatic effciency and emissions benefts. Many
automakers and others have committed to bring varying levels of automation to new vehicles
over the next fve years, and the NHTSA is beginning to take steps to enable vehicle-to-vehicle
and vehicle-to-infrastructure communications. The degree to which markets for these vehicles
grow—and how local, State and federal rules shape and support them—will determine the
80
81
82

50

South Coast Air Quality Management District
San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District
www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tpp/offces/ocp/complete_streets_fles/CompleteStreets_IP03-10-10.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



level of emissions impact from these technologies. Early studies show that vehicle automation
could enable dramatic emissions decreases, or emissions increases, depending on the level
of increased vehicle and systems effciency they enable, how the vehicles integrate with an
alternative fuels infrastructure, and the degree to which they may induce additional vehicle travel.
Over the next fve years, it will be critical to begin planning for these vehicles on our roads and to
maximize their benefts and potential for GHG emission reductions. California is already a leader
in this emerging space, and the California Department of Motor Vehicles has issued the nation’s
frst draft rules regulating the testing of autonomous vehicles on California’s roads, pursuant to
Senate Bill 1298 (Padilla, Chapter 570, Statutes of 2012). Many are also looking to California’s
I-710 corridor to begin demonstrating and deploying intelligent transportation system
technologies for heavy-duty trucks. Additional research is needed to better understand the
impacts these vehicles will, or can, have on GHG emissions in California’s transportation sector,
and how to best integrate automated vehicles within the State’s existing and evolving vehicle,
fuel, and planning policy framework. The next Scoping Plan Update will include additional detail
on the role of existing systems improvements and vehicle automation in meeting California’s
transportation-sector emissions reduction goals.
Integrated Policy Planning in the Sustainable Freight Strategy
California has already made signifcant progress reducing emissions from its freight system,
while supporting our ports and goods movement industries as some of the most critical to
the State’s economy. Through regulations, incentives, enforcement agreements, port and
industry initiatives, project mitigation and land use decisions, California has reduced diesel
PM emissions—along with the associated health risks—by 70 percent at the largest ports and
about 50–70 percent at the highest-risk railyards since 2005. However, much more needs to
be done to continue to reduce the impacts from air pollution, including diesel PM at the local
level, ozone at the regional level, and GHGs at the global level. The ongoing planning, policy
foundation, fnancial incentives, and state commitment to reduce PM and NOx emissions from
the freight system provide a foundation from which to develop a similar framework to reduce
GHG emissions.
Over the past decade, public and private stakeholders across California have increasingly
recognized the need to plan and implement multi-pollutant emission reduction strategies
that achieve transformational changes resulting in signifcant reductions of near-source toxic,
regional criteria pollutant, and global GHG emissions. SB 375 uses this integrated, multi-pollutant
approach to reduce passenger vehicle GHG emissions through strategies that impact land use and
housing decisions, transportation infrastructure funding, and regional criteria pollutant analyses.
A parallel effort to SB 375 needs to reside in the freight sector, with its highly complex
international logistics system and incredibly diverse set of stakeholder groups. To achieve our
multi-pollutant goals, over the long-term California must transition from a diesel-dependent
system into one with signifcant numbers of zero and near-zero emission engines for trucks,
locomotives, cargo-handling equipment, ships, and aircraft. California must also support the
parallel development of the necessary supporting infrastructure, and implement logistical/
effciency improvements to reduce the emissions impact of moving freight. In short, the freight
sector must become a system that is effcient, reliable, clean, and low carbon.
The Sustainable Freight Initiative83 (Initiative) is a broad, multi-decade effort to develop, fund, and
implement the changes necessary to achieve a sustainable freight system. The Initiative will be
informed by an ongoing, transparent process that engages all freight stakeholders. These include,
but are not limited to: industry (such as retailers and other cargo owners, shipping, trucking,
rail, and warehousing), ports, labor, environmental groups, business leaders, venture capitalists,
community representatives, technology developers, air districts, and representatives from local,
State, and federal government.
83

www.arb.ca.gov/gmp/sfti/sfti.htm

Climate Change Scoping Plan: IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

51



The 2014 Sustainable Freight Strategy (Strategy) is a concentrated, one-year effort to produce
a document developed in the context of the broader Initiative and represents the next milestone
in defning what is necessary to move California toward a sustainable freight system. Building
a coalition of freight stakeholders is a primary focus of the Strategy, and will ultimately be a
signifcant driving force behind affecting change in areas outside of ARB’s sphere of infuence,
including advocating at the federal level and acquiring public and private funding
for implementation.
The South Coast Zero-Emission Freight Transport Technology Symposium and ARB’s HaagenSmit Symposium in mid-2013 provided early input into the sustainable freight effort. Currently,
there are a number of existing venues led by both public and private entities where California
freight issues are being discussed. These are critical to ARB’s public process for the sustainable
freight effort, and were some of the earliest points of engagement in the process.
ARB will work with stakeholders on the Strategy throughout 2014, with the ultimate goal of
setting California on the path to move freight more effciently and with zero/near-zero emissions.
This work must recognize the equally important priorities of transitioning to cleaner, renewable
energy sources, providing reliable velocity and expanded system capacity; integrating with the
national and international freight system; and supporting clean air and healthy communities.
The Initiative should also recognize the value of: keeping California’s ports and logistics industry
competitive; supporting the delivery of California’s products locally and to other states and
countries; creating jobs in California and training local workers to support the new transport
system; increasing energy security; and improving mobility.
The 2014 Strategy will include several key elements that together will provide a holistic look at
the freight system and identify actionable next steps through 2020. The Strategy will: identify
near-term actions resulting from assessments of each of the freight sectors and the system,
prioritize effciency improvements, include principles and criteria for transportation infrastructure
projects, and begin to answer the following questions:
• What actions and changes must take place within California’s freight
system to address air quality and climate requirements?
• What are the technology gaps?
• What research and demonstration is needed?
• What incentives are needed to drive technology, infrastructure and effciency improvements?
To that end, ARB is working with agency partners to expand upon existing and ongoing
technology assessments in all the major freight-related source categories, including: trucks,
locomotives, ocean-going vessels, commercial harbor craft, cargo equipment, and air cargo/
airports. These assessments will draw from technology expertise in the public and private sector,
and will lay the framework for identifying and prioritizing the next steps, including accessing and
leveraging funding, near-term implementation strategies, and longer-term actions that could be
included as measures in upcoming SIPs.
This technical effort will also provide an opportunity to evaluate the types and availability of data
and how they could be collected and ultimately used to quantify the emission reduction potential
of future measures for each sector. Technology-specifc objectives include, but are not limited to,
the following:
• Accelerate the introduction and deployment of zero and near-zero
emission trucks, including trucks capable of zero-emission miles.
• Continue improving the effciency of trucks (both engines and vehicles).
• Support development and introduction of locomotives capable of zero emission track miles.
• Accelerate cleanup of the existing locomotive feet.

52

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



• Increase near-dock rail in Oakland/Los Angeles/Long Beach.
• Reduce GHGs and criteria pollutants from ocean-going vessels.
• Build on the work done by the U.S. Department of Defense on cleaner
fuels/aircraft design to reduce GHGs and criteria pollutants from air cargo.
• Identify effciency improvements on all levels (equipment, sector, and system).
• Showcase strategies and best practices.
In addition, ARB will develop principles and criteria that seek to establish air quality and climate
benefts as equal to established transportation/mobility metrics in determining the priority of
freight-related transportation projects and recommend inclusion of these principles and criteria
in the 2014 Freight Mobility Plan. ARB is participating on the California Freight Advisory
Committee and will coordinate with Caltrans staff to refect the outcome of this effort in the
California Freight Mobility Plan.
Moreover, the Strategy process provides the opportunity to begin evaluating the feasibility
of a systemwide effciency metric(s) that could track upstream and downstream impacts of
implemented emission reduction and effciency strategies. The metric could be used to set
targets, prioritize funding, evaluate projects, evaluate programs, and gauge performance
or progress across modes. To complement a metric, ARB will seek advice on actions that
government could take to support effciency improvements. ARB will also begin efforts to
defne criteria and principles for new and expanded freight infrastructure projects as a tool
for local land use decision makers and community residents.
Supporting Planning and Market Development through Targeted Investments
Incentive funding is essential to encourage use of alternative transportation modes, develop
and deploy low-carbon fuels, spur feet turnover, and continue to develop advanced technologies.
Through the Carl Moyer Memorial Air Quality Standards Attainment Program (Carl Moyer),
Proposition 1B program for goods movement, and AB 118 Air Quality Improvement Program
(AQIP), ARB provides funding, directly or through the air districts for technologies that reduce
criteria pollutant and air toxic emissions, often with concurrent climate change benefts. A subset
of these funds, about $283 million to date, are utilized for advanced technologies that achieve
GHG emission reduction benefts, which include: rebates for light-duty clean cars, vouchers for
hybrid and zero emission heavy-duty trucks, grants for installation of shore-based electrical
power for ships, and technology demonstrations such as hybrid tugboat retrofts.
In 2013, the State extended fees for AQIP until 2024 which is expected to provide about $25
million annually for advanced technologies. Most recently, the Governor’s proposed budget
for Fiscal Year 2014–15 would direct $200 million from Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds to ARB
for low-carbon transportation to respond to the increasing demands for incentives of these
technologies and for pre-commercial demonstration of advanced freight technology. In addition,
the CEC’s AB 118 Alternative and Renewable Fuel and Vehicle Technology Program invests $100
million annually (also extended until 2024) to develop and deploy alternative and renewable fuels,
fueling infrastructure, vehicles, and workforce skills necessary operate and maintain these new
technologies. Finally, Senate Bill 99 creates an active transportation program to increase funding
of bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure, which is funded at an annual level of $129 million.
These current efforts will need to be enhanced or expanded beyond currently allocated
resources. To implement this, protocols that outline funding priorities will need to be reviewed
and metrics should be developed for evaluating investment opportunities. For example,
existing State rebates for light-duty zero emission and plug-in hybrid vehicles are consistently
oversubscribed, yet continued public commitment is necessary at this time to support fullscale commercialization and consumer acceptance of these vehicles. Furthermore, the vehicle
regulations and incentives for both light- and heavy-duty vehicles must be supported through

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

53



parallel investments in infrastructure and additional policies to ensure that value is returned
to consumers. These policies include setting reasonable electricity rates that encourage
electrifcation and vehicle charging rates that strongly encourage off-peak charging or are
responsive to grid operational needs and policies that manage charging to facilitate renewable
energy uptake. They also include streamlining local permitting, siting, and utility interconnection
for fueling infrastructure.
Additional investments will be necessary for advanced technology freight demonstration
projects and pilot deployments of advanced heavy-duty vehicles and equipment in a variety of
vocations. Near-term focus areas for these projects include, but are not limited to: zero emission
port trucks for near-dock rail pilot projects; pilot projects to deploy zero emission and hybrid
vehicles and equipment at distribution centers located in areas most affected by air pollution; and
development and demonstration of advanced technology locomotives, marine vessels, and cargo
handling equipment.
Investment throughout California in projects that modernize the passenger rail system and link
seamlessly to local public transit systems will continue to build public transit ridership and shift
travelers from single-occupancy vehicles to public transport. As a start, in 2008, voters approved
Proposition 1A, authorizing nearly $10 billion in state bonds for the United States’ frst high-speed
rail line, which would connect the San Francisco Bay Area with Los Angeles. Rail modernization
in California will increase benefts for passengers, including improved mobility and safety, with
a reduced carbon footprint. Prior to 2030, high-speed rail will reduce GHG emissions by
providing a cleaner alternative to air and private car travel. It is projected to realize GHG emission
reductions its frst year in operation, with annual increases in GHG emission reductions as the
system expands.84
Rail modernization infrastructure investments must be coordinated with local and regional
planning to be mutually supportive. As part of the early development of high-speed rail,
commuter and urban rail systems are being upgraded and expanded to provide connectivity to
the future high-speed rail system. In addition, work has begun on shared-use investments that
high-speed rail will ultimately access, such as the electrifcation of the Caltrain corridor between
San Francisco and San Jose, which is scheduled to be operational in 2019. Coordination among
regional and urban rail providers on issues such as schedules and integrated fare mechanisms
will provide increased service, speed, and amenities that will grow this clean mode of travel and
encourage transit-oriented development and infll around station locations.
Furthermore, ongoing investments are needed for local communities to plan and implement
sustainable community development, including integrated public transit and high-speed rail,
incentivizing transit utilization, and to address both passenger and freight transportation
infrastructure needs. Active transportation and public transit alternatives, including zeroemission transit buses, are increasingly in demand and are necessary to meet ongoing emission
reduction targets. Caltrans, working with local and regional agencies, will need to coordinate on
transportation infrastructure funding (including construction, operation, and maintenance costs)
and consider lifecycle benefts and impacts (including environmental, construction, operation,
and maintenance costs) for transportation infrastructure projects.

84

54

www.hsr.ca.gov/docs/programs/green_practices/HSR_Reducing_CA_GHG_Emissions_2013.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions
for the Transportation System
Vehicle Technology
• The 2017 mid-term review for Advanced Clean Cars, where ARB, U.S. EPA, and
NHTSA will conduct a technical assessment of vehicle technology trends, will
inform future light-duty vehicle standards targeted at continuing to achieve
GHG emission reductions of about fve percent per year through at least 2030.
• In 2016, ARB will propose rules and/or incentives, including the “Phase 2”
heavy-duty vehicle GHG standards in conjunction with U.S.
EPA and NHTSA with a goal of achieving new vehicle GHG
emission reductions of at least fve percent per year.
• For completion by 2017, ARB will engage the Offce of Planning
and Research (OPR) and other stakeholders to expand upon the
2013 ZEV Action Plan for medium- and heavy-duty ZEVs.

Fuels
• In 2014, ARB will propose enhancements to strengthen the LCFS.
ARB will also consider extending the LCFS beyond 2020 with more
aggressive long-term targets, such as a 15 to 20 percent reduction
in average carbon intensity, below 2010 levels, by 2030.
• By 2018, the CPUC, CEC, California Department of Food and Agriculture
(CDFA), and ARB will evaluate and adopt the necessary regulations
and/or policies to further support commercial markets for
low-carbon transportation fuels, including but not limited to:
• Reducing off-peak demand charges for electricity and
plug-in vehicle charging rates that strongly encourage
off-peak charging both at home and at public chargers;
• Development of large-scale renewable and low-carbon
production facilities through continued funding for infrastructure;
• Development and adoption of performance and quality standards;
• Streamlined local permitting and siting for hydrogen fueling and charging
infrastructure and utility interconnection for charging infrastructure; and
• Research.

Transportation, Land Use, and Housing
• In 2014, ARB will complete a technical review that will inform the need for and
appropriate timing of revisions to the SB375 regional targets established in 2010.
• The High-Speed Rail Authority will work with other rail and mass transit
providers to increase transit ridership both regionally and inter-regionally.
• The High-Speed Rail Authority will continue construction of the HSR system, beginning
with completion of all station-area planning by 2017 followed by completion of the initial
operating segment in 2022. By 2029, HSR will run from San Francisco to Los Angeles.
• ARB, Caltrans, SGC, and HCD, along with other State, local, and regional
agencies, will coordinate planning and support to ensure that the expected
GHG emission reductions from approved SCS are achieved or exceeded.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

55



Sustainable Freight Strategy
• In 2014, ARB will complete the frst phase of the Sustainable Freight
Strategy, which will identify and prioritize actions through at least
2020 to move California towards a sustainable freight system.

Investments
• Leverage available public money to scale-up clean technology markets and
strategies and ensure necessary infrastructure investments, including the following:
• ARB, CEC, CPUC, and CDFA will support growing markets for clean passenger
transportation, advanced technology trucks and equipment, and low-carbon
transportation fuels and energy, including any necessary infrastructure.
• Caltrans, working with local and regional agencies, will consider lifecycle
benefts and impacts (including environmental, construction, operation,
and maintenance costs) for transportation infrastructure projects.
• Caltrans and regional transportation agencies will increase investment
in expanded transit and rail services, active transportation, and other
VMT-reduction strategies in their next regional transportation plans.
• SGC will support SCS implementation, including, for example,
integration of the regional transportation and Regional Housing
Needs Allocation planning, as well as provision of local assistance for
transit, active transportation, and affordable transit-oriented housing
development; therefore offering more effcient consumer choices.
• State agencies, including ARB and Caltrans, will incorporate into
ongoing GHG planning efforts strategies that help achieve signifcant NOx
reductions by 2032 to meet the national ambient air quality standards for
ozone. The 2016 SIPs will outline attainment strategies through 2032.

56

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



3.

Agriculture

Agriculture in California provides a safe, reliable, and affordable food source to support
growing local, State, national, and global populations. It is also a key economic driver in the
State. California has a range of climatic regions that allow for the production of a diverse variety
of annual crops (such as vegetables and grains), perennial crops (such as fruits and nuts), and
livestock and dairy products. As one of only fve Mediterranean growing regions on Earth,
California is a major contributor to the global food supply; particularly of fruits, nuts, vegetables,
and dairy products.
California’s agricultural GHG emission inventory includes on-site emissions from enteric
fermentation (by animals), manure management, rice cultivation, energy use (including fuel
combustion), crop residue burning, and soil management practices (fertilizer and manure
applications). The primary GHG emissions from agriculture include methane (CH4), carbon dioxide
(CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), and black carbon. In 2012, agricultural sources accounted for about
eight percent of California’s total GHG emissions. In addition to being a GHG emissions source,
agriculture can also be a carbon sink, where carbon is stored (sequestered) in both crops and soil.
Many of the strategies to reduce GHG emissions or increase sequestration in the agriculture
sector overlap and have synergies with other sectors. For example, agricultural operations are the
largest water users in the State. Because water use is a signifcant source of GHG emissions (due
to the electricity used to pump water), conservation and water delivery effciency improvement
efforts employed in agricultural operations would support GHG emission reduction goals in
the water sector. Agricultural operations can also contribute to the strategies for reducing
GHG emissions in the energy sector by providing biomass feedstock resources for bioenergy
production (for both fuels and electricity). Reduction strategies described in the transportation,
land use, fuels, and infrastructure sector could also be realized through agricultural land
conservation efforts, and through operational effciency improvements that reduce transportation
emissions and fuel use.
Due to the wide diversity of crop and livestock production, the agricultural sector presents unique
challenges to controlling GHG emissions. The initial Scoping Plan considered voluntary steps to
reduce GHG emissions in this sector in place of regulatory measures, due primarily to costs and
scientifc uncertainty in measuring GHGs in many agricultural systems.
The installation of manure digesters to reduce methane emissions was included as a voluntary
strategy for the agricultural sector in the initial Scoping Plan. However, voluntary installation
of anaerobic digesters at dairies in California has not increased as expected. This is due to the
recent economic recession, increased feed and fuel prices, lack of suffcient fnancial incentives,
and insuffcient utility contracts. ARB is working with federal, State, and local agencies, as well
as with industry stakeholders, to remove obstacles to digester installations. Critical to this is the
continued effort to evaluate the many co-benefts of manure management through digesters. The
evaluation will examine the potential for successful voluntary efforts to be more widely adopted in
California. As new information becomes available, ARB will work with stakeholders to determine
whether and how the program should become mandatory and/or more strongly incentivized.
The initial Scoping Plan also called for research on baseline nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from
the use of fertilizers to improve the GHG inventory. ARB, CEC, and CDFA have been coordinating
and funding research to determine baseline N2O emissions from a variety of soil types, crops, and
farming techniques used throughout California. Research began in 2009 and is expected to be
completed by the end of 2014.
A number of other potential voluntary GHG-reduction activities were mentioned in the initial
Scoping Plan, including improvement of agriculture water use effciency, increasing the effciency
of or electrifcation of agricultural water pumps, using biomass-based fuels, and increasing
carbon sequestration on agricultural lands.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

57



The CDFA, in partnership with scientists at the University of California (UC) at Davis, and with
funding from the CEC, are evaluating the economic, benefcial environmental factors and costs
of biofuel feedstock crops. Outcomes will focus on cropping systems for California with best
management practice recommendations; estimates of direct environmental costs such as water
use, input levels, and effects; and potential off-farm environmental consequences. The CDFA is
working with ARB to expand use of biomass-based transportation fuels as a regulatory pathway
under the Low Carbon Fuel Standard.
The CDFA is also supporting projects that address GHG mitigation through its Specialty Crop
Block Grant Program (SCBGP). Results of funded research projects provide knowledge and
tools to help growers reduce GHG emissions and increase carbon sequestration.
As discussed in Chapter II, there is increased recognition of the signifcant role that short-lived
climate pollutants have on climate change. In response, the importance of methane emissions
from agricultural operations, particularly from rice and cattle operations, has increased.
Consequently, there is a need for enhanced efforts to secure additional methane reductions
from agricultural operations.

Maintaining Momentum
There are many GHG emission reduction and carbon sequestration opportunities that could be
realized in the agriculture sector. However, because of limited research, and the wide variety of
farm sizes, animals, and crops produced, there are few one-size-fts-all emission reductions or
carbon sequestration strategies for the agriculture sector.
Agricultural operations throughout the State are variable, there are a number of potential GHG
sources at each operation, and a number of potential co-benefcial management practices can
be used for each source. To address this complexity, one approach to reducing GHG emissions
from agriculture in California is to develop agriculture-sector mid-term and long-term 2050 GHG
emission reduction planning targets.
To meet GHG emission reduction planning targets, farmers and ranchers could assess their
on-farm GHG emissions and determine which GHG emission reduction management practices
work best for their particular situation. In many cases, pursuing the GHG emission reduction
practices would build on existing
efforts already in use to increase
operational effciency, reduce criteria
pollutant emissions, and reduce costs.

SUCCESS STORY
The broadband Internet technology driving
the information revolution is also driving
revolutions in energy effciency and GHG
reductions for farming. So-called M2M
(machine-to-machine)
technology
now
allows precision farming technology to more
effciently apply fertilizers and pesticides,
helping reduce GHGs and other air pollutants.
Wireless soil moisture sensors reduce water
use, saving electricity costs for pumping
and moving the water. Some growers claim
crop yield increases as a result of more
effective
monitoring
and
timing
of
irrigation—a beneft appreciated all the more
during a drought.
58

The sections below detail some
of the areas with potential
emission reduction/sequestration
opportunities, as well as areas that
need additional research. These
opportunities may yield multiple cobenefts, including cost and resource
savings, to growers.
Nitrogen Management
Nitrogen fertilizers applied to crops
release N2O, a signifcant source
of agricultural GHG emissions.
Obtaining more specifc data on
statewide fertilizer use in agriculture

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



and nitrogen deposition on land would help ARB determine baseline emissions and improve the
GHG N2O inventory. This information would also help guide the development of potential GHG
emission reduction measures. Existing nitrogen tonnage reports and new reporting requirements
under development by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) could be utilized to
improve the existing GHG N2O inventory for fertilizer. Further examination of these data will help
determine if broader statewide fertilizer use reporting is needed.
There are several practices that have been shown to reduce emissions of N2O in agriculture,
including the use of nitrifcation inhibitors, fertigation (the application of fertilizer through
irrigation systems), and other approaches. When fertigation is combined with precision drip
irrigation there are opportunities to both reduce water and nitrogen fertilizer use. Additional
research is needed to evaluate the potential for GHG emission reductions.
Manure Management
Livestock manure is a signifcant source of methane, and approximately half of the methane
generated from livestock comes from manure storage lagoons. The methane generated from
those lagoons can be captured by covering the lagoons and can be used to produce energy
or renewable fuel (e.g., with the use of a digester).
Soil Management Practices
Historically, tilling (loosening and turning) of soil has been a fundamental agricultural practice
to suppress weeds and loosen compacted clay soils. However, tillage releases large quantities of
CO2 and N2O from the soil into the atmosphere. Several alternative methods, including changing
tillage or cropping patterns, may reduce the release of GHGs. Some soil management practices,
such as reduced tilling, can also result in reduced fuel consumption by farm equipment, providing
additional permanent reductions in GHG emissions, including short-lived climate pollutants.
Water and Fuel Use
A new generation of technologically advanced tools, such as remote irrigation systems, will play
an important role in water conservation efforts, maximizing operational effciency and optimizing
resources that can also reduce GHG emissions. In addition, the application of precision irrigation
to crops can reduce water use (in turn, reducing the GHG emissions associated with the energy
needed to deliver the water), which may also reduce fertilizer use—both of which can reduce
emissions and costs.
Greenhouse gases and other emissions from the operation of internal combustion engines that
power farm equipment and water pumps are a concern from a regional air quality and climate
change perspective. To reduce emissions, the cleanest, most-effcient, and well-maintained
equipment should be used for agricultural operations.
The agriculture sector can also play an important role in producing fuels. Biofuel production is
a renewable energy resource that reduces reliance on fossil-based fuels. Fueling equipment with
biofuels generated on-site or nearby can also reduce emissions and fuel costs.
Land Use Planning to Enhance, Protect, and Conserve Lands in California
Recent research has shown that GHG emissions from urban areas are much greater than those
from agricultural lands on a per-acre basis. As California’s population increases, pressures
to convert agricultural croplands and rangelands to urban and suburban development also
increase. Conservation of these lands will be important in meeting our long-term climate goals.
Farmland and open space conservation can be an important policy to support the objectives of
the Sustainable Communities Strategies, including reducing vehicle miles traveled. This could
be accomplished by using incentives for conservation easements, supporting urban growth
boundaries, and maintaining agricultural zoning.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

59



As also described in the Natural and Working Lands Sector section below, to meet the State’s
GHG reduction goals it is important to take an integrated and coordinated approach to local land
use planning that considers all land types, including urban, agricultural, and natural and working
lands, within and across jurisdictions, to create interconnected land areas and ecosystems. Local
and regional land use planning actions and policies need to more fully integrate and emphasize
land conservation and avoided conversion of croplands, forests, rangelands, and wetlands, as
well as expansion and promotion of urban forestry, urban agriculture, and green infrastructure.
Highly Effcient Conventional and Organic Agriculture Systems
Highly effcient management systems (precision agriculture) for both conventional and organic
farming may provide climate benefts through reduced GHG emissions and increased carbon
sequestration. To realize such systems, a host of agricultural management practices might be
required. In addition to potentially reducing GHG emissions, these strategies may also have
co-benefts such as reductions in energy and fossil fuel use and improvements in soil carbon
content and water quality.
Research, Technical Assistance, and Incentives
Over the past several years signifcant progress has been made in understanding agricultural
GHG emissions and the strategies that can provide climate benefts. Through research, technical
assistance, and fnancial incentives, farmers and ranchers have implemented many successful
GHG emission reduction strategies. Priority should be placed on continued coordination and
leveraging of funding between State, local, and national conservation programs to help farmers
and ranchers implement GHG emission reduction practices.

60

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions
for the Agriculture Sector
• In 2014, convene an interagency workgroup that includes CDFA, ARB, CEC, CPUC,
and other appropriate State and local agencies and agriculture stakeholders to:
• Establish agriculture sector GHG emission reduction planning
targets for the mid-term time frame and 2050.
• Expand existing calculators and tools, to develop a California-specifc
agricultural GHG tool for agriculture facility operators to use to estimate
GHG emissions and sequestration potential from all on-farm sources.
The tool would include a suite of agricultural GHG emission reduction
and carbon sequestration practices and would allow users to run different
scenarios to determine the best approach for achieving on-farm reductions.
• Make recommendations on strategies to reduce GHG emissions
associated with the energy needed to deliver water used in agriculture
based on the evaluation of existing reporting requirements and data.
• The Dairy Digester Workgroup will develop recommendations
for a methane capture standard by 2016.
• Conduct research that identifes and quantifes the GHG emission
reduction benefts of highly effcient farming practices, and provide
incentives for farmers and ranchers to employ those practices.
• By 2017, evaluate the data reported to the RWQCB’s Long Term Irrigated Lands Regulatory
Programs to determine if the reported fertilizer data are adequate to establish a robust
statewide GHG N2O inventory for fertilizer used in agriculture. If existing data are not
adequate to develop an inventory, then develop a mechanism to collect the necessary data.
• In 2015, OPR, the California Natural Resources Agency (CNRA), the California
Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA), CDFA, and ARB will convene an inter-agency
workgroup to engage local and regional land use planning agencies in establishing
a coordinated local land use program to develop recommendations and targets for
incorporating farmland conservation in local and regional land use planning.
• CDFA will strengthen technical assistance programs and associated
fnancial incentives to help agricultural operators develop carbon
plans and implement GHG emission reduction practices.
• In 2015, the Bioenergy Interagency Working Group will:
• Strengthen, refne, and implement actions contained in its Bioenergy
Action Plan to promote the input of digester biogas into natural
gas pipelines and bioenergy onto the electric grid.
• Evaluate the potential biomass energy generation capacity.
• Develop methods to quantify biomass life-cycle GHG fux.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

61



4.

Water

In addition to being an essential element for all life, a reliable, clean, and abundant supply of
fresh water is a critical component of California’s economy. The State’s developed surface and
groundwater resources support a variety of residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural
activities. Therefore, the development and management of the State’s water resources has
implications for each of the focus areas evaluated in the updated Scoping Plan.
More than 40 percent of California’s total fresh water supply (or about 80 percent of developed
water resources) is used to support the State’s extensive agricultural industry and, therefore,
has critical ramifcations for the agricultural focus area. A signifcant amount of water is also
used to support residential, commercial, and industrial activities within California’s extensive
metropolitan and suburban areas. Therefore, a reliable water supply also has important
ramifcations for future population growth and economic development as examined within
the transportation, fuels, and land use focus area. Water is also used to cool power plants and
produce hydropower, and therefore has important implications for the energy focus area.
California’s water system includes a complex infrastructure that has been developed to support
the capture, use, conveyance, storage, conservation, and treatment of water and wastewater.
Greenhouse gas emissions from the water sector come primarily from the energy used to pump,
convey, treat, and heat water. As such, water sector emission reductions are primarily associated
with reducing the amount of electricity and natural gas used within the water sector.
The storage, conveyance, and treatment of water in California consume large amounts of
electricity. Approximately 19 percent of the electricity and 30 percent of non-power plant natural
gas consumption is used by the water sector. Water is used to grow crops, support urban and
industrial needs, and produce energy. Therefore, most of the water measures included in the
Scoping Plan focused on the GHG emission benefts derived from reduced energy use, and the
emission benefts are refected in those sectors.
The State is currently implementing several targeted, agricultural, urban- and industrial-based
water use effciency, recycling, and conservation programs as part of an integrated water
management effort that achieves GHG emission reductions within the water sector. California’s
water community is continuing collaborative efforts to reduce its carbon footprint while
improving water supply reliability, drought resilience, and public safety; fostering environmental
stewardship; and supporting a stable State economy.
California’s 2009 Water Conservation Act (Senate Bill x7-7) specifcally addresses urban and
agricultural water conservation. The Act’s key urban provision established an aggressive statewide
goal to reduce per capita water use by 20 percent by 2020. To date, 400 urban water agencies have
prepared water management plans, which cover close to 80 percent of California’s population.
The State has also set ambitious goals for development of alternative water sources such as
recycled water and stormwater. The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) adopted
recycled water and stormwater goals through a stakeholder-driven process. Recycled water
usage is to be increased above the 2002 usage levels by at least one million acre-feet per year
by 2020 and by at least two million acre feet per year by 2030. Stormwater usage is to increase
above the 2007 usage levels by at least 500,000 acre-feet per year by 2020 and by at least one
million acre-feet per year by 2030. Grant and loan programs have provided over $1.15 billion for
recycling and stormwater capture infrastructure, and projects are coming online.
In addition, the State has invested $1.5 billion to support 48 regional collaborative efforts to
develop water management plans, diversify regional water portfolios, and increase regional
water supply self-reliance to support future growth and development. Governor Brown has also
taken action to permanently reduce water use consumption by directing State agencies and
departments to reduce their overall water use by ten percent by 2015 and 20 percent by 2020.85
85

62

See Executive Order B-18-12, issued on April 25, 2012.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



The ongoing drought in California affects energy management as well as water systems.
Reduced snowpack decreases hydroelectricity production, and reduced surface fows create
additional demands for groundwater pumping. These relationships highlight the need for closer
coordination between water and energy managers. Coordinated water and energy investments
can be coordinated to maximize GHG emission reductions, if local and State agencies work
together to identify project designs that best serve both purposes.

Maintaining Momentum
The primary mechanisms to reduce water-related energy use are energy effciency and water
conservation strategies. Many water and wastewater agencies are already leading the way
through conservation-adjusted business plans, investments in effcient infrastructure, reuse
of wastewater, and self-generation of renewable energy; but more work is needed. Achieving
industry-wide shifts will require sustained State leadership and new policy and regulatory
frameworks that account for water supply, water and energy use, water quality standards
with regional fexibility and funding, and effective data collection and analysis. Reducing GHG
emissions from the water sector will require close coordination between water agencies and
energy agencies. Greater attention will need to be paid to the water-related impacts of land use
and development. Most important, the State and local water agencies will need to play a key role
in three areas:
• Prioritizing investments in conservation.
• Adopting rate structures and pricing that maximize conservation.
• Promoting less-energy intensive water management, such
as a comprehensive groundwater policy.
Additional gains in water conservation, especially use reductions in both agricultural and urban
landscape irrigation, are critical not only for meeting GHG emission reduction goals, but also for
resilience to more frequent and severe droughts. Many local agencies throughout California have
invested in water conservation and water use-effciency activities. The State should encourage
and facilitate local water conservation projects that achieve co-benefts of energy effciency and
greenhouse gas emission reductions.
Establishing a conservation-frst policy for water-sector investment and action would help to
sustain declining per-capita usage. This policy would be similar to the State’s “loading order”
policy for energy, which prioritizes investments in energy effciency ahead of developing new
power supplies. The conservation-frst policy could be implemented through legislation or
joint-agency action. (The State’s Energy Action Plan, for example, was jointly approved by the
CEC, CPUC, and CAISO).
Pricing policies are another key tool to deter waste, encourage effciency, and require those who
use the most to pay the costs of assuring the water supply. It is important that such policies also
protect the ability of low-income households to purchase minimum necessary water supplies.
While water rates are set at the local level, the State can use fnancial and regulatory incentives
to promote widespread adoption of strong and equitable price signals to maximize conservation.
These incentives could be made available within State grants and loans, or through applicable
regulatory relief processes such as water rights applications.
California must also develop policies that thoroughly and accurately refect the economic,
social, and environmental value of water, to ensure the effectiveness of future water management
practices, and to evaluate competing water use demands and trade-offs. For example, in the
California Water Action Plan, the State proposed a comprehensive groundwater policy to reduce
overdraft and energy-intensive pumping from deep underground. This policy will require
collaboration between the SWRCB, Department of Water Resources (DWR), Department of Food
and Agriculture, and other agencies.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

63



Successfully meeting the water sector goals will also require balancing multiple policy objectives,
such as food protection, sustainable food production, and renewable energy development.
Interagency coordination, such as the recent efforts of the SWRCB to develop the Water Quality
Control Policy on the Use of Coastal and Estuarine Waters for Power Plant Cooling (once-through
cooling), shows interagency coordination is possible without a drastic overhaul of regulatory
responsibilities. Nevertheless, additional challenges posed by the changing climate and economic
pressures to successfully achieve mitigation goals across multiple economic sectors must be
addressed. Multiple policy objectives must be balanced across a wide spectrum of State water
and climate planning documents, such as the AB 32 Scoping Plan, the Safeguarding California
Plan, the California Water Plan, the Delta Plan, the Bay Delta Conservation Plan, and the
Integrated Regional Water Management Strategic Plan. The California Water Action Plan provides
some guidance on the relationship between the priorities established in these water and climate
planning documents by establishing priorities for the next fve years.
State agency collaboration and policy alignment requires a foundation of information sharing
and feedback. Both agency staff and executives will need to devote more time to inter-agency
dialogue to ensure that policy differences are resolved with a full understanding of the
consequences of decisions taken. In addition, achieving effcient and aligned policies across
agencies may require alterations to existing agency authorities and decision-making procedures.

64

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions
for the Water Sector
Funding
• DWR and SWRCB to give priority to funding integrated management
plans that include robust existing or proposed water and energy
conservation and effciency and measures that achieve GHG emission
reductions. Conservation programs should include numeric targets.

Technology
• CEC to implement new water-related energy conservation
measures and effciency standards.
• CPUC to complete water-energy nexus rulemaking by 2016 and to continue
implementation of joint water-energy utility effciency programs and partnerships
• SWRCB and CPUC to incent resource-recovering
wastewater treatment projects by 2015.
• SWRCB and RWQCB by 2016 to implement green infrastructure
permits to treat and capture urban runoff for local use.

Administration
• As directed by the California Water Action Plan, the DWR, the SWRCB, CPUC,
CEC, CDFA, and ARB to guide adoption of GHG emission-reducing policies
for water sector investments and action by 2015. Conservation measures and
regulations to reduce GHG emissions and maintain water supply reliability
during drought periods will be a centerpiece of this administration action.
• As directed by the California Water Action Plan, DWR, SWRCB, CPUC in
consultation with the CDFA, to identify and incent implementation of rate
structures that accurately refect the economic, social, and environmental
value of water in California while maintaining affordability for basic services.
• As directed by the California Water Action Plan, the SWRCB to develop
a comprehensive groundwater management strategy, and the DWR and
CDFA to provide technical and fnancial assistance to exceed SBx7-7 targets.
• SWRCB and RWQCBs by 2016 to modify State and regional water board policies and permits
to achieve conservation, water recycling, stormwater reuse, and wastewater-to-energy goals.

Education
• As directed by the California Water Action Plan, DWR, SWRCB, CPUC, CEC,
and CAISO to promote water-energy conservation outreach and education.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

65



5.

Waste Management86

The Waste Management Sector covers all aspects of solid waste and materials management,
including the recycling, reuse, and remanufacturing of recovered material; composting and
anaerobic/aerobic digestion; municipal solid waste (MSW) thermal operations (waste-to-energy);
biomass management (combustion, composting, chip and grind); and landflling. This sector
also includes market development programs, such as the State’s environmentally preferable and
recycled-content product purchasing program. The primary source of GHG emissions from this
sector is the direct emission of methane from the decomposition of organic material in landflls.
However, recycling, reuse, and reduction of waste materials will reduce upstream GHG emissions
associated with the production and transport of products. Although many of these upstream GHG
emissions happen outside of California, California’s waste policies can help reduce both local and
global GHG emissions and create jobs within the State.
California has a robust waste management system in place, with established programs that
reduce air emissions through activities such as gas collection systems from landflls and
stringent recycling mandates. California adopted landmark legislation in 1989 (Assembly Bill
(AB) 939) that required cities and counties to reduce the amount of waste going to landflls by 50
percent in 2000 and has surpassed this mandate to achieve 66 percent in 2012. This action has
resulted in diverting nearly 60 million tons per year of material from landflls to reuse, recycling,
composting, and other benefcial uses.87 These reductions could not have been achieved without
the waste industry, local jurisdictions, affected business, and the public working diligently and
cooperatively to meet the goal of AB 939. In doing so, we achieved a co-beneft of substantial
GHG emission reductions due to the energy savings associated with the use of recovered
materials in place of new raw materials.
However, California still disposes about 30 million tons of solid waste in landflls each year.
To address this and recognize the role waste management can play in GHG emission reductions,
the legislature adopted AB 341 (Chesbro, Chapter 476, Statutes of 2011) in 2011. This legislation
set a clear mandate to achieve more signifcant waste reductions by 2020, setting a goal that
75 percent of the solid waste generated be reduced, recycled, or composted by 2020. It is
estimated that achieving the AB 341 waste reduction goal will result in a yearly GHG reduction
of about 20 to 30 MMTCO2e.88
The initial Scoping Plan identifed several activities that would continue to move California
forward in enhancing this integrated system for addressing waste-related issues and further
reduce GHG emissions from this sector. These activities include landfll methane emission
reductions, reduction in waste generation, and shifting waste to more benefcial uses. In 2009,
ARB adopted the Landfll Methane Control Measure to further reduce methane emissions from
landflls. And, in 2012, CalRecycle adopted the Mandatory Commercial Recycling regulation to
further increase recycling programs throughout the State.
ARB approved two resolutions to work with CalRecycle and other stakeholders to characterize
emission reduction opportunities for different options for handling solid waste, including
recycling, remanufacturing of recovered materials, composting and anaerobic digestion,
waste-to-energy, landflling, and the treatment of biomass. In addition, ARB is to develop a
comprehensive approach for the most appropriate treatment of the Waste Sector under the
Cap-and-Trade Program, based upon the analysis of emission reduction opportunities.
86

87
88

66

ARB and CalRecycle have prepared six technical papers: Recycling, Reuse, and Remanufacturing; Composting
and Anaerobic Digestion; Biomass Conversion; Municipal Solid Waste Thermal Technologies; Landflling of Waste;
and State Procurement which are the basis for the information summarized here. The technical papers are available
at www.arb.ca.gov/cc/waste/waste.htm.
This also includes the use of green material as alternative daily cover at landflls and some materials sent
to transformation facilities.
Most of the estimated emissions benefts will be outside of California, since the majority of the recyclable
commodities are currently reprocessed outside the State.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Meeting the AB 341 75 percent recycling goal is the best path forward to maximizing GHG
emission reductions from the Waste Management Sector and putting California on the path for
even greater GHG emission reductions in the future. In the future, net zero GHG emissions are
achievable in a mid-term time frame. By 2050, direct GHG emissions from waste sector activities
could be reduced by 25 percent, creating a net negative GHG footprint for the waste sector.
To achieve these goals, California must take greater ownership and responsibility for the waste
generated within its borders. Shipping of waste, even recyclable products, to other states or
nations is not a viable, long-term, environmentally appropriate waste management practice
for California. Furthermore, exporting waste denies California the economic opportunity of
signifcant job growth that would result if these materials were processed and remanufactured
in California. While California cannot control exports, implementing the principle of owning our
own waste will allow California to develop new, state-of-the-art waste management facilities/
system which can be emulated by other states and nations.

Maintaining Momentum
California will need to maximize recycling, composting, and anaerobic digestion (instead
of landflling) and expand current waste management infrastructure to accommodate the
increases in recycling and remanufacturing of waste material that is expected. This would mean
constructing more composting and anaerobic digestion facilities that can use organics from the
waste stream, as well as building more remanufacturing facilities for recyclable commodities
such as fbers and resins.
Financing and permitting infrastructure development will be critical elements to achieving
the Waste Management Sector goal. Financing, funding, and incentive mechanisms will be
needed to support the development of the in-state infrastructure. Mechanisms to be considered
will include Cap-and-Trade Investment Plan; loan, grant, and payment programs; Low Carbon
Fuel Standard pathways; Public Utility Commission programs (e.g. biogas from anaerobic
digestion and Renewable Market Adjusting Tariff); and offset protocols. Actions will also be
needed to address permitting challenges and streamlining the multi-agency review of new and
expanded infrastructure.
As increasing amounts of materials are diverted and recovered from the landflls, the markets for
the recycled, reused, and remanufactured materials must grow. The State can take a leadership
role in market development by having public agencies increase procurement of products with
low-waste or no-waste attributes. In addition, greater producer responsibility for end-of-life
product management, along with product design changes that minimize impacts on human
health and the environment at every stage, will be increasingly important.
The State will need to explore opportunities for additional methane control at new and existing
landflls either through amendments to the Landfll Methane Regulation and/or moving landflls
into Cap-and-Trade or prohibiting/phasing out landflling of organic materials.
The comprehensive nature of the waste sector has important ramifcations for other focus areas.
For example, efforts to divert green waste or biomass from the waste stream complements
goals within the energy sector to further develop biomass resources for renewable electricity
generation. Expanding agricultural waste diversion through composting and anaerobic digestion
may affect policies within the agricultural focus area. Efforts to expand urban-based waste
recycling and reuse programs may have implications for the transportation, fuels, and land
use focus area.
Enhanced collaboration with State and local agencies is necessary, as California’s waste-related
issues are diverse and interconnected. Determining the best use of recycling alternatives,
examining ways to increase the use of collected wastes and expanding their potential markets,
providing funds to build needed infrastructure, and undertaking additional research are all
important steps to reach the State’s 2050 GHG emission goals.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

67



In summary, to achieve the vision for the waste management sector, certain overarching
actions are recommended. Actions to identify opportunities to further expand and maximize
various waste management alternatives with California’s own borders will need to be pursued.
This could include the implementation of regulatory or statutory actions to phase out organic
materials at landflls; including landflls in the Cap-and-Trade Program; and implementation of
“best management” practices. Financial incentives to build adequate in-state infrastructure and
incentivize activities to accomplish GHG and waste reduction goals are critical. Collaboration
with other agencies, districts, and jurisdictions to streamline the permitting process and
address conficting requirements, including cross media issues, will permit a sustainable
waste management system to grow in California. Additional research will also be needed to
better characterize emissions for various materials and processes, and identify the best waste
management alternatives.

68

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



-

a

Key Recommended Actions
for the Waste Sector
• ARB and CalRecycle will lead the development of program(s) to eliminate
disposal of organic materials at landflls. Options to be evaluated will include:
legislation, direct regulation, and inclusion of landflls in the Cap-and-Trade
Program. If legislation requiring businesses that generate organic waste to
arrange for recycling services is not enacted in 2014, then ARB, in concert with
CalRecycle, will initiate regulatory action(s) to prohibit/phase out landflling of
organic materials with the goal of requiring initial compliance actions in 2016.

0

• ARB and CalRecycle will identify and execute fnancing/funding/incentive mechanisms
for in-State infrastructure development to support the Waste Management Sector goals.
Mechanisms to be considered will include the Cap-and-Trade Investment Plan; loan,
grant, and payment programs; LCFS pathways; CPUC proceedings (e.g. biogas from
anaerobic digestion and Renewable Market Adjusting Tariff); and offset protocols.
• ARB will lead a process of identifying and recommending actions to address crossCalifornia agency and federal permitting and siting challenges associated with composting
and anaerobic digestion. As the frst step, ARB convened a working group in 2013
made up of representatives from CalRecycle, SWRCB, and local air districts to identify
challenges and potential solutions. A working group report will be released in mid-2014.
• ARB will explore and identify opportunities for additional methane control at new and
existing landflls, and increase the utilization of captured methane for waste already in place
as a fuel source for stationary and mobile applications. If determined appropriate, amend the
Landfll Methane Regulation and/or move landflls into the Cap-and-Trade Program (2016/17).
• ARB and CalRecycle will develop new emission reduction factors to estimate GHG emission
reduction potential for various recycling and remanufacturing strategies. To the extent data
are available, these factors will include upstream and downstream emissions impacts.
• CalRecycle and the Department of General Services will need to take the lead in
improving the State procurement of recycled-content materials through the State
Agency Buy Recycled Campaign reform. Recommended improvements need to be
identifed by 2014, along with a plan for implementing the identifed improvements.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

69



6.

Natural and Working Lands (Formerly Referred to as Forest Sector)

Three-quarters of California’s landmass comprises biologically diverse landscapes such as
forests, woodlands, shrublands, grasslands and wetlands. In this section’s discussion, working
lands includes rangelands but not agricultural croplands which are addressed in the Agriculture
Sector. The initial Scoping Plan included a measure on sustainable forests and also identifed
additional strategies such as urban forestry and fuels management. This Scoping Plan update
recognizes the key role that forests and all natural and working lands must play in meeting
California’s GHG emission reduction goals.
Natural and working lands act as both a source of GHG emissions and a carbon sink that removes
CO2 from the atmosphere. For example, vegetation growth and associated carbon sequestration
in response to favorable growing conditions in one year can be followed by reduced growth or
mortality during extended periods of drought. Emissions from wildfre, pest, and disease, are
all natural ecosystem processes that can fuctuate from year to year and greatly infuence the
relationship between source and sink. However, when sustainably managed, the potential for
natural and working lands to reduce GHG emissions and sequester carbon is signifcant and will
be critical to reaching California’s long-term climate goals.
Efforts to reduce GHG emissions and enhance carbon sequestration on natural and working
lands also have signifcant economic, social, and environmental co-benefts, and can aid progress
on efforts to prepare for climate change risks. A few key co benefts include protection of water
supply and water quality, air quality, species habitat, recreation, jobs, wood and related products,
food protection, nutrient cycling and soil productivity, reduced heat-island effect, and reduced
energy use. However, to ensure resilience, carbon management of these lands must be integrated
with a broader suite of resource management objectives for those lands.
The initial Scoping Plan included a Sustainable Forest Target. The goal of this target was to
maintain net carbon sequestration on forest lands. This was to be achieved using the mechanisms
provided by the Forest Practice Rules, timberland conversion regulations, fre safety requirements,
forest improvement assistance programs, and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA),
which requires avoidance or mitigation of impacts affecting forest site productivity or forest
carbon losses to conversion. The initial Scoping Plan also identifed other opportunities to realize
additional GHG emission reductions and increase sequestration, including the following:
• Preventing the conversion of forestlands through publicly
and privately funded land acquisitions.
• Maintaining and enhancing forest stocks on timberlands through forest
management practices subject to the Forest Practice Act.
• Planting trees on lands that were historically covered with native forests.
• Establishing forest areas where the preceding vegetation was not forest.
• Planting trees in urban areas.
• Using urban forest wood waste for bioenergy.
• Reducing vegetative fuels that could feed wildfres and using this waste for bioenergy.
The Board of Forestry and Fire Protection (BoF) has been evaluating the adequacy of existing
forest regulations and programs for achieving GHG emission reductions and ensuring carbon
sequestration on forest lands. In 2010, amendments to CEQA guidelines led to the requirement
that timber harvest proponents subject to State regulations must analyze GHG emissions when
applying for CAL FIRE permits.
The initial Scoping Plan recognized the need for continued research to improve estimates of
ecosystem carbon stocks and GHG fux associated with stock change on forests and other
natural lands. In 2011, ARB contracted with researchers from UC Berkeley to develop a new

70

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



methodology for assessing carbon stock changes for all California’s lands except agricultural and
urban areas. The researchers have developed a new emissions assessment approach based on
feld measurements (Forest Inventory and Analysis data) and satellite remote sensing data and
methods. The methodology includes an emissions assessment of forests, woodlands, grasslands,
shrublands, and wetlands.89
Healthy forests and lands returning to forest are an important source of carbon sequestration.
The UC Berkeley research is showing, however, that loss of forests and other natural lands
through fre, natural ecosystem succession and conversion of forests and woodlands to other
uses represent signifcant CO2 release, potentially signifcantly greater than previously estimated
and may outpace carbon sequestration, possibly by substantial amounts. This information
underscores the importance of managing our forests and other natural and working lands to
maximize the net benefts—increasing sequestration while reducing conversion and carbon stock
losses, and maximizing associated co-benefts.
Application of the new research methodology will enable the monitoring of changes on the land
over time and periodic quantifcation of the GHG fux associated with changes in ecosystem
carbon stocks. As source data improves and methods are refned, ARB’s GHG inventory for
forests and other lands will be updated. This new inventory information can help identify the
steps needed to reverse adverse trends and inform efforts to manage natural and working lands
for net climate benefts.
The methodology developed by UC Berkeley does not include tree-covered urban areas.
However, CAL FIRE, in conjunction with the U.S. Forest Service and researchers at UC Davis,
is also developing GHG inventory data for urban forests and is continuing to refne and update
those data over time. Improvements to ongoing GHG reporting systems will include refnements
to methods and incorporation of additional relevant data sets (such as information on vegetation,
forest stand treatments, and other activities) that are collected by CAL FIRE and other agencies.
On September 11, 2012, Governor Brown signed Assembly Bill 1492 (AB 1492; Blumenfeld,
Chapter 289, Statutes of 2012), with the frst major changes in forest sector legislation in ten
years. Among other things, AB 1492 set into motion a fee on certain types of lumber and wood
products in California that now help fund forest management programs related to timberlands.
One of the provisions of this new law is the requirement for the State to evaluate ecological
performance measures, which are likely to include an evaluation of practices that may directly
or indirectly affect GHG emissions.

Maintaining Momentum
While ongoing efforts are being made to reduce GHG emissions and increase carbon
sequestration in California’s forests, additional work is necessary, and incorporating other
land types into our planning will become increasingly important as we move beyond 2020.
With appropriate investments and sound science-based policy, natural and working lands in
California can provide a tremendous opportunity to meet the State’s climate goals. Over time,
efforts in the Natural and Working Lands Sector will achieve many other important public and
environmental benefts, such as protection of water supply and quality, air quality, and species
habitat, as well as providing recreational opportunities and jobs.
Timing is critical for actions in this sector. Activities to enhance carbon storage on natural and
working lands, such as reforestation or restoration, will require time to fully realize carbon
benefts. For example, planting trees today will maximize their sequestration capacity in 20 to
50 years. In addition, trees in urban environments, or “urban forests,” provide signifcant shading
89

Battles, J., Gonzalez, P., Robards, T., Collins, B., Saah, D., Jan 2014, California Forest and Rangeland
Greenhouse Gas Inventory Development, Final Report, California Air Resources Board Agreement 10-778;
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/sectors/forest/forest.htm

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

71



and other cooling benefts. As the trees mature they reduce urban temperatures and energy
needs. Near-term investments in activities such as planting trees will help us reach our 2020 limit,
but will also play a greater role in reaching our mid-term and longer-term 2050 targets especially
if action is taken in the near-term.
Some actions to reduce emissions and enhance carbon storage in the long-term may result
in temporary, short-term reductions in carbon sequestration. For instance, actions taken to
address forest health concerns or to reduce wildfre risks may result in temporary reductions
in carbon stock, but they are necessary to maintain healthy forests that are more effcient at
GHG sequestration and more resilient to future climate conditions. It’s important to manage our
forests to maximize net climate benefts, increasing sequestration while reducing losses due to
fre or other processes, while also considering the broader range of environmental services that
forests and other natural lands provide.
There may also be additional benefts beyond carbon that can only be realized if actions are
taken early enough. For instance, in some cases restoring tidal wetland can offer food protection
that is able to keep pace with sea level rise through the growth of root mass over time, but such
naturally growing food protection enhancements are only possible if restoration activities are
initiated early.
Through implementation of GHG policies, actions, and strategic investments identifed below,
efforts to enhance, protect, and conserve natural and working lands in California can result in
important climate benefts, as well as a more resilient California that is better prepared for climate
risks such as more frequent and severe wildfres, changing water availability, and stressors on
species and natural communities.
Research and Emission Inventory Updates
Inventory development and improvement are critical for informing carbon management
activities in California. Recently developed tools will enable ARB to generate geospatially explicit
estimates of ecosystem carbon stocks and GHG fux associated with stock change across a
variety of land categories. Though additional work is needed, these tools, along with regularly
updated input datasets will allow tracking of changes over time and provide a new method to
update the GHG inventory.
The sources and methods for quantifying ecosystem carbon and GHG fux in this sector are complex.
Additional work is needed to evaluate the data provided by the UC Berkeley research, to incorporate
additional new data, and to identify further research needed to expand use of these tools. Continued
refnements will advance carbon quantifcation, attribution of GHG fux by disturbance process, and
reduce uncertainty, all of which will help inform effective carbon management activities. There is also
a need to prioritize and conduct additional research on outcomes of specifc practices to maximize
carbon uptake on natural and working lands in California.
Integrating Biological Systems
Natural and working landscapes in California are composed of widely varied, vibrant, and often
interconnected biological systems. Moving forward, it is important to begin looking at these
lands in a more holistic and integrated way to ensure that we maximize opportunities to achieve
biological carbon benefts across the range of California’s natural lands, while also ensuring the
health and resiliency of these lands to provide ongoing ecosystem services.
Forest Planning and Actions
California forests must be managed to ensure that they provide net carbon storage even in the
face of increased threats from wildfre, pests, disease, and conversion pressures. Quantitative
planning targets must be set to increase net forest carbon storage in California in the nearterm, mid-term, and by 2050, while ensuring forest resilience, health, and continued ecosystem

72

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



services. Forest carbon inventory and assessments should be continually maintained and
refned to support this effort, and appropriate measures, funding, and incentives must also
be established.
Specifc actions to meet these planning targets for increasing carbon storage in California forests
will be laid out in a “Forest Carbon Plan” (Plan). The Plan will be developed by a joint inter-agency
workgroup and will necessitate engaging our federal partners with respect to federal lands in
the State. The Plan should also include input from expert resources and stakeholders such as
academia, non-governmental organizations, working forest owners, and local planning groups,
to inform policy decisions. Additionally, the Plan should work synergistically with other State
planning policies where GHG emission reduction strategies and co-benefts intertwine such as
in the Water Action Plan, State Wildlife Adaptation Plan, and Safeguarding California. A resource
economics study may be necessary to support the development of the Forest Carbon Plan;
funding for such a study would be needed.
The Forest Carbon Plan will, at a minimum, set mid-term and long-term planning targets;
identify actions to meet those targets; and provide recommendations on funding those
actions. Development of the Plan should include a review of Forest Practice Regulations and
recommendations for best management practices and potential additional regulatory measures
or amendments needed to minimize GHG emissions and enhance carbon storage associated with
silvicultural treatments. For example, a requirement for Sustained Yield Plans to demonstrate that
activities not only maintain the current level of carbon sequestration, but actually increase carbon
sequestration over the 100-year planning horizon.
Funding recommendations in the Plan should include but not be limited to the following:
• Recommendations regarding the development and implementation of marketbased mechanisms applicable to large forest land owners for the purpose
of ensuring that forests in California provide net carbon storage.
• Recommendations regarding the development and
implementation of a competitive grant program.
• Recommendations regarding types of climate investments that might be supported by
varying levels of funding support from Cap-and-Trade auction revenues or other sources.
• Recommendations regarding the process for dedicating a portion
of Yield Tax Revenue to fund forest climate investments.
• Recommendations pertaining to property tax restructuring or other fnancial incentives
to attract more interest in active forest management by nonindustrial timberland owners.
Another forest action is to incentivize the sustainable use of biomass obtained from forest
management practices to produce energy. This strategy diverts raw materials from being
burned in open piles, and reduces criteria and GHG pollutant emissions. Open burn piles create
particulate emissions, which can exacerbate health problems and interfere with attaining State
and federal ambient air quality standards. In addition, open burning contains black carbon,
which is a short-lived climate pollutant (SLCP). As discussed in Chapter II, SLCPs have a shorter
lifetime in the atmosphere and have a higher pound-for-pound warming potential than CO2, and
as such, during these shorter lifetimes they are very potent. Because SLCPs are removed from
the atmosphere rather quickly, reducing their emissions results in immediate climate and air
quality benefts. Cross-sector coordination is needed between the energy, waste, water, natural
and working lands, and agriculture focus groups to develop recommendations for addressing
economic, infrastructure, and regulatory hurdles regarding the input of bioenergy into the
electricity grid from both small-scale and utility-scale biomass energy facilities.
Development of a carbon life cycle analysis for wood products could also be considered. When
utilizing wood products for construction, manufacturing, and sale of goods in California, the
location of the initial raw wood should be considered along with an analysis of the associated

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

73



carbon emissions from the processing and transport of wood products through the various steps
of the supply chain. Guidelines could be established that would identify and incentivize wood
products that reduce carbon emissions–taking into account GHG emissions from transportation
to the mill, from the mill to the production facility, and fnally to the retailer. For example, wood
harvested in California and transported and utilized locally for construction and manufacturing
would have a lower carbon impact than wood that has been harvested and manufactured outside
the State, shipped from overseas, or processed and reintroduced within California as a fnished
wood product.
Rangelands and Wetlands Planning and Actions
In the absence of comprehensive California rangeland and wetland carbon data, these lands
should be protected from conversion pressures and degradation that could result in signifcant
carbon emissions. In addition, restoration and improved management practices to increase
carbon storage should be incentivized. This is true particularly where such enhancement,
protection, and conservation action provide other important climate benefts, such as improving
watershed conditions and food protection, and providing habitat and connectivity for climatestressed species.
Land Use Planning to Enhance, Protect, and Conserve Lands in California
As described under the Agricultural Sector, an integrated and coordinated approach to local
land use planning that considers all land types is important in meeting the State’s GHG
reduction goals. Urban, natural and working lands, and agricultural croplands within and across
jurisdictions must all be considered to create interconnected land areas and ecosystems. Local
and regional land use planning actions and policies need to more fully integrate and emphasize
land conservation and avoided conversion of croplands, forests, rangelands, and wetlands—as
well as expansion and promotion of urban forestry, urban agriculture, and green infrastructure.
Urban Forests
Expansion and support is needed for urban forest programs, particularly in environmental justice
communities. Urban forests can signifcantly reduce the disproportionate environmental impacts
on California’s environmental justice communities through increased green infrastructure
investments that reduce GHG emissions. These investments beneft communities and result in
environmental benefts such as reduced storm water runoff and clean air; health benefts from
motivating active transportation and reducing urban heat island effects; and economic benefts
such as reduced energy demand through cooling and increased land values. Utilizing local
groups, such as the Local Conservation Corps, to implement urban forest and urban greening
projects in these areas can provide dual benefts by also providing experience, training, and
opportunity for at-risk youth.
Funding Needs
Funding is critical to address the needs in this sector, yet it is far below historic levels and in some
cases does not exist. Outcomes of actions on natural and working lands often occur on a decadal
scale. Action within the next ten years is critical so long-term benefts can be fully realized in
the 2050 time frame. Funding sources must be identifed, particularly where funds from existing
sources can be leveraged effectively.
Funding across the sector is needed for further inventory improvements, research on effective
GHG reduction and sequestration practices, and direct on-the-ground activities known to reduce
GHG emissions and increase sequestration.

74

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



To further defne and describe these needs, a natural and working lands climate investment
working group will be convened to produce a report that outlines funding needs and
opportunities for the Natural and Working Lands Sector as a whole. The GHG inventory, Forest
Carbon Plan, local land use planning efforts, and other statewide efforts should be considered
in development of the report.
To the extent feasible, the report should include strategic prioritization guidelines for investments
in forests, rangeland, or wetlands. As different governmental entities and stakeholders actively
manage forest, rangelands, and wetlands, separate prioritization guidelines should be developed
for each land type and for the sector as a whole, if possible.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

75



Key Recommended Actions
for Natural and Working Lands
• The California Natural Resources Agency (CNRA) and CalEPA will
convene an inter-agency forest climate workgroup to prepare and
publish a “Forest Carbon Plan” in 2016. The Forest Carbon Plan will:
• Set quantitative near-term, mid-term, and long-term planning targets to ensure an
increase in net forest carbon storage in California commensurate with the State’s
long-term GHG reduction goals, and in light of recent research that suggest that
forests in California may be a source of GHG emissions rather than a carbon sink.
• Identify near-term and long-term actions necessary to meet quantitative
planning targets while ensuring forest resilience and health, ecosystem services,
conservation of the forest land base, and continued economic opportunities.
• Evaluate GHG emission and carbon sequestration trends for different forest
land ownership types and consider sector sub-targets for each type.
• Develop specifc recommendations regarding approaches for funding actions
to ensure that forests in California provide net long-term carbon storage.
• In 2016, through AB 1504, CAL FIRE and BOF will evaluate methods to develop
a life cycle analysis to track carbon in wood products; this work should be
coordinated with ARB’s forest inventory and support the Forest Carbon Plan.
• The Bioenergy Interagency Working Group will continue
to work with stakeholders and relevant agencies to:
• Strengthen, refne, and implement actions contained in
its Bioenergy Action Plan related to use of forest biomass.
• Evaluate the potential biomass energy generation capacity.
• Develop methods to quantify biomass life-cycle GHG fux.
• In 2015, OPR, CNRA, CalEPA, CDFA, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW),
CAL FIRE, and ARB will convene an inter-agency workgroup to engage local and regional
land use planning agencies in establishing a coordinated local land use program. The
program will set planning targets that identify, prioritize, and incentivize land conservation;
increase urban forestry canopy cover; bolster development of green infrastructure; and
limit the conversion of both agricultural croplands and natural and working lands.
• In 2015, CNRA, CalEPA, CDFA, CDFW, CAL FIRE and ARB will convene a natural and
working lands climate investment working group to draft a report outlining funding
needs, opportunities, and priorities for the Natural and Working Lands Sector.
• Expand urban forestry and green infrastructure programs and investments,
particularly in California’s environmental justice communities.
• Continue to analyze the UC Berkeley research methodology and data to develop GHG
inventory updates, incorporate more recent data into the newly developed tools for
carbon quantifcation, and invest in and expand monitoring and research to reduce
uncertainty in carbon quantifcation and attribution of GHG fux by disturbance process.

76

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



I
I

I
I

I !1111 [

-9
0
4D

7.

Short-Lived Climate Pollutants

Mitigation of short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs)—which include black carbon, methane,
tropospheric ozone, and some hydrofuorocarbons (HFCs)—produces immediate climate benefts
and is an important complement to efforts to reduce emissions of CO2. Many short-lived climate
pollutants are already regulated by ARB, either as part of the air quality and toxics program
or under the Scoping Plan. For example, black carbon levels in California will be reduced by
95 percent from the late 1960s to 2020, primarily due to diesel controls and burning restrictions.
Peak urban ozone levels have also been reduced by more than 75 percent since the 1960s;
however, substantial further reductions are needed to comply with federal requirements to meet
the National Ambient Air Quality Standard by 2032. ARB is mitigating methane and HFCs from
various sources through the implementation of control measures identifed in the initial Scoping
Plan and will develop a more aggressive short-lived climate pollutant strategy by 2015 that will
include an inventory of sources and emissions, the identifcation of additional research needs,
and a plan for developing necessary control measures. ARB will consult with external experts
in the development of this strategy.
Several recent analyses of atmospheric measurements suggest that actual methane emissions
may be 1.3 to 1.7 times higher than estimated in ARB’s emission inventory. California and federal
agencies, universities, and national laboratories have put into place a comprehensive set of
research studies to determine the sources of these higher-than-expected methane emissions,
and whether additional controls are technologically feasible and cost-effective. In March 2014, the
Obama Administration released the Climate Action Plan - Strategy to Reduce Methane Emissions90
identifying actions to improve methane emission estimates and develop methane emission
control measures. The Strategy identifes key agencies that will be responsible for evaluating and
implementing methane reduction strategies for various sources including landflls, agriculture
operations, coal mines, and oil and gas production. Strategies that address methane emissions
in this Update are identifed in the preceding sector discussions on energy, agriculture, and waste.
Short-lived climate pollutants have a subcategory of compounds that are considered to have an
even higher signifcance on climate change on a per-ton emission basis than other SLCPs. These
compounds are called high global warming potential (GWP) gases. High-GWP gases are those
that, on a per-ton basis, contribute to global warming at a level many times greater than carbon
dioxide (GWPs of 150 or higher). These gases are manufactured, have no natural sources, and
have been in use for decades, primarily in refrigerators, air conditioners, and foam insulation.
A majority of the emissions are comprised of hydrofuorocarbons (HFCs), with a smaller
percentage from perfuorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafuoride (SF6), and nitrogen trifuoride
(NF3). Although emissions of high-GWP gases are only three percent of today’s statewide
GHG inventory, they are the fastest-growing GHG source in California as HFCs are replacing
ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) in response to the Montreal Protocol mandates. Signifcant
efforts will be needed to control these emissions as the ODSs are phased out. The ODSs
are primarily chlorofuorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofuorocarbons (HCFCs), and all the
fuorine-containing gases are collectively known as F-gases. Figure 7 shows California’s F-gas
emission trends from 1990 to 2050.

90

www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/fles/strategy_to_reduce_methane_emissions_2014-03-28_fnal.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

77



Figure 7:

Fluorinated gas (F-gas) Emissions in California (1990–2050)
F-gas Emissions in California
Estimated Projections 1990-2050 (w/ CARB regs as of 2013)

100

80

MMTCO2e

BAU Emissions
(w/o any CARB regs pre 2008)

60

----------

CFCs
40

HFCs, ODS substitutes
HCFCs
20

0
1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Note: The blue dashed line represents business-as-usual F-gas emissions
if no CARB regulations had been adopted to reduce high-GWP emissions.
The dark blue area represents business-as-usual (BAU) emissions,
including reduction measures adopted as of December 2013.

Due to the phase-out of ODSs, total F-gas emissions have been reduced by 57 percent since
1990. However, HFCs continue to increase as they replace the ODSs that are banned by the
Montreal Protocol. Even with the current regulations that are in place, HFC emissions are
expected to increase by about 40 percent (from 18 to 25 MMTCO2e) between 2012 and 2020.
With no additional control measures, HFC emissions in California are expected to more than
double by 2050, to 43 MMTCO2e annually, accounting for approximately half of California’s
long-term GHG emission target.
While high-GWP gases are not a discrete sector of California’s economy, the Scoping Plan
addressed them as a sector to organize and track emissions, sources, and emission reduction
strategies. The focus of the Scoping Plan measures was primarily on HFC emission reduction
programs. These measures focused on two central themes to achieve fve MMTCO2e of GHG
emission reductions by 2020: (1) use of lower-GWP alternatives for certain consumer products
and new motor vehicle air conditioning systems, and (2) avoiding releases of currently used
high-GWP gases, using gas recovery options, such as those for electrical transmission and
particle accelerators, and leak tightness specifcations.
Implementation of the Scoping Plan measures has reduced emissions from a variety of sources.
The biggest reductions of high-GWP gases are expected to come from ARB’s Refrigerant
Management Program, which requires facilities with refrigeration systems to inspect and repair
leaks, maintain service records, and in some cases, report refrigerant use. Signifcant reductions
are also expected to come from a motor vehicle air-conditioning (AC) credit program for vehicle
models 2017 and beyond. This measure is part of the Low Emission Vehicle (LEV III) regulation
that has been aligned with a new federal Clean Cars program.

78

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



In spite of ARB efforts, signifcant obstacles remain for further reductions of HFCs, due to
the diverse nature of sources. Substantial progress has been made in recent years in the
development of low-GWP alternatives in the refrigeration and foam industries that can achieve
signifcant reductions in the high-GWP sector. Low-GWP refrigerants and insulating foam are
currently under evaluation to better understand their technical feasibility and cost-effectiveness
in various applications. Based on further analysis, ARB may develop programs to require
low-GWP insulating foam materials and refrigeration systems that use either low-GWP
alternatives or signifcantly reduced amounts of HFCs.
California’s efforts can help support a national or international phase-down of HFC production
and consumption. On June 8, 2013, the United States and China entered into a preliminary
agreement to phase down the production and consumption of HFCs between the two countries.
For the frst time, the United States and China will work together and with other countries to
use the expertise and institutions of the Montreal Protocol to phase down the consumption
and production of HFCs, among other forms of multilateral cooperation.

Maintaining Momentum
There are several potential approaches to further reduce high-GWP F-gases. These include:
High-GWP F-gas Phasedown
California to work with the U.S. EPA to establish national standards in alignment with the
European Union (EU) proposed F-gas phasedown of HFC production and import to just 21 percent
(based on CO2-equivalents) of baseline annual usage (years 2008 – 2011) by the year 2030. Some
sector-specifc prohibitions are included within the proposed EU phasedown, including a ban on
refrigerants with a GWP greater than 2,500 used in new equipment.
Low-GWP Requirements
Low-GWP substitutes for ODSs and HFCs are becoming increasingly feasible and cost-effective.
As such, it will be vital to require that low-GWP compounds be used for commercial refrigeration
and air conditioning, residential appliances and air conditioning, insulating foam, motor vehicle
air conditioning, transport refrigeration, aerosol propellants, metered dose inhalers, solvents, fre
suppressants, sulfur hexafuoride uses, and structural pesticide fumigants if California is to meet
its mid-term GHG goals and long-term GHG emission reduction goal of 80 percent below 1990
levels by 2050.
ODS Recovery and Destruction
The Montreal Protocol has reduced ODS emissions signifcantly (by almost 60 percent)
by reducing the production and consumption of ODSs. However, it appears that end-of-life
emissions from legacy equipment are still signifcant. Due to higher demand and therefore
higher value of recovered ODSs, there is currently less incentive for ODS destruction. More
than 80 percent reduction in ODS emissions (approximately 20 MMTCO2e) can be obtained
by 2030 by incentivizing recovery and destruction of ODSs at the end-of-life. This can be done
by a combination of strategies, including adjustments to current ODS destruction protocols,
implementing a mitigation fee, and/or using cap-and-trade revenue to help pay for higher costs.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

79



High-GWP Fee
An upstream mitigation fee on sales of high-GWP gases would incentivize a faster transition
to low-GWP substitutes, and could further incentivize improved refrigerant recovery practices.
The fee would also be applied to sales or import of equipment pre-charged with high-GWP gases.
The mitigation fee would complement rather than replace downstream high-GWP regulations
currently in effect or being developed. As sources comply with regulatory measures, affected
entities would reduce their emissions and therefore the fees they would need to pay. A high-GWP
fee would address high-GWP gases in a consistent manner, on a carbon dioxide equivalent basis,
and serve to change behavior, induce new low-GWP alternative products, and provide revenue
that can be used to mitigate GHG emissions.

80

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions for
Short-Lived Climate Pollutants
• Develop a comprehensive strategy for mitigation
of short-lived climate pollutants by 2015.
• Continue diesel controls that will reduce black carbon
emissions by 95 percent from the late 1960s to 2020.
• Reduce emissions of smog-forming pollutants by about 90 percent below 2010
levels by 2032 to meet the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for ozone.
• Create a collaborative agreement with the U.S. EPA to establish national
standards in alignment with the European Union (EU) proposed F-gas
phasedown of HFC production and importation to just 21 percent (by CO2equivalents) of baseline annual usage (years 2008-2011) by the year 2030.
• Require low-GWP gases where feasible and cost-effective.
• Incentivize recovery and destruction of ODSs at the
end-of-life by a combination of strategies, including adjustments to
current ODS destruction protocols, and/or implementing a mitigation fee.
• Set an upstream mitigation fee on sales of high-GWP gases and sales
or import of equipment pre-charged with high-GWP gases.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

81



8.

Green Buildings

Buildings represent the second largest source of statewide GHG emissions, when accounting
for electricity, natural gas, and water consumption. However, there are additional GHG emissions
related to buildings that have not yet been fully accounted for as part of the Statewide GHG
emission inventory. For example, additional GHG emissions could be accounted for under
a lifecycle emissions analysis approach such as estimating emissions resulting from the mining,
harvesting, processing, and transportation of materials used to construct new buildings, as well
as products consumed over the life of a building. The siting and integration of buildings into
communities may also affect transportation patterns and infrastructure needs and result in
GHG benefts. Green buildings are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to maximize
energy effciency, conserve water, and minimize waste. They also are strategically located to
encourage people to walk, bike, or take public transit rather than drive cars.
Green buildings offer a comprehensive approach to support California’s climate change goals
across multiple sectors, including energy, water, waste, and transportation while protecting
the environment and public health. Green buildings utilize an integrated process to improve
the design and construction of new buildings, as well as to retroft, maintain, and operate
existing buildings. By supporting current initiatives and expanding the long-term focus
toward zero carbon buildings, green buildings represent a fundamental shift toward a crosssector and integrated climate policy framework. In the last fve years, California has solidifed
its commitment to green building; leading the way with State buildings, improving building
standards, continuing to raise the bar with voluntary programs at the local level, and greening
existing buildings.
Leading the Way with State Buildings
Governor Brown took a leadership role by signing Executive Order B-18-12 in April 2012. The
Executive Order directs State agencies and departments to take immediate action for state
government buildings to serve as models for green buildings. New and renovated State buildings
shall achieve Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design for New Construction (LEED-NC)
“Silver” certifcation or higher. All existing State buildings over 50,000 square feet shall complete
LEED for Existing Buildings: Operations and Maintenance (LEED-EB: O&M) certifcation by 2015.
In addition, the Order provides that 50 percent of new State facilities beginning design after
2020 shall be zero net energy (ZNE) buildings, and all new State buildings and major renovations
starting design in 2025 shall be ZNE buildings. Already, over 100 State buildings have been able
to achieve LEED certifcation. Nearly half of those certifcations are for LEED-NC, 35 percent
are for LEED-EB: O&M, and about 20 percent are certifed to the LEED for Commercial Interiors
(LEED-CI) rating system.
In addition, by the end of 2014, there will be 46 megawatts of on-site solar photovoltaic systems
at State facilities, plus about 33 megawatts at University of California campuses, and 11.3
megawatts at California State University campuses.
California Green Building Standards
Reducing GHG emissions from construction is being accomplished through continuous updates
to the California Green Building Standards (CALGreen) Code. Originally adopted in 2008, the
CALGreen Code included all voluntary standards that went beyond the basic building code
requirements and introduced new standards for reducing water use, provisions for reducing and
recycling construction and demolition waste, criteria for site development to locate buildings
near public transit, and measures for improving indoor air quality to protect the health of building
occupants. In 2010, the CALGreen Code became mandatory on a statewide basis. The 2010 code,
as amended, included provisions for additions and alterations for non-residential buildings,
but it still only applied to new construction for low-rise residential buildings. For the 2013
code, effective January 2014, the scope of the CALGreen Code was expanded to all residential

82

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



buildings, including high-rise residential, as well as to additions or alterations with increases
in conditioned space. In addition to mandatory standards, the CALGreen Code still includes
voluntary standards, also known as Tiers, that offer model building code language available
for local adoption.
Voluntary Programs at the Local Level
Local governments are helping to reduce GHG emissions as they adopt green building standards
that include targets to exceed minimum State building standards for new construction. Over
100 local governments have adopted “beyond code” green building standards. Twenty of those
cities adopted building standards to exceed the Building Energy Effciency Standards by 15
or 30 percent; IOUs supported the adoption of these local “reach” energy standards through
technical analysis and funding, as overseen by the CPUC. About 50 cities and counties have
standards exceeding the minimum CALGreen Code Tiers. Over 60 local governments have
mandated all new construction to achieve third-party green building certifcation, such as the
GreenPoint Rated program and the LEED rating system. Similarly, school districts are pursuing
high performance standards for greening public schools. About 40 school districts have
mandated minimum Collaborative for High Performance Schools (CHPS) certifcation for all new
construction and major modernization. Since 2008, nearly 200 schools in California have been
recognized as CHPS schools.
The State’s higher education systems are also leaders in designing and constructing green
buildings on their campuses. For example, the University of California system has taken a
proactive role in reducing GHG emissions in its buildings and in 2013; President Janet Napolitano
declared an initiative for the University of California to achieve carbon-neutrality in its operations
by 2025.91 As of 2011, the California State University system had 36 buildings that were LEED
certifed with an additional ten buildings expected to qualify for some level of LEED certifcation.92
Finally, California’s Community Colleges have made remarkable progress toward conserving
energy and making their campuses more energy effcient.93
Greening Existing Buildings
While building standards for new construction, additions, and alterations are useful to reduce
the impacts of climate change, major renovations and sustainable operation of existing buildings
offer the greatest potential to reduce building-related GHG emissions. Over 500 buildings have
been certifed to the LEED-EB: O&M rating system, which certifes that a building’s operations
follow rigorous green building standards and practices. To maintain momentum for greening
existing buildings, progressive programs that accelerate the uptake of proven strategies are
needed to reduce not only energy impacts, but also water, waste, and transportation impacts of
the existing building stock. To this end, California must begin to develop a process to implement
a portfolio of green building requirements to reduce GHG emissions at time of sale or using other
trigger mechanisms.

Maintaining Momentum
Zero Net Carbon Buildings
Zero net carbon buildings will be key as we continue to pursue an integrated approach to reduce
new and existing building-related impacts that combine climate and air quality programs. To this
end, the State will be developing new emission reduction programs for State buildings, schools,
homes, and commercial buildings. It will be essential to expand upon the Energy Sector zero net
energy building goals and establish goals to achieve zero net carbon buildings. Achieving these
goals would result in zero net carbon emissions over the course of a year from all GHG emission
91
92
93

http://sustainability.universityofcalifornia.edu/documents/carbon-neutrality2025.pdf.
www.calstate.edu/pa/documents/CSU_Sustainability_Report_2011.pdf
http://extranet.cccco.edu/Portals/1/CFFP/Sustainability/BOG_Energy_Sustainability_Policy_FINAL.pdf

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

83



sources associated, directly and indirectly, with the use and occupancy of buildings. Zero net
carbon buildings could utilize high-performance design solutions, generate renewable energy
and heating on-site or locally, and employ other techniques to eliminate or offset GHG emissions
from all GHG impacts (i.e., energy, water, waste, and transportation) associated with a building.
Zero net carbon buildings are the next generation of buildings and could contribute signifcantly
to achieving our long-term GHG emission goals.
The key actions summarized below would support the State’s efforts to realize the 2020 emission
reduction limit while helping to drive California toward developing and implementing additional
strategies to achieve emission reductions from green buildings.

84

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Key Recommended Actions
for Green Buildings

I

Develop a comprehensive GHG emission reduction program for new construction,
existing building retrofts, and operation and maintenance of certifed green
buildings. Program development to be completed by end of 2017 and incorporate
the following principles:
• Achieve Executive Order goals for State buildings.
• Build on California’s existing zero net energy building goals and activities by 2015.
• Continue research activities to better quantify GHG emission
reduction potential of certifed green buildings by 2016.
• Strengthen the next two triennial editions (2016 and 2019) of the Green Building Standards
Code with mandatory provisions that reduce GHG emissions by 2017 and 2020 respectively.
• Build on AB 758 Action Plan implementation activities, and explore
opportunities to implement a portfolio of green building retroft
requirements at time-of-sale or other trigger mechanism by 2017.
• Explore methodologies to quickly but accurately quantify direct and
indirect GHG emissions from new and existing buildings by 2017.
• By 2017, establish target dates and pathways toward transitioning to zero
net carbon buildings that expand upon and complement ZNE goals.
• By 2018, implement a mechanism to track progress toward
achieving statewide green building goals.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

85



9.

Cap-and-Trade Regulation

The Scoping Plan recommended the development of a California Cap-and-Trade Program that
links with other Western Climate Initiative partner programs to create a regional market system.
On January 1, 2013, ARB launched the second-largest GHG Cap-and-Trade Program in the world.
The Cap-and-Trade Regulation ensures progress toward the near-term 2020 statewide limit, while
providing businesses the greatest fexibility to reduce emissions at the lowest possible cost.

Q

The Cap-and-Trade Program is a vital component in achieving both California’s near-and longterm GHG emissions targets. California’s Cap-and-Trade Regulation is purposely designed to
leverage the power of the market in pursuit of an environmental goal. It opens the door for major
investment in emission-reducing technologies and sends a clear economic signal that these
investments will be rewarded. The Cap-and-Trade Regulation establishes a hard and declining
cap on approximately 85 percent of total statewide GHG emissions. Under the Cap-and-Trade
Regulation, ARB issues allowances equal to the total amount of allowable emissions over a given
compliance period and distributes these to regulated entities. One allowance equals one metric
tonne of greenhouse gases. Each regulated entity must hold allowances or other compliance
instruments equal to its emissions.
The Cap-and-Trade Regulation gives companies the fexibility to trade allowances with others or
take steps to cost-effectively reduce emissions at their own facilities. Companies that emit more
have to turn in more allowances or other compliance instruments. Companies that can cut their
GHG emissions have to turn in fewer allowances. But as the cap declines, aggregate emissions
must be reduced. Companies can meet a limited portion of their compliance requirement by
surrendering offset credits, which are rigorously verifed emission reductions that occur from
projects outside the scope of the Cap-and-Trade Regulation. The offset program was included
in the Cap-and-Trade Regulation because it is an important cost-containment mechanism. The
Cap-and-Trade Regulation currently recognizes offset protocols for four project areas: forestry,
urban forestry, manure digesters, and the destruction of ozone-depleting substances. ARB
recently adopted a compliance offset protocol for the capture and destruction of fugitive mine
methane, and is developing a protocol to reduce GHG emissions from rice cultivation. ARB will
continue to evaluate additional offset protocols with an emphasis on in-state opportunities.
With just the envisioned six compliance offset protocols, it is clear there will not be enough offsets
to meet the 2013–2020 maximum offset demand if every entity chose to use the maximum number
of allowable offsets. It should be noted that the Cap-and-Trade Program is designed so that offsets
will play a larger role in cost containment in the later years of the program. As ARB continues to
work to identify additional compliance offset protocols, there will be challenges, particularly for
in-state offset protocols. California has a history of identifying and regulating emissions when it is
feasible and cost-effective. Under AB 32, offsets must be additional to any regulatory requirement
and beyond business-as-usual. California’s focus on regulations limits opportunities for California
offsets. This preference for regulatory solutions—which are mandatory under a regulation as
opposed to voluntary under an offset protocol—ensures maximum emission reductions.
However, it limits opportunities for offsets both in- and out-of State.
The Cap-and-Trade Regulation is being implemented in two stages. Electric generating utilities,
electricity importers, and large industrial facilities became subject to the program beginning
in 2013, and fuel distributors are brought under the cap in 2015.
The Cap-and-Trade Regulation is different from most of the other measures in the Scoping Plan.
The regulation sets a hard cap, instead of an emission limit, so the emission reductions from
the program vary as our estimates of “business as usual” emissions in the future are updated.
In addition, the Cap-and-Trade Program works in concert with many of the direct regulatory
measures—providing an additional economic incentive to reduce emissions. Actions taken to
comply with direct regulations reduce an entity’s compliance obligation under the Cap-and-Trade
Regulation. So, for example, increased deployment of renewable electricity sources reduces a
utility’s compliance obligation under the Cap-and-Trade Regulation. Finally, the Cap-and-Trade

86

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Regulation provides assurance that California’s 2020 limit will be met because the regulation sets
a frm limit on 85 percent of California’s GHG emissions.
Under the Cap-and-Trade Regulation, a portion of the allowances required for compliance are
auctioned by the State. The frst auction of emission allowances occurred in November 2012.
To date, ARB has held fve successful auctions.
The State’s portion of the proceeds from these auctions is to be used to fund projects to reduce
GHG emissions. A three-year investment plan was submitted to the Legislature in May 2013,
identifying the State’s GHG emission reduction goals and priority programs for investment
of the action proceeds. More discussion of auction proceeds and other investments is included
in Chapter V.
Because the Cap-and-Trade Program applies only to California entities, ARB designed the
regulation to minimize emissions leakage. ARB continues to conduct ongoing leakage
assessment studies that are based on an evaluation of industry emissions and trade exposure.
ARB is considering several amendments to improve the Cap-and-Trade Regulation in 2014.
In particular, ARB proposes to provide additional transition assistance in the form of free
allowances to industrial producers while the new leakage studies are being conducted. In
addition, ARB is proposing mechanisms to keep allowance prices within an acceptable range
by allowing a limited number of future allowances to be used for compliance should prices get
too high. The continuation of the Cap-and-Trade Program will enhance the effectiveness of the
new cost containment mechanism proposal.
California linked its program with the Canadian Province of Québec in January 2014. California
and Québec have worked together to harmonize their regulations and coordinate on a
joint auction platform and tracking system. ARB provided a report on the status of linkage
implementation to the governor and CalEPA in November 2013.
As part of the Cap-and-Trade Regulation, the Board also approved an Adaptive Management
Plan94 to track unintended consequences of the Cap-and-Trade Regulation. The Plan requires ARB
to develop systems to track and respond to: (1) potential adverse localized air quality impacts that
might be caused by the Cap-and-Trade Regulation, and (2) potential adverse impacts that might
be caused by the Compliance Offset Protocol U.S. Forest Projects (Protocol). ARB is working with
the local air districts to determine the most effective path forward for gathering and evaluating
permit data, GHG data, and other information needed for tracking potential localized impacts. As
part of this effort, ARB has amended the Regulation for the Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse
Gas Emissions to collect information on GHG emission increases and decreases from covered
entities. ARB has contracted with the University of California, Davis, and is working with forestry
experts from around the country to develop an approach to understand potential forest impacts
resulting from implementation of the Protocol under Cap-and-Trade.

Maintaining Momentum
The Cap-and-Trade Program will continue to be a vital component in achieving California’s
longer-term climate change goals. As the cap continues to decline, the Cap-and-Trade Program
incentivizes emission reductions associated with the production of energy and goods and
encourages consumers to reduce emissions. Sending the market a signal that the Cap-and-Trade
Program will continue in the long-term is critical to fully realizing the benefts of the program.
Continuing the program and establishing an emission cap beyond 2020 will also reduce the costs
of the program as California industry and households make long-term capital and investment
decisions. A clear path forward will lead to a lower-carbon California.
94

The 2011 Adaptive Management Plan for the Cap-and-Trade Regulation is available at
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/adaptive_management/plan.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

87



As the Cap-and-Trade Program continues to help achieve our long-term climate goals, it will be
increasingly important to bolster the offset program. As noted above, there are real challenges
to identifying in-state offset protocols, but ARB is committed to pursuing those that are
workable. Part of the strategy to ensure suffcient offsets are available is to continue to consider
international sector-based offset programs. The Cap-and-Trade Regulation already includes a
placeholder for potential international sector-based offsets from programs designed to Reduce
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) through a future rulemaking. To
that end, the REDD Offset Working Group, an ad hoc technical expert working group, labored for
two years to develop technical and policy recommendations that were provided for consideration
in fnal form to ARB, Acre (Brazil), and Chiapas (Mexico) in July 2013.95
Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) is another option to reduce emissions under both the
Cap-and-Trade Program and the Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). Successful development
and deployment of CCS in California would provide in-State GHG emission reductions, lower
an entity’s compliance obligation under Cap-and-Trade, and potentially lower an entity’s carbon
intensity under LCFS.

B. Progress to Date
The initial Scoping Plan laid out an ambitious plan for reducing GHG emissions from a
combination of direct regulatory measures, incentives, and market-based approaches. The
Cap-and-Trade Program establishes an overall limit on GHG emissions from most of the California
economy—the “capped sectors.” Within the capped sectors, some of the reductionvvs are being
accomplished through direct regulations, such as improved building and appliance effciency
standards, the LCFS, and the 33 percent RPS. Whatever additional reductions are needed to bring
emissions within the cap is accomplished through price incentives posed by emissions allowance
prices. Together, direct regulation and price incentives assure that emissions are brought down
cost-effectively to the level of the overall cap. Reductions in the remainder of the economy—the
“uncapped sector”—are being accomplished through specifc measures, such as those for highGWP gases and fugitive emissions from industrial sources.
Over the last fve years, ARB has worked with other State and local agencies to implement
the climate change programs outlined in the Scoping Plan and to ensure their smooth
implementation. The State’s progress on measures included in the Scoping Plan and other
complementary activities have put California on the path to achieve the statewide GHG emissions
limit of 1990 levels by 2020, and to achieve the maximum technologically feasible and costeffective reductions over the long-term. Today, many of the State’s GHG emission reduction
measures and initiatives set forth in the initial Plan have been adopted and are in the early stages
of implementation. Full implementation of all adopted measures by 2020 will not only allow us
to reach our near term GHG goals but will also provide numerous additional public health and
environmental benefts.
We measure progress toward the 2020 statewide limit in two ways:
• Evaluating the expected emission reductions from ongoing regulations and programs:
ARB and other State agencies are implementing numerous programs to reduce
GHG emissions. The California Greenhouse Gas Report Card is an annual report that
summarizes state agency activity to reduce greenhouse gases.96 To assess whether
California will meet the 2020 limit, it is necessary to estimate the expected emission
reductions from these measures in 2020 based on the regulatory requirements.
95

96

88

REDD Offset Working Group. 2013. California, Acre and Chiapas – Partnering to Reduce Emissions from
Tropical Deforestation: Recommendations to Conserve Tropical Rainforests, Protect Local Communities and
Reduce State-Wide Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Available at
http://greentechleadership.org/documents/2013/07/row-fnal-recommendations-2.pdf.
The State Agency Greenhouse Gas Reduction Report Card is available at :
www.climatechange.ca.gov/climate_action_team/reports/2013_CalEPA_Report_Card.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



• Evaluating emission trends: Each year, ARB updates the statewide GHG emission inventory.
This information provides a retrospective look at emissions and is based on actual data,
either reported directly to ARB or to other regulatory agencies. The emission inventory
is useful for evaluating progress in sectors that are affected by many different programs.
For example, the electricity sector is affected by the Renewable Energy Standard, energy
effciency programs implemented by utilities, appliance effciency standards, building
codes, and numerous other programs. One way to assess progress in this sector is to
retrospectively examine whether actual emission trends are consistent with our expectations.
ARB used both of these methods to evaluate progress toward the 2020 statewide limit in this
Update. As the Scoping Plan is in the early stages of implementation, this evaluation will be ongoing.

1.

Key Accomplishments

California has undertaken a number of notable groundbreaking climate change initiatives.
These include the frst in the nation economy-wide Cap-and-Trade Program, the Low Carbon Fuel
Standard, a 33 percent Renewable Portfolio Standard, and an Advanced Clean Cars program that
has been adopted at the federal level. ARB has also worked closely with our local and regional
partners to implement the Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008 (Senate
Bill 375). Strategies developed under this program integrate land use, housing, and transportation
planning to reduce regional passenger vehicle GHG emissions.
In addition to these efforts, additional actions include Building and Appliance Energy Effciency
Standards, the California Solar Initiative (i.e., Solar Hot Water Heaters and Million Solar Roofs),
Water Effciency, Mandatory Commercial Recycling, and High-Speed Rail.

2.

GHG Emissions Trends

In 2006, Assembly Bill 1803 mandated that ARB prepare, maintain, and update California’s
statewide GHG emission inventory. The GHG emission inventory serves as the foundation for
tracking the State’s emission trends and progress toward California’s GHG emission reduction
goals. The GHG inventory provides estimates of the amount of GHGs emitted to the atmosphere
by human activities within California. The inventory includes estimates for carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), sulfur hexafuoride (SF6), hydrofuorocarbons (HFCs), and
perfuorocarbons (PFCs), which are often referred to as the “six Kyoto gases,” plus nitrogen
trifuoride (NF3). The emission estimates of the seven gases are typically expressed in terms
of million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents (MMTCO2e). The emissions of the non-carbon
dioxide gases are converted in CO2e units based on their global warming potential relative to
that of carbon dioxide.
The California statewide GHG emission inventory is structured and aligned with the Guidelines
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories developed by the IPCC (2006). Emission estimates
rely primarily on state, regional, or national data sources. The inventory also incorporates
methodology and data from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks,
published by the U.S. EPA.97 Starting in 2008, facility-level data from ARB’s Mandatory GHG
Reporting Program have been used to compile statewide emissions from electricity generation
facilities, refneries, cement plants, and lime and nitric acid production facilities.
ARB regularly publishes updated versions of California statewide GHG emission inventory on its
Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventory website.98 A technical support document detailing the data
sources and methods used to develop the inventory is also available for download from the same
website. The current inventory compiles statewide anthropogenic GHG emissions from 2000
through 2012, using consistent sets of data and methods to allow for the detection of trends over
time (Figures 8a and 8b). ARB updated the GHG emission inventory in this Update to be based on
GWPs in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report.
97
98

www.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/usinventoryreport.html)
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/inventory.htm.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

89



Figure 8a: California Total and Per Capita GHG Emissions (2000-2012)
15
Total Emissions

14

450

13
400
12
Emissions Per Person

Tonnes of CO2e per person

Million tonnes CO2e

500

350
11

300
‘00

10
‘01

‘02

‘03

‘04

‘05

‘06

‘07

‘08

‘09

‘10

‘11

‘12

Figure 8b: California Sectoral GHG Emissions (2000-2012)
200

175
Transportation

Million tonnes CO2e

150

125
Electric Power

100

75

Industrial

50
Commercial & Residential

25

0
‘00

-----

Agriculture

-

0 High GWP
Recycling & Waste

‘01

‘02

‘03

‘04

‘05

‘06

‘07

‘08

‘09

‘10

‘11

‘12

Over the last decade, the total statewide GHG emissions decreased from 466 MMTCO2e in 2000
to 459 MMTCO2e in 2012—a decrease of 1.7 percent. The emissions in 2012 increased for the frst
time in the fve-year period since 2007. This increase was driven largely by the increased natural
gas-generation of in-state electricity due to the closure of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station (SONGS) as well as dry hydrological conditions in 2012 (drought) causing a drop in the
in-state hydropower generation. California’s population grew by 11.3 percent between 2000 and
2012. As a result, California’s per capita GHG emissions have decreased by 11.6 percent. The
recent recession had a major impact on GHG emissions between 2008 and 2009, when emissions

90

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



decreased by almost six percent. Other changes refect ongoing early implementation of Scoping
Plan measures, energy effciency actions, renewable power requirements, and hydrology (rain
and snow fall). In 2012, emissions from the transportation sector continued to decrease while
emissions from the electric power sector increased from the previous year. Emissions from all
other sectors remained relatively constant since 2000.
A summary of the trends in emissions observed for each of the major sectors of the statewide
GHG inventory is provided below.
Transportation Sector: The transportation sector remained the largest source of GHG emissions
in 2012, constituting more than 36 percent of California’s GHG emission inventory. Emissions
decreased by fve percent between 2000 and 2012. Emissions from on-road vehicles constituted
over 92 percent of the transportation sector. These emissions have declined each year since
2007, with the greatest decrease occurring at the time of the recession. In the summer of 2008,
fuel prices reached a historic maximum, followed by a dramatic decrease in the consumption of
gasoline and diesel fuel. Total transportation fuel consumption declined in 2008, and even with
modest increases in 2009 and 2010, on-road emissions continued to decrease, remaining below
pre-recession levels as the economy improved.
Electric Power: Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation have decreased by
9 percent from 2000 to 2012, in spite of the shutdown of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station (SONGS) and low hydro-power generation due to the drought, both of which caused an
increase in emissions for 2012. California produces almost 70 percent of its electricity within the
State and imports the rest. Emissions from in-state electricity generation decreased by more than
13 percent between 2000 and 2012. During that period, electricity consumption grew from 265.8
terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2000 to 282.1 TWh in 2012, with a peak of 288.0 TWh in 2008.
Over the last twelve years, on average, hydropower provided 13 percent of California’s electric
power generation. The amount of hydropower produced is dependent on rainfall and was highest
in the two wettest years, 2006 and 2011. Hydropower production, as well as other non-emitting
sources of energy, affects the GHG intensity of electricity generation (the amount of CO2e emitted
per megawatt-hour [MWh] generated). The GHG intensity of California electricity peaked in
2001 and reached a low point in 2011, a particularly wet year. Both the GHG intensity of in-state
generation and that of electricity imports have been reduced since 2008, with in-state intensity
showing a slight increase in 2012 due to the double impacts of the SONGS shutdown and the low
hydro-power output caused by the drought.
Industrial Sector: Industrial emission sources include refneries, oil and gas extraction, cement
plants, and other stationary sources that consume fuel. Emissions from the industrial sector
have declined overall, decreasing by six percent between 2000 and 2012. Associated with the
recession, a decline of three percent was observed in 2009. However, emissions grew by four
percent from 2009 to 2010. Emissions from cement plants, made up of fuel combustion and
clinker process emissions, peaked in 2005, with a decrease beginning in 2006 and continuing
through 2010. Between 2005 and 2010, cement plant emissions declined 44 percent, refecting
a large decrease in demand due to the crisis in housing and construction, as well as the closure
of three cement plants in the State over the period. Cement production has begun to recover,
showing a 24 percent increase in emissions in 2012 from its 2010 low.
Commercial and Residential Sectors: Emissions from the commercial and residential sectors are
driven by the combustion of natural gas and other fuels for household use and heating and for
providing energy for commercial businesses. Emissions remain fat over the past twelve years
between 2000 and 2012.
Emissions from residential fuel combustion showed a decline of fve percent over the last
twelve years, with its lowest point of 28.1 million tonnes occurring in 2012. At the same time, the
number of housing units grew steadily, from 12.2 million units in 2000 to slightly over

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

91



e e e

13.7 million in 2012, resulting in a sharp decline in the fuel consumption per housing unit.
The commercial sector emissions increased 16 percent between 2000 and 2012, but at the
same time commercial use of foor space has increased slightly faster, resulting in slightly
reduced emissions per unit of foor space.
Agricultural Sector: Agricultural emissions represent the sum of emissions from agricultural
machinery fuel use, residue burning, soil management and fertilization, enteric fermentation,
manure management, and rice cultivation. Emissions (primarily methane emissions from
livestock) increased by 16 percent between 2000 and 2012. Agricultural fuel use was the only
category that saw a GHG emissions decrease from 2000 to 2012, decreasing by three percent over
that period. On the other hand, emissions from manure management increased 29 percent during
the same period, refecting the growth of the number of animals in agriculture in California.
High-GWP Gases: High Global Warming Potential (high-GWP) gases included in the inventory
consist primarily of substitutes for ozone-depleting substances. Emissions from this sector
increased by 129 percent between 2000 and 2012. This growth is driven by the increasing
substitution of these gases to replace ODS gases in refrigeration, air conditioning, aerosols,
and other applications over the last decade.
Recycling and Waste: Emissions from the recycling and waste sector consist of methane and
nitrous oxide emissions from landflls and from commercial-scale composting, which increased
by 16 percent between 2000 and 2012.99 Emissions from landflls constitute about 94 percent
of the total emissions of this sector. In 2000, 37 million tons of solid waste was deposited in
California’s landflls; deposits grew to 42 million tons by 2005, followed by a steady decline to 29
million in 2012. The decrease in annual landfll deposits has not yet resulted in a landfll emissions
trend decline however, since the total waste-in-place not yet decomposed that has accumulated
from the landflls’ opening continues to drive the increasing amount of landfll gas generated.

3.

Emission Reductions to Meet the 2020 Statewide Limit

Assembly Bill 32 required ARB to determine California’s 1990 statewide GHG emissions level,
which would become California’s near-term statewide emissions limit to be achieved by 2020.
ARB developed a California statewide GHG emission inventory for years 1990–2004 to support
the effort of determining the 1990 level and 2020 emissions limit. In December 2007, the Board
approved a total statewide GHG 1990 emissions level and 2020 emissions limit of 427 MMTCO2e,
based on the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report. As discussed in Chapter II, most national
and international climate change organizations are moving to the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment
Report, which updated the global warming potential of GHGs, especially methane and HFCs.
ARB is proposing to update the number for the 2020 limit, weighting the 1990 emissions with
100-year GWPs from the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report. The new 2020 statewide limit is 431
MMTCO2e—an approximately one percent increase from the 427 MMTCO2e limit adopted by the
Board in 2007. In addition, to assess progress toward the limit in a consistent manner, ARB is
using GWPs from the Fourth Assessment Report to update projections of the emission reductions
that adopted and anticipated Scoping Plan measures will achieve.
ARB maintains the statewide GHG emission inventory to track California’s progress toward the
2020 statewide emissions limit. To determine the amount of GHG emission reductions needed
to reduce to 1990 emissions, ARB developed a forecast of 2020 emissions in a business-as-usual
scenario (2020 BAU),100 which is an estimate of the emissions expected to occur in the year 2020
if none of the foreseeable measures included in the Scoping Plan101 were implemented. ARB
99

See the Recycling and Waste sector discussion earlier in this chapter for a discussion of additional
GHG emission reductions associated with upstream activities.
100 www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/forecast.htm.
101 www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/tables/reductions_from_scoping_plan_measures_2010-10-28.pdf.

92

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



subtracts the estimated reductions from adopted and anticipated measures in 2020 to determine
whether the 2020 limit is within reach (Table 5). The Cap-and-Trade Regulation provides a frm
cap, ensuring that the 2020 statewide emission limit will not be exceeded. Thus, the estimated
emission reductions attributed to the Cap-and-Trade Program depend on the emissions forecast.
For example, if the emissions forecast increases, the reductions associated with the Cap-andTrade Program will increase.
Table 5:

Meeting the 2020 Emissions Target
Category

2020 (MMTCO2e)**

AB 32 Baseline 2020 Forecast Emissions (2020 BAU)

509

Expected Reductions from Sector-Based Measures
Energy

25

Transportation

23

High-GWP

5

Waste

2

Cap-and-Trade Reductions

23*

2020 Limit

431

*
**

Cap-and-Trade emission reductions depend on the emission forecast.
Based on AR4 GWP values.

C. Next Steps
Since the initial Scoping Plan was released, California has put in place a number of measures
that have already led to signifcant emission reductions, and a transformation to a strong,
stable low-carbon economy in California is under way. It is critical that California continues
to develop and implement a successful climate policy. Planning must begin now to transition
the State toward meeting our longer-term GHG emission reduction goals. Table 6 summarizes
the recommended actions the State should take in each of the sectors discussed earlier in this
chapter to meet our climate change goals.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

93



Table 6:

Summary of Recommended Actions by Sector
All Sectors
Set mid-term targets to meet a State mid-term GHG emission reduction goal when defned.

94

Expected
Completion Date

Energy Actions

Lead Agency

Develop a comprehensive and enforceable GHG emission reduction
program for the State’s electric and energy utilities.

ARB
CEC
CPUC
CAISO

2016

Develop criteria and rules for fexible demand response resources
to participate in wholesale markets and integrate variable
renewable resources.

CPUC
CAISO

TBD

Expand participation of regional balancing authorities in CAISO
Energy Imbalance Market and other methods of balancing
authority cooperation.

CAISO

Ongoing

Through AB 758 process, develop a plan to encourage energy
assessments and energy use disclosure requirements.

CEC

2016

Enhance energy effciency and demand-response programs,
and develop robust methodologies to monitor and evaluate the
effectiveness of these programs.

CEC
CPUC
CAISO

Methodologies
by 2015/
Enhanced
program
proceedings
by 2016

Develop ministerial, low-cost interconnection process for
distributed generation.

CPUC
CEC
CAISO

2015

Assess existing barriers to expanding the installation of CHP
systems and propose solutions that help achieve climate goals.
A future CHP measure could establish requirements for new or
upgraded effcient CHP systems.

ARB
CEC
CPUC
CAISO

2016

Continue development of statewide programs that could require new
residential and commercial construction to meet ZNE standards.

ARB
CPUC
CEC

TBD

Develop cost-effective, on-site reductions for large
industrial facilities, consistent with the audit fndings under
the Energy Effciency and Co-Benefts Audits for Large Industrial
Sources Measure.

ARB

TBD

Develop measures to control fugitive methane and carbon dioxide
emissions from oil and gas production, processing,
and storage tanks.

ARB

2014

Develop measures to reduce fugitive emissions from natural gas
transmission and distribution pipelines and associated facilities
(e.g., compressor stations).

ARB
CPUC

TBD in the
SLCP Plan

Work with the local air districts to evaluate amendments to their
existing leak detection and repair rules for industrial facilities to
include methane leaks.

ARB

Ongoing

Evaluate the potential for CCS in California to reduce emissions
of CO2 from energy and industrial sources. Working with Division
of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources, CEC and CPUC, ARB will
consider a CCS quantifcation methodology for use in California

ARB

2017

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Transportation Actions

Lead Agency

Expected
Completion Date

Propose “Phase 2” heavy-duty truck GHG standard standards.

ARB

2016

Expand upon 2013 ZEV Action plan for medium- and heavy-duty ZEVs.

OPR

2017

Enhance and strengthen the LCFS with more aggressive
long-term targets.

ARB

2014

Adopt the necessary regulations and/or policies to further support
commercial markets for low-carbon transportation fuels.

ARB
CPUC
CEC
CDFA

2018

Evaluate updating the SB 375 regional targets established in 2010.

ARB

2014

Ensure GHG emission reductions from approved SCS are achieved
or exceeded through coordinated planning.

ARB
Caltrans
SGC
HCD
Local &
Regional

Ongoing

HighSpeed Rail
Authority

2017
2019
2022
2029

Complete the frst phase of the Sustainable Freight Strategy, which
will identify and prioritize actions through 2020 to move California
towards a sustainable freight system.

ARB

2014

Provide expanded markets for clean passenger transportation,
advanced technology trucks and equipment, low-carbon
transportation fuels and energy, and related infrastructure.

ARB
CEC
CPUC
CDFA

TBD

Consider lifecycle benefts and impacts for transportation
infrastructure projects

Caltrans

TBD

Increase Caltrans and regional transportation agencies’ investments
in expanded transit and rail services, active transportation, and
other VMT reduction strategies in regional transportation plans.

Caltrans &
Regional
Transportation
Agencies

TBD

Support Sustainable Communities Strategies to provide more
effcient consumer choices.

SGC

Ongoing

Incorporate into ongoing GHG planning efforts strategies that help
achieve signifcant NOx reductions by 2032 to meet the national
ambient air quality standards for ozone. The 2016 SIPs will outline
attainment strategies through 2032.

ARB
Caltrans

2016

Construct HSR system
• Complete all station-area planning.
• Complete Caltrain component of HSR.
• Complete initial operating segment of HSR.
• Run HSR from San Francisco to Los Angeles.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

95



96

Expected
Completion Date

Agriculture Actions

Lead Agency

Convene an interagency workgroup whose purpose is to: (1)
establish agriculture-sector GHG reduction planning targets for
the mid-term time frame and 2050; (2) develop a California-specifc
agricultural GHG tool to estimate GHG emissions and sequestration
potential from all on-farm sources; (3) strategies to reduce GHG
emissions associated with energy in agricultural water use.

CDFA
ARB
CEC
CPUC

2014

Develop a methane capture standard.

Dairy
Digester
Workgroup

2016

Evaluate data reported to Long Term Irrigated Lands Programs, to
determine if the reported fertilizer data are adequate to establish
a robust statewide GHG N2O inventory for fertilizer used in
agriculture.

RWQCB

2017

Develop recommendations for a coordinated local land
use program.

OPR
CNRA
CalEPA
CDFA
ARB

2015

Implement actions in Bioenergy Action Plan to promote the input
of digester biogas into natural gas pipelines and bioenergy onto
the electric grid, evaluate the potential biomass energy generation
capacity, and develop methods to quantify biomass life-cycle GHG
fux.

Bioenergy
Interagency
Working
Group

Ongoing

Water Actions

Lead Agency

Give priority to funding integrated management plans that include
robust existing or proposed water and energy conservation and
effciency, and measures that achieve GHG emission reductions.
Conservation programs must include numeric targets.

DWR
SWRCB

2014

Implement new water-related energy conservation measures
and effciency standards

CEC

2015

Complete water-energy nexus rulemaking and continue
implementation of joint water-energy utility effciency programs
and partnerships.

CPUC

2016

Incent resource-recovering wastewater treatment projects.

SWRCB
CPUC

2015

Implement green infrastructure permits to treat and capture urban
runoff for local use.

SWRCB
RWQCB

2016

Guide adoption of GHG emission-reducing policies for water sector
investments and action. Conservation measures and regulations to
reduce GHG emissions and maintain water supply reliability during
drought periods will be a centerpiece of this administration action.

DWR
SWRCB
CPUC
CDFA
ARB

2015

Identify and incent implementation of rate structures that accurately
refect the economic, social, and environmental value of water in
California while maintaining affordability for basic services.

DWR
SWRCB
CPUC
CDFA

TBD

Develop a comprehensive groundwater management strategy and
provide technical and fnancial assistance to exceed SBx7-7 targets.

SWRCB
DWR
CDFA

TBD

Modify State and regional water board policies and permits to
achieve conservation, water recycling, stormwater reuse, and
wastewater-to-energy goals.

SWRCB
RWQCB

2016

Promote water-energy conservation outreach and education.

DWR
SWRCB
CPUC
CEC
CAISO

TBD

Expected
Completion Date

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Expected
Completion Date

Waste Management Actions

Lead Agency

Eliminate the disposal of organic materials at landflls.

CalRecycle
ARB

2016

Implement fnancing or incentive mechanisms for in-State
infrastructure development to support Waste Sector goals.

CalRecycle
ARB

TBD

Develop actions to address cross-California agency and federal
permitting and siting challenges associated with composting and
anaerobic digestion.

ARB

2014

Identify opportunities for additional methane control at new and
existing landflls, and use of captured methane as a fuel source for
stationary and mobile applications.

ARB

TBD in the
SLCP Plan

Develop new emission reduction factors to estimate GHG
emission reduction potential for various recycling and
remanufacturing strategies.

ARB
CalRecycle

TBD

Identify improvements to the procurement of recycled-content
materials through the State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign reform.

CalRecycle
DGS

2014

Natural and Working Lands Actions

Lead Agency

Convene an inter-agency forest climate workgroup to prepare
and publish a “Forest Carbon Plan.”

CNRA
CalEPA

2016

Evaluate methods to develop a life cycle analysis to track carbon
in wood products.

CAL FIRE
BOF

2016

Implement actions in Bioenergy Action Plans related to use of forest
biomass, evaluate the potential biomass energy generation capacity,
and develop methods to quantify biomass life-cycle GHG fux.

Bioenergy
Interagency
Working
Group

Ongoing

Develop recommendations for a coordinated local land use program.

OPR
CNRA
CalEPA
CDFA
CDFW
CAL FIRE
ARB

2015

Convene an interagency workgroup to draft a report outlining funding
needs, opportunities, and priorities for Natural and Working Lands.

CNRA
CalEPA
CDFA
CDFW
CAL FIRE
ARB

2015

Expand urban forestry and green infrastructure programs
and investments, particularly in California’s environmental
justice communities.

CAL FIRE

Ongoing

Expected
Completion Date

;

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

97



98

Short- Lived Climate Pollutants Actions

Lead Agency

Expected
Completion Date

Develop a comprehensive strategy for mitigation of short-lived
climate pollutants, including methane.

ARB

2015

Continue diesel controls that will reduce black carbon emissions by
95 percent from the late 1960s to 2020.

ARB

2020

Reduce emissions of smog-forming pollutants by about 90 percent
below 2010 levels by 2032 to meet the National Ambient Air Quality
Standard for ozone.

ARB

2032

Create an agreement with U.S. EPA to establish national standards
for the proposed F-gas phasedown of HFC production.

ARB

2030

Require low-GWP gases where feasible
and cost-effective.

ARB

TBD in the
SLCP Plan

Incentivize recovery and destruction of ODS at end of life by a
combination of strategies.

ARB

TBD in the
SLCP Plan

Set an upstream mitigation fee on sales of high-GWP gases and
sales or import of equipment pre-charged with high-GWP gases.

ARB

TBD in the
SLCP Plan

Green Building Actions

Lead Agency

Build on California’s existing zero net energy building goals and
activities.

CEC
CPUC

2015

Continue research activities to better quantify GHG emission
reduction potential of certifed green buildings.

ARB

2016

Strengthen the next two triennial editions of the Green Building
Standards Code with mandatory provisions that reduce GHG
emissions.

CBSC

2016 & 2019

Building on AB 758 Action Plan implementation activities, explore
opportunities to implement a portfolio of green building retroft
requirements at time-of-sale or other trigger mechanism.

CEC

2017

Explore methodologies to quantify direct and indirect GHG
emissions from new and existing buildings.

TBD

2017

Establish target dates and pathways toward transitioning to zero net
carbon buildings that expand upon and complement ZNE goals.

ARB
CPUC
CEC

2017

Implement a mechanism to track progress toward achieving
statewide green building goals.

ARB
CPUC
CEC

2018

Cap - and -Trade Actions

Lead Agency

Expected
Completion Date

Develop a plan for a post-2020 Cap-and-Trade Program, including
cost containment, to provide market certainty and address a midterm emissions target.

ARB

2017

Expected
Completion Date

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps



Evaluation Actions

Lead Agency

Expected
Completion Date

Develop a plan for an Ex Post Assessment of Realized Cost and
Benefts of AB 32.

ARB

2014

Assess the effects of AB 32 programs on disadvantaged communities

ARB

2014 (Phase I)

Develop guidance for agencies administering Cap-and-Trade
auction proceeds, including actions to fulfll the requirements for
investments to beneft disadvantaged communities.

ARB

2015

Report annually to the Legislature on auction proceeds investment
results and benefts to disadvantaged communities.

ARB
DOF

Ongoing

Update the three-year Cap-and-Trade Auction Proceeds Investment
Plan, identifying funding gaps and new investments needed for
GHG emission reductions and other environmental and public
health benefts.

ARB

2016

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter IV: Accomplishments and Next Steps

99



V.

Achieving Success

Climate change presents an unprecedented set of challenges for California
that cuts across sectors and policy areas. These emerging challenges are
increasingly unifying policy planning across government agencies and
jurisdictions, allowing us to do more with less – achieving multiple goals
more quickly and effectively than if we address separate priorities in isolation.
Successfully delivering on California’s climate policies and realizing the full benefts of California’s
leading approach to climate change requires careful policy planning and implementation, diligent
monitoring, and evaluation of policies (Chapter VI). We are integrating climate thinking and
sustainability programming into the range of actions we take to grow the economy, protect the
environment, and plan for the future. Increasingly, we must coordinate planning to ensure that
the way we design and grow our communities for the future allows us to meet all of our goals
– including those related to economic growth, equity, climate change and resiliency, air quality,
water quality and reliability, mobility, public health, and others. Of course, achieving success
requires targeted investment and market support, to launch commercial markets for the cleanest
technologies and build the infrastructure we need to support continued economic growth in
California that is increasingly free of pollution and consequence for disadvantaged communities
or future generations. And it requires active outreach to share our successful approach and
expand global action to address climate change.
With strategic investment and coordinated policy-making, California can slash emissions from
trucks and trains while at the same time building a world-class goods movement and freightdelivery system. We can modernize our rail and passenger transportation systems to move
people in ways that both reduce greenhouse gases and increase mobility options and safety.
We can take actions to cut emissions of potent short-lived climate pollutants that will also deliver
key public health benefts. And we can align strategies that both support reduction goals and
bolster our ability to deal with the impacts of climate change already underway.
The imperative of climate change can push action to advance priorities that affect every aspect
of our built and natural environments, and quality of life. Effectively implementing California’s
climate plan will not just chart the path in the fght against climate change, but also to cleaner
air, better health, and lasting, equitable growth.

A. Integrate and Coordinate Planning
California faces many critical, and equally important, planning objectives. In order to most
effectively meet each of them, minimize costs, and maximize and accelerate benefts, the State
is focused on integrating planning objectives and ensuring that limited investments advanced
as many objectives as possible. The strategies we pursue to cut greenhouse gas emissions
from our cars, trucks, buses, trains and industries can support ongoing efforts to improve air
quality up and down the state, especially in our most heavily impacted communities. Effciency
and conservation programs in the water sector needed to cut emissions will also drive critically

100

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



needed efforts to enhance supply and reliability priorities. We can cut emissions from our waste
stream while also increasing home-grown sources of low-carbon energy and fuels. And we can
manage our natural lands and valuable agricultural resources in ways that both achieve climate
goals and enhance their long-term sustainability.
The nexus between air quality and climate is a key example. The South Coast and San Joaquin
Valley Air Quality Management Districts, together home to more than half of the State’s
population, must reduce emissions of smog-forming pollutants by about 90 percent below 2010
levels by 2032 to meet the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Many of the technologies
and strategies to reduce smog-forming pollution or GHG emissions are the same. Advancing
progress on climate change should advance progress on air quality, and vice versa. By effectively
integrating our planning to do so, as California has done through its Vision modeling exercise and
Sustainable Freight Plan (among other activities), we can accelerate progress to meet both air
quality and climate change objectives.
Amid dire drought, the availability, reliability, and quality of water are taking center stage. Water
effciency, conservation, and storage are connected to energy effciency and supply, food supply,
land use and housing, and economic growth of our agricultural and other sectors. The phase-out
of once-through cooling in the State’s power plants links energy supply with water availability,
quality, and habitat. As we respond to the drought, develop an increasingly clean and reliable
energy supply system, and build upon California’s climate framework, we must ensure that our
efforts in one area recognize and reinforce the objectives in the others. To that end, DWR has
developed a Climate Action Plan. The State Water Board is developing a Guidance Document on
Climate Change. Together with other efforts being led through the Climate Action Team and those
identifed in this Update, California is increasingly focused on integrating objectives for climate
and water policy planning.
Increasingly, technologies and planning objectives are converging across sectors. Electrifcation
in the transportation and building sectors must coincide with decarbonization of electricity
supply. New electricity loads from these sectors, as well as increasing levels of renewable
generation, will change the operational requirements of the electricity grid, which in turn
affects emissions and operations for electric transportation. Changes in the energy sector will
affect the water and agricultural sectors due to the signifcant amount of energy used to move
water throughout the State and the important role and evolving role of hydropower in the
electricity system. Green and net zero energy buildings create new accounting requirements and
interactions between utilities and customers and buildings and the electricity grid. The growing
role of bioenergy for transportation fuels, heat production, and electricity generation will impact
the agricultural, natural lands, water, and waste management sectors. All of this will have direct
or indirect effects on land use that will require integrated planning and a closely coordinated
effort with locally driven GHG emission reduction initiatives. State agencies are addressing each
of these cross-cutting issues and others through standing, interagency working groups that all
keep climate change as an overarching or integral theme.
Integrating planning to achieve multiple objectives inherently requires coordination among
planning agencies across sectors, systems, and governmental jurisdictions. Already, climate
change is serving as a unifying objective that is bringing unprecedented levels of collaboration
among government agencies. California state agencies meet routinely and work very
collaboratively as part of the Climate Action Team or other climate-related working groups.
ARB is working with Caltrans, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, and many other
agencies and stakeholders to develop the Sustainable Freight Strategy. SB 375 has created new
relationships and coordinated planning between state and local planning agencies. The Desert
Renewable Energy Conservation Plan is a unique collaboration among state and federal agencies.
And this Scoping Plan Update is key example of the level of coordination happening among
California State agencies to address climate change.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

101



State Plans that Will Assist the State in Meeting Its GHG Goals
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

California Climate
Adaptation Strategy
Safeguarding California Plan
(Update to 2009 Adaptation Strategy)
California’s Clean Energy Future
ARB’s Vision for Clean Air
California Agricultural Vision
DWR Climate Action Plan
CEC Integrated Energy
Policy Report
California Transportation Plan
Strategic Fire Plan for California
Water Action Plan

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Environmental Goals
and Policies Report
Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Action Plan
Caltrans Interregional Blueprint
Climate Research Plan
Vision California
State Implementation Plan
CDFW Vision for Confronting Climate
Change in California
Extreme Heat Adaptation Guidance
Document
AB 341 75% Plan
(in development)

California’s state agencies are collaborating to achieve the State’s climate change goals and
broader environmental protection goals, in concert with achieving their own individual agency’s
goals. It will be necessary to maintain and strengthen this collaborative effort, and to draw upon
the assistance of regional and local governments and private institutions, to achieve the State’s
near-term and longer-term emission reduction goals and improve its ability to adapt to potential
climate change impacts.
The Governor’s Offce provides leadership to set priorities and to ensure a coordinated effort
is taken among the numerous State agencies and departments in pursuing GHG emission
reductions. To this end, Governor Brown has overseen the development of the Zero Emission
Vehicle Plan and Bioenergy Action Plan, and has set distributed generation and combined
heat and power goals for the State in his California Clean Jobs plan. The Governor’s Offce
of Planning and Research (OPR) has hosted several stakeholder conferences and participated
in research efforts on issues including climate change adaptation risks and strategies, zero
emission vehicles and infrastructure planning, strategies to increase renewable and distributed
energy integration, GHG emission assessments in CEQA, and streamlining criteria. OPR is also
providing outreach and technical assistance to regional and local government transportation
and land use planning agencies.
Climate change, like many issues, crosses economic sectors, policy areas, and governmental
jurisdictions. Recognizing this, the State has established interagency workgroups to provide
coordinated policies and strategies in various key areas where GHG emission reductions are
needed to meet California’s 2020 limit. For example, the Water-Energy Team of the Climate Action
Team (WET-CAT), consisting of over two dozen State agency and academia representatives,
is tasked with coordinating efforts on both GHG emission reductions and adaptation actions
affecting the portion of the energy sector that supports the storage, transport, and delivery of
water in California while ensuring that the State continues to maintain water quality and adequate
water supplies. Part of the WET-CAT effort has been to provide recommendations to pertinent
agencies on water and energy policies and actions.
This Update is California’s plan for future actions to reduce climate-changing emissions. Other
State agencies have already developed plans and actions specifc to their priorities that will
assist California in fulflling the vision set forth in the Scoping Plan and this Update, and are
expected to continue to do so. Some plans are interagency plans, developed in coordination with

102

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



numerous State agencies’ policies
and priorities. Future State agency
planning tools must incorporate
mechanisms to help the state meet
California’s GHG emission
reduction goals.
Action plans have been developed in
concert with adaptation planning and
climate research. State environmental
goals and objectives should be integrated
and framed to align State agency decisionmaking toward attaining these goals, as
proposed in the Governor’s Environmental
Goals and Policies Report.

B. Transportation,
Land Use, and Housing
Planning Development
One of the most critical, cross-cutting issues
for addressing climate change and other
integrated policy priorities is land use and
development.
Over the past 60 years, growth in
automobile ownership, development of the
highway system, and the rise of suburban
neighborhoods has dominated the landscape
in much of California and the United States.
This development pattern has created a
dispersed network of cities and towns, which
can be diffcult to serve effciently with
transportation and other necessary public
services. In the same way that past policies
have shaped today’s built environment,
actions taken today will establish
the foundation for a more sustainable future.
For the frst time, State law (SB 375)
requires an integrated approach to planning
our transportation system and land use.
Metropolitan planning organizations and
local governments are collaborating to
evaluate alternative future scenarios that
could make land use development patterns
and supportive transportation systems more
sustainable. Regional planning agencies
that are responsible for forecasting growth
and preparing transportation plans to
accommodate that growth are already
responding to signifcant demographic and
market shifts that call for changes in the
way we plan our housing and transportation

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

SUCCESS STORY
Local Governments in Action
In 2013, the City of Palo Alto switched to 100
percent renewable energy. To support this, the
city authorized solar power purchases totaling
182,500 MWh of solar a year—enough to power
the city’s 65,000 residents and more.
The City of Tulare in central San Joaquin Valley
has implemented extensive building retroft
and residential solar programs, created a 100
percent green-powered wastewater treatment
facility by installing a 900 kilowatt (kW) fuel
cell system, one MW of solar power, and
much more. Through these improvements,
Tulare is expected to save more than $13.9
million in energy costs and avoided capital
and operation costs.
In 2010, the Metropolitan Transportation
Commission awarded $33 million in grants to
promote: innovative, breakthrough techniques
to reduce GHG emissions; purchase electric
vehicles for public agencies and tribes, and to
electrify City CarShare; bringing shore power
to the Port of Oakland; implementation of bikedetecting traffc signals; and more.
In December 2012, the City of Glendale
launched the use of “smart meters” for
all 120,000 residents, which will result in
considerable electricity savings over the
next 15 years through energy effciency,
increased options for time-of-use electricity
rates, and real-time user consumption data to
encourage conservation.
Sonoma County’s Energy Independence
Program (SCEIP) is an innovative voluntary
fnancing program that uses the property tax
system to fund permanent energy effciency,
water-effciency,
and
renewable-energy
improvements. Since 2009, SCEIP provided $64
million in funding to more than 1,900 property
owners in the county.
103



infrastructure. Recently adopted regional sustainable community strategies (SCS) are designed to
respond to shifts in the way future generations of Californians will live, work, recreate, and travel.
As residential development constitutes the largest share of urbanized and land uses, changes
in housing development are particularly critical to infuencing travel patterns, energy use, and
emissions. Location-effcient, affordable transit-oriented development (TOD),
for example, has been estimated to yield VMT reductions of 20 to 40 percent over households
in non-TOD locations. In large urban regions of California, the demand for more livable cities
with smaller dwelling units located close to activity centers and more transportation options
are creating momentum for more sustainable community development. As transit ridership
is highest among lower-income households, many of whom already reside in transit-rich areas,
the preservation and upgrading of affordable housing in these locations is also important.
Traffc congestion and higher gasoline prices are forcing consumers to consider the fnancial
ramifcations of longer commutes and continued use of fossil-fueled vehicles. Recent
demographic trends predict a shift toward lower vehicles miles traveled both in-state and
nationally, along with changing attitudes toward driving automobiles. For example, nationally,
young people between 16 and 34 drove 23 percent fewer miles on average in 2009 than they
did in 2001.102 Those born between 1983 and 2000 are more likely to want to live in urban and
walkable neighborhoods and are more open to public transportation than older Americans.
These trends are expected to continue beyond 2020.
Metropolitan areas are beginning to change and trend toward more dense urban development
designed to minimize energy consumption, waste output, air pollution, and water pollution.
Business districts are encouraging more infll development that offers a mix of residential space,
entertainment, restaurants, shopping, and other amenities within close proximity, which reduces
dependence on private vehicles. These trends create opportunities for developers to satisfy
changing consumer desires and for land- use planners to establish policies for more sustainable
development patterns. It takes decades for changes in land use and transportation policies to
result in tangible changes, including GHG emission reductions. The next generation of regional
integrated plans is expected to result in climate benefts well beyond the 2035 time horizon.
Integrated regional planning efforts under SB 375 enable communities to understand the
differences between alternative development patterns and to make choices accordingly. Recently
approved SCSs refect regional goals for a more sustainable form of community development
that brings with it economic, social, and environmental benefts. The implementation of these
regional goals through individual action by local governments and the development community
will be essential to meeting the State’s ongoing climate objectives. The success of efforts to
reduce GHG emissions within other economic or resource sectors such as water, energy, and
transportation will be greatly improved by a transition to more sustainable land use practices
in the years ahead.
Similarly, California must pursue integrated planning in the freight sector, recognizing that
passenger vehicles and trucks share the same transportation system.

C. Investments
Investments in fnancial incentives and direct funding are critical components for successful
implementation of GHG emission reduction strategies. These investments combine with
California’s regulatory and market-based programs to provide an environment where businesses
that make smart investments can be rewarded for developing advanced technologies. Targeted,
performance-based standards and technology-forcing rules can kick-start markets and drive
technologies to higher volumes, lower prices, and ultimately, to become market-winning
solutions, rather than compliance approaches. Strategic fnancial investments and policy support
can accelerate market transitions to cleaner technologies.
102 Dutzik, T., and P. Baxandall. 2013. A New Direction: Our Changing Relationship with Driving and the Implication’s
for America’s Future. U.S. PIRG Education Fund and Frontier Group. Spring.

104

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



The initial Scoping Plan contained a comprehensive array of strategies to reduce GHG emissions
in California and acknowledged the important role that strategic investments and fnancial
incentives play in moving the State toward the 2020 goal. The initial Plan noted that funding,
combined with effective regulatory policies, should help to foster an economic environment that
promotes California-based investment and the development of new clean energy. Many of the
initial Plan’s measures relied on incentives and funding to achieve the full benefts, including
energy effciency, forestry management, and local land use planning.
The State has existing, but limited, incentive programs and it is critical to use these resources
effectively to leverage private-sector investment and build sustainable, growing markets for clean
and effcient technologies. Some examples include: millions of dollars in rebates for Californians
that purchase or lease electric or fuel cell cars; millions of dollars for grants to help diesel truck
owners buy cleaner trucks; billions of dollars in assistance to help improve the energy effciency
of homes and businesses; and the potential use of Cap-and-Trade revenue to promote growing
clean energy markets.
There are many existing funding programs that work in tandem at the Federal, State, and local
levels to achieve GHG emissions reductions and help foster the transition to a clean energy
economy. For example, since 2008, the CEC has administered the Alternative and Renewable
Fuel and Vehicle Technology Program, authorized under AB 118 (Núñez, Chapter 750, Statutes
of 2007) to fund alternative and renewable fuels and advanced transportation technologies
and help meet California’s climate change goals. The program invests $100 million annually
to develop and deploy advanced technology fuels, build fueling infrastructure, purchase clean
vehicles, and provide the workforce training that is needed to operate and maintain these new
technologies. In addition, ARB administers the Air Quality Improvement Program (AQIP) which
is also authorized under AB 118 and continues to provide incentives for zero-emission passenger
vehicles, zero-emission and hybrid trucks, and advanced technology demonstrations. These
AB 118 programs are critical to meeting California’s long-term air quality and climate change
goals and have recently been reauthorized through 2023103 providing about $1 billion in public
investments over the next decade to reduce GHG, criteria, and toxic emissions.
Table 7 highlights some of the existing federal, State, and regional incentive programs.

103 Assembly Bill 8, (Perea, Chapter 401, Statutes of 2013).

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

105



Table 7:

Existing Regional, State, and Federal Incentive Programs
Regional Programs
• Clean truck and bus grants/incentives from local air districts
• Urban greening and sustainable development grants from metropolitan
planning organizations and local governments
• Utility rebates/incentives for energy effciency and renewable energy
• Transit assistance from local governments and transit operators
• Water effciency and wastewater diversion projects via local air, water and sanitation agencies
State Programs
• ARB incentives for clean cars and buses, fuel infrastructure, equipment
electrifcation, and RD&D of sustainable freight technology
• CEC incentives, via the Electric Program Investment Charge (EPIC) Program and AB 118,
for alternative and renewable energy, alternative fuel technology, energy effciency,
waste-to-energy, and applied research and development for innovative energy technology
• CPUC and CSD* energy effciency, weatherization, and solar projects
• Climate dividends for electricity ratepayers
• Energy effciency projects for schools and clean energy jobs via Proposition 39
• SGC/DOT/HCD** grants for sustainable community planning and development
• CalRecycle incentives for waste reduction, recycling, and composting, including infrastructure
• CAL FIRE/CDFW support for natural resource protection
• HCD Transit Oriented Development Housing Program (TOD)
• CDFA funding for RD&D of environmentally sound fertilizing materials
Federal Programs
• U.S. EPA incentives reducing mobile source emissions, encouraging smart
growth and increasing multi-modal transportation options
• U.S. DOE funding for energy effciency, renewable energy, alternative
fuels and vehicles, and alternative fuel infrastructure
• U.S. DOT incentives for increased transit opportunities, cleaner fuels,
congestion reduction, and multi-modal transportation options
• U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funding
for residential energy effciency and affordable infll development
• U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) support for rural electricity and bioenergy programs

*

(CSD) Community Services & Development, **(HCD) Housing and Community Development;

While the funding resources shown above represent existing programs, the initial Scoping
Plan focused on potential State proceeds from the auction of allowances under the Cap-andTrade regulation. The initial Plan also identifed a number of possible investments, including
funding energy effciency and renewable resource development, providing incentives to local
government, delivering rebates to consumers, and funding research, development,
and deployment.
In 2013, the Brown Administration developed an Investment Plan to guide the investment of
State proceeds from Cap-and-Trade auctions—expected to be one of the largest State sources
of funding for climate mitigation programs. The Investment Plan was developed to meet
the requirements of AB 1532, SB 535, and SB 1018, which provide a framework for how the
auction proceeds will be administered, including requirements to spend a percentage of the
proceeds within disadvantaged communities and to beneft disadvantaged communities. The
Administration’s frst three-year Investment Plan, which continues through the 2015–16 fscal
year, contained the following investment principles to guide the expenditure of auction proceeds:
• Emphasize investments in existing programs in sectors which have the
greatest GHG emissions—transportation, energy, waste, and natural
resources—with investments commensurate with relative emissions.
• Maximize economic, environmental, and public health benefts to the State.
• Foster job creation, through promotion of in-state GHG emission
reductions carried out by California workers and businesses.

106

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



• Complement efforts to improve air quality.
• Direct investments toward the communities and households
disproportionately burdened by multiple sources of pollution.
• Provide additional opportunities to businesses, public agencies,
nonprofts, and other community institutions to participate in and
beneft from statewide efforts to reduce GHG emissions.
• Lessen the impacts and effects of climate change on the
State’s communities, economy, and environment.
ARB will outline multi-year auction proceeds investment strategies every three years as part
of the required updates to the Cap-and-Trade Auction Proceeds Investment Plan.
Building upon the results of the public process and multi-agency effort for the frst
three-year Investment Plan, the Governor’s proposed January budget for fscal year 2014-2015
(Proposed Budget) presented auction proceeds investments in existing State programs that
support California’s ongoing effort to reduce GHG emissions and promote a more energyeffcient California. The Proposed Budget included a balanced portfolio of $850 million in initial
investments for GHG emission reductions and benefts to disadvantaged communities, as
directed by SB 535 (De León, Statutes of 2012), in the transportation, energy, waste, and
natural resources sectors.
An important element of auction proceeds investment will be identifying and funding projects
that meet or exceed the requirements in SB 535, which states that at least 25 percent of funding
provide benefts to disadvantaged communities and at least ten percent of funding be allocated
to projects located in disadvantaged communities. Over the last year, the Administration has
received comments with varying interpretations of how an investment can beneft disadvantaged
communities. To ensure consistent implementation of SB 535, ARB will develop guidance for
administering agencies, including what qualifes as a beneft to disadvantaged communities.
ARB will solicit public input on this guidance and the SB 535 specifc elements. Informed by the
public process, ARB will also work with implementing agencies to defne how those benefts
can be quantifed, tracked, and reported. Table 8 provides a preliminary timeline for the SB 535
implementation process.
Table 8:

Proposed SB 535 Implementation Process
Activities

Preliminary Timeframe

• Develop preliminary guidance, including what it means for
an investment to beneft a disadvantaged community
• Solicit public input on SB 535 implementation

Summer 2014
to Winter 2015

• Quantify and report on benefts to disadvantaged communities
• Revise SB 535 guidance as needed and as new investments are made

Each year

Continued investment in existing programs with established success in reducing GHG emissions
will help maintain the 2020 limit. However, extensive additional innovative strategies and funding
sources are needed in sustainable community planning and development, clean transportation,
clean energy, energy effciency, water effciency, agriculture, natural resources, and waste
diversion to achieve deeper emissions reductions.
For the near-term, funding is needed to fll information gaps and analyze the trade-offs associated
with different policy choices and technologies. These strategic investments can be made now
to demonstrate and identify projects with long-term environmental and economic benefts for
California. For example, investment in research to develop improved fertilizer management
practices has the potential to result in larger-scale strategies that can reduce GHG emissions
while maintaining or enhancing crop yields.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

107



On the transportation side, as part of 2013-14 State Budget, Governor Brown charged the
California State Transportation Agency with identifying California transportation needs and
long-term funding sources. Per this direction, in April 2013, the California State Transportation
Agency formed the California Transportation Infrastructure Priorities Workgroup (CTIP) to help
set priorities for transportation spending and explore long-term funding options to support
California’s infrastructure needs. In February 2014, the CTIP released a visioning document for
the next ten years of California’s transportation infrastructure that recognized the need to
continue to seek consensus and implementation on viable long-term, dedicated, funding such
as increased local revenue, mileage-based user fees, toll facilities and lanes, and others.
The availability of dedicated and long-lasting funding sources, such as those identifed by the
CTIP, helps provide certainty and additional partnership opportunities at the State, regional,
and local levels for further investing in projects that have the potential to reduce millions
of metric tons of GHGs, such as sustainable communities, transit infrastructure, energy
conservation, renewable energy, and natural resources projects.
Funding available to support AB 32, whether from short or long-term sources, should be
primarily focused on programs that (1) reduce GHGs or short-lived climate pollutants,
(2) are consistent with state climate strategies, and (3) provide co-benefts such as job creation
and better air quality. As an example, investments in urban forestry projects administered by
Local Conservation Corps are identifed in the Investment Plan and can provide economic and
educational co-benefts combined with long-term carbon sequestration and GHG emission
reductions. Table 9 describes the types of funding that support the purposes of AB 32 and
provide valuable co-benefts.

108

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



Table 9:

Funding of Specifc Areas to Support AB 32
• Expansion of established programs:
• affordable transit-oriented development (TOD) and infll housing development that cut VMT
• local, regional, and state funding programs supporting transit, infrastructure,
active transportation (walking/biking), land-use changes, and other projects
that place a priority on reducing VMT and GHG emissions and are identifed in
the Sustainable Community Strategies or Regional Transportation Plans
• rebates and grants for zero and near-zero emission vehicles, trucks, and buses
• funding for goods movement and other mobile source advanced
technology demonstration/deployment projects
• residential energy effciency fnancing mechanisms
• weatherization and building energy effciency upgrades
• residential solar retrofts
• incentives for small-scale energy storage systems and smartgrid technology to support zero-net energy buildings
• water effciency/conservation
• industrial and agricultural operational energy effciency
• diesel pump replacement and electrifcation
• Recycling Market Development Zones loans
• organic waste reduction, recycling, and increased composting to turn waste into a resource
• Infrastructure investments that are integrated with sustainable
community plans, maximize transit trips, and cut VMT
• Partnerships with local programs, such as the California Green Business Program, which
promote and improve environmental practices within businesses to reduce GHG emissions
• Rail modernization efforts that grow transit ridership, improve
mobility across the State, and reduce GHG emissions
• Wide-scale implementation of sustainable freight transport
strategies and other mobile source strategies
• Research, development, and deployment for projects that have the potential to further reduce
or sequester GHG emissions, such as low-emission distributed generation, advanced energy
storage, renewable/low carbon fuels, and carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration
• Low carbon bioenergy, including developments in second-generation biofuels
• Urban forestry, forest, and biomass energy projects that result in a net increase in carbon stocks
• Agricultural and rangeland efforts to reduce or minimize GHG emissions through
fertilizer and amendment strategies, soil management practices, and land
conservation and management aligning with SB 375 and AB 32 goals
• Water conservation and effciency
• Wetlands, rangelands, and other land use efforts to minimize
GHG emissions or increase net sequestration
• Commercialization of low-/lower-GWP gas alternatives for existing high -GWP gases

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

109



Looking forward, the State will need to make targeted, priority investments with the limited
funding available. California will need to continue coordinating and utilizing funding sources such
as the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund104 (auction proceeds), the Alternative and Renewable Fuel
and Vehicle Technology Program (AB 118), Electric Program Investment Charge (EPIC) Program,
and the Proposition 39: Clean Energy Job Creation Fund to expand investments in California’s
clean economy and further reductions in both GHG emissions and short-lived climate pollutants.
For example, the State can use auction proceeds to provide rebates that encourage consumers
to purchase zero- and near-zero emission vehicles. This effort can be coordinated with CEC AB
118 investments for the installation of charging infrastructure to help meet the objectives of AB
32 and move the State to the widespread adoption of zero-emission vehicles needed to achieve
ongoing climate and air quality goals.

D. Expanding Climate Actions
California’s achieved success of reducing emissions while supporting economic growth
and improving quality of life creates another leading policy regime in California that others
necessarily want to follow.
Engaging with other governments is critical to expanding action to address global climate change
and maximizing benefts to California. Fostering broad action on the global scale is critical to
minimize the impacts of climate change on California, reach sectors that California policy has
a hard time affecting, and scale markets for clean technologies, including California products.
California and other leading national and subnational jurisdictions are working to expand action
to reduce emissions and combat climate change and share best practices in order to maximize
the effciency and benefts of doing so.
Successful climate action does not start or end with government, however. It depends on how we
interact with our built and natural environments. It depends on how businesses create value and
interact with customers. Ultimately, it depends on the choices we each make. A critical element
of California’s strategy to achieve climate policy success is remaining fexible, facilitating local
and private sector leadership, and providing a greater array of choices for consumers that include
cleaner technologies and lower carbon lifestyles.

1.

Support Sustainable Choices by Households and Businesses

The choices that we make—where we live, how we travel, what we purchase—have signifcant
impacts on energy use and GHG emissions. Individuals and businesses play critical roles in
addressing climate change. According to a recent Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
study,105 changes in behavior can result in 8 to 17 percent energy savings. Moving forward, it will
be essential to expand the range of options Californians have to live sustainable, healthy lives.
Through policies implemented under AB 32, California is offering consumers more choices.
This is materializing in just about every area of our lives that is touched by the way we use energy
and is illustrated by the examples below:
• Cars and trucks: We have an expanding array of choices in the cars
and trucks that we drive. There is now a wide, and growing, range
of effcient and zero emission vehicles in showrooms.
• Alternatives to driving: Those who want an alternative to driving or vehicle ownership are
fnding more alternatives, as local governments design their communities to accommodate
more walking, biking, and public transportation and businesses pioneer new mobility models.
• Fuels: Drivers can now pick from fossil or bio-based gasoline and diesel,
ethanol, electricity, natural gas, renewable natural gas, or hydrogen.
104 AB 1532 (Pérez, Chapter 807), SB 535 (De León, Chapter 830), and SB 1018 (Senate Budget Committee, Chapter 39)
established the GHG Reduction Fund to receive Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds.
105 Wei, M., J. H. Nelson, M. Ting, and C. Yang. 2012. California’s Carbon Challenge: Scenarios for Achieving 80%
Emissions Reduction in 2050. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

110

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



• Energy in the home: Homes and appliances are more energy effcient, delivering
more comfort for less cost. Consumers have more control over how and when they
use energy, how much it costs, and where it comes from. New home buyers can pick
among an array of energy options, including various levels of effciency and solar.
• Business productivity: Businesses are improving productivity and delivering more
value with lower energy use and emissions. They have more options for cutting their
energy costs and getting products to market quickly and effciently. And they are
leading on distributed generation deployment and clean energy investment.
Always, California’s climate policies and programs need to leverage and enable its citizens
and businesses to innovate and further reduce GHG emissions.

2.

Enable Local and Regional Leadership

California’s local and regional governments are critical partners in meeting the State’s GHG goals.
They have broad infuence and, in some cases, sole authority over activities that contribute to
GHGs and air pollutants, including industrial permitting, land use and transportation planning,
zoning and urban growth decisions, implementation of building codes and other standards, and
control of municipal operations.
Local and regional governments are uniquely positioned to collaborate to affect GHG emission
reductions on a larger scale. As cities and counties fall into a larger regional framework, they
are working together to create synergistic relationships for reductions through land use and
transportation networks, as well as within specifc sectors, such as energy.
Local air pollution control and air quality management districts (districts) have a key role to play
in reducing regional and local sources of GHG emissions. Because many actions to reduce air
pollutants also reduce GHG emissions, many districts are actively integrating climate protection
into air quality programs. Districts also support local climate protection programs, by providing
technical assistance and data, quantifcation tools, and even funding. In addition, districts can
be key players in regional cross-media collaborations to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
The California Air Pollution Control Offcers’ Association, and its 34 local air district members,
prepared a detailed discussion of local and regional efforts to mitigate climate change; this
document is included as Appendix D.
Since the approval of the Scoping Plan, local and regional governments throughout California
have increasingly pursued efforts to reduce GHG emissions across sectors. The passage of SB
375 has accelerated regions toward the development of more integrated, sustainable regional
transportation plans that, if implemented, could reduce passenger vehicle emissions and bring
about substantial co-benefts. So far, each of the major metropolitan planning organizations
(MPOs) that have adopted SCSs has demonstrated that it could meet its region’s emission
reduction targets under SB 375.
Local governments have initiated efforts to reduce GHG emissions beyond those required
by the State. Local governments are improving their municipal operations by upgrading their
vehicle feets, retroftting government buildings and streetlights, purchasing greener products,
implementing waste-reduction policies, and more. In addition, they are adopting more
sustainable codes, standards, and general plan improvements to reduce their community’s
emissions. For instance, localities are implementing landscaping ordinances to reduce water
use, streamlining permitting for small-scale renewable energy systems, requiring commercial
buildings to be retroft on resale, and updating General Plans to improve transportation mobility
options and land use decisions. Regions throughout California are also supporting innovative
programs and technologies—supporting the accelerated adoption of advanced vehicle
technologies and programs, creating innovative fnancing options for residents to retroft their
homes, and pursuing their own alternative energy sources. To maximize success in reducing

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

111



GHG emissions and promoting sustainability within communities, local governments are creating
integrated planning processes and are developing innovative regional collaborations that extend
beyond government agencies to include utilities, universities, labor, and leadership from business
and community groups.
While the Scoping Plan encouraged local governments to adopt GHG emission reduction
goals consistent with those of statewide targets, many local governments had already initiated
their own locally driven climate action efforts. By late 2011, 27 percent of California’s cities
and counties—representing 50 percent of the state’s population—were signatories to the U.S.
Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Agreement or the Sierra Club’s “Cool Counties”
program.106 By September 2013, 76 California local governments had joined the International
Council for Local Environmental Initiatives’ Climate Protection Campaign—representing 57
percent of the State’s population.107 Today, locally driven climate actions continue to increase
among local governments. According to a recent survey, roughly 70 percent of California
jurisdictions have either completed policies or programs to reduce GHG emissions or are
in the process of adopting them.108 While many local governments have become leaders
in sustainability, there remains signifcant opportunity for many local governments to take
meaningful action.
A number of tools and resources have been developed to assist local climate action planning.
These include:
• The local Government Operations Protocol, which provides a standard
GHG emission inventory methodology for municipal operations.
• The U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
• Climate action plan templates and monitoring and tracking tools developed through
the Statewide Energy Effciency Collaborative in coordination with ARB and OPR.
Many of these tools can be found on the CoolCalifornia.org website, which also houses climate
action tools and resources for businesses, schools, and individuals.
106 Bedsworth, L. W., and E. Hanak. 2013. “Climate policy at the local level: Insights from California.”
Global Environmental Change 23: 664–677.
107 ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability membership status as of September 2013.
108 Offce of Planning and Research. 2012. Annual Planning Survey Results 2012.
www.opr.ca.gov/docs/2012_APSR.pdf.

SUCCESS STORY
CoolCalifornia City Challenge

COOLCALIFORNIA
CITY CHALLENGE
energy

Sponsored by:

upgrade™

To engage communities in reaching the State’s climate goals, the Air Resources
Board sponsored a pilot project, the CoolCalifornia Challenge. Conducted by
the University of California, Berkeley, the Challenge was a yearlong competition
between California cities to reduce the carbon footprints of residents and build
more vibrant and sustainable communities. Using lessons from successful
community-based social marketing programs that motivate individuals to
take climate action through peer-to-peer capacity building and leadership, the
Challenge inspired over 225 metric tons of greenhouse gas emission reductions
by over 2,600 participants in its eight participating cities, equivalent to taking
95 California homes off the electrical grid for one year.

CALIFORNIA

112

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



To enable local and regional leadership to further reduce GHG emissions beyond State programs
and policies, California must always provide a supportive framework to advance communitywide, voluntary efforts. In addition to reducing emissions across sectors, many of these activities
also can bring benefts to households and businesses, create more sustainable lifestyles, and
help our communities thrive.
Community-wide Emissions Reduction Target
Recognizing the important role local governments play in the successful implementation of
AB 32, the initial Scoping Plan called for local governments to set municipal and communitywide GHG reduction targets of 15 percent below then-current levels by 2020, to coincide with
the statewide limit. As California continues to build its climate policy framework, there is a need
for local government climate action planning to adopt mid-term and long-term reduction targets
that are consistent with scientifc assessments and the statewide goal of reducing emissions 80
percent below 1990 levels by 2050. Local government reduction targets should chart a reduction
trajectory that is consistent with, or exceeds, the trajectory created by statewide goals. Improved
accounting and centralized reporting of local efforts, including emissions inventories, policy
programs, and achieved emission reductions, would allow California to further incorporate,
and better recognize, local efforts in its climate planning and policies.
Local Government Financing Mechanisms and Incentives
The development of long-term revenue streams and creative local fnancing mechanisms and
incentives can accelerate emission reductions. For instance, local fnancial incentives can spur
retrofts of the existing building stock, net-zero energy or carbon projects, and other voluntary
GHG emission reductions. The expansion of PACE fnancing programs, the creation of incentive
opportunities under various policies and planning efforts, and the formation of new mechanisms
are all options that should be explored to continue progress toward reducing emissions across
our communities.

3.

Coordinate with Subnational, Federal, and International Partners

California has established itself as a national and international leader in addressing and
combatting climate change. The release of the initial Scoping Plan strengthened the State’s
commitment to address climate change, but California is not alone. Reducing the risks of climate
change requires effective action among all the world’s major GHG emitters. Recognizing the
interconnected and multi-jurisdictional nature of climate change, California has established a
wide range of partnerships, both within and beyond its borders, to promote its own best practices
and learn from others while further leveraging the State’s leadership in climate protection.
California’s efforts on clean energy and climate policy have been successful in leveraging
action at the interstate, federal, and international levels. Through collective efforts such as the
Western Climate Initiative (WCI) and other alliances of states, California is taking action to expand
emission reduction programs and build resiliency against climate change impacts. At the federal
level, many of California’s policies and programs have served as models for action. California has
developed climate solutions with key federal agencies, including the U.S. Department of Energy
(U.S. DOE), U.S. EPA, U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT), and others. Internationally,
California is engaged in consultation and collaboration with both national and subnational
jurisdictions to share best practices, build capacity, and pioneer new policy tools. These activities
are assisting in implementing and strengthening a variety of climate programs around the world.
Efforts in all of these areas are consistent with the State’s long-standing leadership in
environmental protection and leadership. Coordinating and promoting climate action at the
interstate, federal, and international levels is necessary to adequately address climate change,
expand clean energy and economic development, and enhance the competitiveness of the State’s
businesses, workers, and economy.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

113



Interstate Partnerships
California has a long history of working with other states on environmental protection.
Continuing this practice and recognizing the value in broad collaborative action to reduce
GHG emissions, the State has reached beyond its borders to enlist its neighbors in joint
climate-change efforts and promote interstate action.
With the adoption of the initial Scoping Plan, California became the frst state in the nation
to formally approve a comprehensive GHG emission reduction plan that involves every sector
of the economy. Today, several states and cities are following suit and achieving real emission
reductions and gaining valuable policy experience as they take action on climate change.
Through participation in interstate initiatives and partnerships with other states, California
continues to promote its own best practices and learn from others while fnding solutions to
reduce GHG emissions, develop clean energy sources, and achieve other environmental and
economic goals. Specifc examples of these ongoing efforts include:
• Coordination with the WCI on Cap-and-Trade.
• Ongoing consultation with the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a forum for leadership
and information sharing and a common voice on issues faced by the region.
• An agreement with the Pacifc Coast Collaborative partners (California, Oregon, Washington
and British Columbia) to develop coordinated approaches to reduce GHG emissions,
including setting mid-term climate targets, pricing carbon, developing Low Carbon
Fuel Standards, and developing an alternative fuels plan for the heavy-duty sector.
Federal Collaborations
In June 2013, President Obama approved the nation’s frst Climate Action Plan that lays out
a series of executive actions to reduce carbon pollution, prepare the nation for the impacts
of climate change, and lead international efforts to address global climate change.
California has worked closely with key federal agencies to ensure that the federal approach is
consistent with California’s stringent standards, as well as the programs in other states that have
been leaders in climate protection. Examples of successful collaboration between California and
the federal government include the following:
• ARB worked with U.S. EPA and NHTSA to harmonize federal light-duty
vehicle standards with California’s existing standards through 2016.
• ARB worked with U.S. EPA and NHTSA to develop the frst-ever federal
GHG standards for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles.
• ARB and U.S. EPA routinely coordinate on advanced transportation and fuels, including
the relationship between the federal Renewable Fuels Standard and California’s LCFS.
• ARB and the U.S. Department of State routinely coordinate on common
issues between California’s climate programs and the negotiations under
way at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
• In January 2012, Governor Brown signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with U.S. Department of Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to expand a state and
federal partnership that has paved the way for more than a dozen utility-scale solar
energy projects and more than 130 renewable power projects in California.
Currently, California is engaging with U.S. EPA and others in the development of national GHG
emission standards for power plants under the federal Clean Air Act. As U.S. EPA moves forward
to set standards, California is well positioned to respond based on our pioneering actions on
climate and air quality.

114

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



California is committed to working with the federal government as it implements the President’s
Climate Action Plan. This commitment includes ensuring that actions the State has already taken
to cut emissions will be refected in subsequent federal actions.
International Engagement
As one of the largest economies in the world and a leader on addressing climate change,
California is committed to working at the international level to reduce global GHG emissions.
As part of this effort, California has engaged in consultation and collaboration with both national
and subnational jurisdictions to share best practices, build capacity, and pioneer new policy tools.
These activities are successfully assisting in implementing and strengthening a variety of climate
programs around the world, in turn supporting the ability of both developing and developed
countries to make more meaningful climate commitments under both the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and bilateral agreements.
California also engages in multi-lateral forums that help develop the policy foundation and
technical infrastructure for GHG regulations in multiple jurisdictions. Recognizing that many
efforts were under way around the world to use market forces to motivate GHG emission
reductions, California worked with other governments to establish the International Carbon
Action Partnership (ICAP) in 2007. The ICAP provides a forum for sharing experiences and
knowledge among jurisdictions that have already implemented or are actively pursuing
market-based GHG programs.109
Similarly, and recognizing the need to address the substantial GHG emissions caused by
deforestation and degradation of tropical forests, California worked with a group of subnational
governments to form the Governors’ Climate and Forests Task Force (GCF) in 2008.110 The GCF is
currently comprised of 22 different subnational jurisdictions, including states and provinces from
Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Spain, and the U.S. that are contemplating low-emissions
development policies and programs, such as REDD. These include addressing forest-related
emissions and sharing experiences on how such programs could potentially interact with carbon
markets, including California’s Cap-and-Trade Program. Ongoing engagement between California
and its GCF partners, including with more advanced jurisdictional programs, such as Acre (Brazil),
and emerging programs in Chiapas (Mexico) and elsewhere, as well as ongoing discussions
with other stakeholders, will provide lessons on how such programs could ft within California’s
Cap-and-Trade Program. Furthermore, REDD is a key topic within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and between national and subnational jurisdictions, including
through collaboration between California and the U.S. Department of State. Continued evaluation
of REDD and other sector-based offset programs further demonstrates California’s ongoing
climate leadership and could result in partnering on other mutually benefcial climate and low
emissions development initiatives, particularly those in Mexico.
In April 2013, Governor Brown led a delegation of California government and business leaders
to Beijing and several Chinese provinces. California signed Memorandums of Understanding
(MOUs) pledging direct cooperation in developing clean technology, pollution reduction, and
climate mitigation policies and markets with the Beijing Environmental Protection Bureau, the
Ministry of Environmental Protection, and Guangdong Province. In June 2013, California and
Shenzhen, China, signed an MOU to work together to share policy design and early experiences
from their climate trading programs. In July 2013, California and Australia signed an MOU to
guide collaboration between the agencies in addressing the global issue of climate change.
More recently, Governor Brown signed the frst agreement of its kind between a subnational
entity and China’s National Development and Reform Commission to expand bilateral
cooperation on climate change. The Memorandum of Understanding is intended to boost
109 International Carbon Action Partnership Website: http://icapcarbonaction.com/.
110 Governors’ Climate and Forests Task Force Website: www.gcftaskforce.org/.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success

115



bilateral cooperation on climate, clean energy, and development, and sharing of low-carbon
programs and policies. In his 2014 State of the State address, the Governor announced his
intention to work with Mexico on climate change.
As California continues to engage at all these levels and share its experiences, policy programs,
and leading approach to climate change, we will also seek new partners to expand global action
to address climate change, minimize its impacts, and deliver benefts to our State.

116

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter V: Achieving Success



VI. Evaluations

Continuing to effectively build upon California’s climate framework and
ensuring successful implementation of the State’s policies requires periodic
monitoring and program evaluation, so that programs can be built upon,
adapted, and enhanced – as appropriate – to continue driving down emissions
well into the future. California will continue to evaluate the economic,
environmental, and public health impacts of its set of climate policies to inform
its ongoing activities to reduce emissions. Importantly, the State is committed
to ensuring an equitable distribution of benefts from its climate programs, and
will continue monitoring impacts in environmental justice communities and
target programs and investments where appropriate to enhance benefts in
disadvantaged communities.
This chapter discusses the economic, public health, and environmental justice evaluations
that will be conducted as the Scoping Plan continues to be implemented. It also discusses
the environmental analysis that was prepared of this Update.

A. Economic Analysis
In California, the implementation of Scoping Plan measures is under way but still in the early
stages, presenting challenges in the ongoing assessment of the economic impacts of AB 32.
While comprehensive in regulatory scope and scale as indicated below, the net impact of AB
32, even after full implementation, is estimated to be small in relation to the $2 trillion California
economy,111 making it diffcult to isolate its economic impact. In addition, the global recession
and California’s subsequent recovery complicate the evaluation of the economic impact of
the suite of regulatory measures that are being implemented under AB 32. This challenging
economic landscape requires careful analysis of the costs and benefts of AB 32 on industries and
individuals in California. The assessment can inform the design and refnement of cost-effective
actions California can take toward its long-term climate goals.
As California emerges from the recession, the overall impact of AB 32 remains unclear, and many
questions remain unanswered. How has AB 32 impacted economic growth? Has AB 32 spurred
innovation and economy-wide growth? How have the impacts of Scoping Plan measures been
distributed among businesses and Californians? These questions and others are critical in the
accurate assessment of the economic impacts of AB 32 and are the driving force in a
multi-pronged approach to the analysis of the economic costs and benefts of AB 32.
Prior to the implementation of regulatory measures under AB 32, the anticipated micro- and
macroeconomic costs of the suite of regulatory measures were estimated. Now California turns
to the next stage of analysis that consists of estimating the aggregate costs of measures already
implemented and analyzing their distributional impacts across businesses and individuals in
California and beyond.`
111 Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy.
www.ccsce.com/PDF/Numbers-July-2013-CA-Economy-Rankings-2012.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

117



Moving forward, the assessment of the economic impact of AB 32 is divided into two phases:
(1) the continued estimation of regulatory costs as measures are implemented, and (2) an ex
post analysis of the macro- and microeconomic impacts of AB 32. As California prepares for
a retrospective ex post analysis in subsequent Scoping Plans, the State continues to assess
whether the economic costs of the implementation of AB 32 are in line with ex ante estimates
of costs. In the frst phase of the assessment, State agencies are monitoring the costs of AB 32
regulatory measures. In the second phase of the assessment, State agencies will collaborate
with external economic experts, researchers, and stakeholders in the design, development, and
implementation of rigorous micro- and macroeconomic assessments of the ex post economic
impact of AB 32.
The following sections outline the assessments of economic impacts that occurred prior to the
implementation of AB 32, the assessments that will occur once AB 32 measures are more fully
implemented, and the assessments of economic impacts that are currently under way.
Ex Ante Assessment of Potential Costs and Benefts
Section 38561 of AB 32 requires State agencies to evaluate the total potential costs, as well
as the total potential economic and non-economic benefts of the Scoping Plan using the
best available economic models and emission estimation techniques.112 Pursuant to AB 32,
ARB conducted two full-scale analyses, as part of the 2008 Scoping Plan and 2010 Updated
Economic Analysis of the Scoping Plan, to assess the potential economic impacts of the
portfolio of Scoping Plan measures on the California economy. In addition, four external
general equilibrium analyses have been conducted.
The two internal and four external macroeconomic analyses estimated the overall potential
impact of AB 32 on California gross state product to range from an increase of 1.0 percent
to a decline of 2.2 percent in 2020.113 The models and modeling approaches underlying the
112 The AB 32 text is available at
www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/05-06/bill/asm/ab_0001-0050/ab_32_bill_20060927_chaptered.pdf.
113 The six analyses include analyses conducted by ARB, David Roland-Holst, the Electric Power
Research Institute, and Charles River Associates. These analyses can be accessed at:
ARB. 2008. Climate Change Scoping Plan.
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/document/adopted_scoping_plan.pdf;

SUCCESS STORY
California Local Governments
Local governments are in many ways the “boots on the ground”
for meeting California’s climate change goals, beginning with their
local planning efforts. Municipalities use a number of frameworks
to outline their goals and implementation strategies for reducing
greenhouse gases. According to 2012 OPR’s Annual Planning
Survey, about 90 local governments have adopted policies and/or
programs to address climate change, often in the form of Climate
Action Plans. Moreover, over 270 local governments reported they
were making progress towards adopting climate change policies.
As of October, 2013, 135 California mayors have voluntarily signed
the U.S. Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Agreement,
which strives to meet or beat the Kyoto Protocol reduction targets.

118

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



six analyses vary in terms of structure and inputs, yet they yield a generally similar conclusion on
the economy-wide impact of AB 32.114 The analyses also identifed the impacts of AB 32 on certain
industrial sectors in California. These results led to program modifcations—most notably the
inclusion of output-based allocation for industrial entities in the Cap-and-Trade Program.
In addition to identifying the impact of AB 32 when all implemented measures achieve expected
emission reductions, in the 2010 Updated Economic Analysis of California’s Climate Change
Scoping Plan ARB estimated the economic impact of reaching the near-term emission limit
in 2020 should measures not provide anticipated GHG emission reductions.115 Within the fve
sensitivity cases developed in the analysis, the overall costs of reaching the near-term emission
limit in 2020 were minimized when all measures, as currently being implemented, achieve their
anticipated GHG emission reductions. Scenarios in which AB 32 measures related to energy
effciency, transportation, and renewable energy fall short of expected emission reductions result
in an increase in the overall cost of AB 32, as additional, less cost-effective emission reductions
are required from the remaining measures to meet the 2020 emission limit. This sensitivity
analysis highlights the need to monitor the GHG emission reductions and costs of individual
measures to identify the overall costs of the suite of AB 32 regulatory measures.
While robust analyses have estimated the potential, or ex ante, economic impacts of AB 32 prior
to implementation, more data and analysis is necessary to determine the realized, or ex post,
impacts of the regulatory measures on California’s industries, businesses, and consumers. In
addition, the range of potential economic impacts identifed in the six macroeconomic analyses
highlights the challenge in parsing the effects of AB 32 from other macroeconomic conditions in
the California economy. The recent economic recession and recovery, as well as the presence of
overlapping local, State, and federal regulations present challenges in the identifcation of
a “business as usual” baseline against which to evaluate the impacts of AB 32.
The macroeconomic ex ante analyses provide important information; however, the models
used in these assessments are often highly aggregated and lack specifc detail about individual
industries or technologies. Greater detail is important for assessing the potential economic
impact of individual regulatory measures that is required under the Administrative Procedure
Act (APA). Section 11346.2 of the APA requires as part of the Initial Statement of Reasons (ISOR)
an assessment of the benefts and costs of any proposed or amended regulation.116 For regulatory
measures adopted under AB 32, assessments of the costs and benefts have been included as
part of the regulatory package. These assessments require gathering sector-specifc information
regarding the engineering and economic costs of regulatory compliance on businesses and
estimating the indirect and induced impacts of these costs, as well as the corresponding expected
environmental beneft. While the scale, scope, and assumptions used in these assessments
are regulation-specifc, these industry-level calculations provide additional data outlining the
projected costs and benefts of AB 32.117
ARB. 2010. Updated Economic Analysis of California’s Climate Change Scoping Plan.
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/economics-sp/updated-analysis/updated_sp_analysis.pdf;
Roland-Holst, David. 2008. Economic Analysis of California Climate Policy Initiatives Using the Berkeley Energy
and Resources (BEAR) Model (Appendix G-III). www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/document/appendices_volume1.pdf;
Roland-Holst, David. 2010. Climate Action for Sustained Growth: Analysis of ARB’s Scoping Plan.
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/economics-sp/meetings/042110/rolandholst.pdf;
Electric Power Research Institute. 2007. An Updated Macroeconomic Analysis of Recent California Climate Action
Team Strategies. www.epri.com/abstracts/Pages/ProductAbstract.aspx?ProductId=000000000001015510; Charles
River Associates. 2010. Analysis of the California ARB’s Scoping Plan and Related Policy Insights.
http://crai.com/uploadedFiles/analysis-of-ab32-scoping-plan.pdf.
114 The internal ARB and external analyses differ, most notably, in assumptions related to emissions leakage, the rate
of technological change, input substitution, costs of VMT, and economic growth in the “Business as Usual” scenario.
115 Table 12 outlines the sensitivity cases considered in the analysis and is available at:
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/economics-sp/updated-analysis/updated_sp_analysis.pdf
116 The APA text is available at
www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=gov&group=11001-12000&fle=11346-11348.
117 Regulatory documents are available through ARB’s Climate Change Programs at
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/cc.htm.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

119



Ex Post Assessment of Realized Costs and Benefts
In the years since the analyses of potential economic impacts were conducted, California has
moved from the assessment of projected impacts to the implementation of measures outlined
in the Scoping Plan and planning the ex post estimation of realized costs and benefts. California
has two objectives in the assessment of the ex post economic impacts of AB 32: (1) estimating
the overall costs and benefts of the suite of AB 32 measures on the California economy, and (2)
identifying the distribution of impacts on industry, small businesses, households, environmental
justice communities, and the public sector. California agencies are currently designing a
work plan to guide this two-prong approach, including the time line, data requirements, and
appropriate methodology for the objective. The work plan will be developed and made publicly
available in 2014.
The overall economic impact of AB 32 on the
California economy is dependent in large part
on the performance of specifc measures,
including the Renewables Portfolio Standard
(RPS), Advanced Clean Cars, Low Carbon Fuel
Standard (LCFS), high global warming potential
gas measures, and the Cap-and-Trade Program.
The costs and benefts of these measures will be
fully realized only after the measures reach full
stringency. Thus, while the ex post work plan is
under development, the full ex post analysis will
be conducted in the coming years. As economic
impacts may not be immediately realized upon
implementation, delaying the assessment also
allows for the analysis of lagged economic
indicators such as structural changes in
employment and production, including the
global competiveness of California businesses.

Economic Advisors
Larry Goulder

Stanford University

Matt Kahn

UCLA

Charles Kolstad

Stanford University

Stephen Levy

Center for Continuing
Study of the
California Economy

Isha Ray

UC Berkeley

Robert Stavins

Harvard University

In pursuit of guidance, ARB has engaged a group of Economic Advisors to assist in the
development of the work plan to achieve the frst objective and estimate the ex post economic
impact of AB 32. The Advisors are helping to identify the metrics and methodologies that are
best suited to identify the overall costs and benefts of AB 32. More details on macroeconomic
modeling of the overall impact of AB 32 and ex post analysis will be included in future updates
to the Scoping Plan.
During the implementation of AB 32, California has been collecting data toward the second
objective of the ex post assessment—identifying the distributional impacts of AB 32. Through
mandatory requirements and voluntary reporting, facility-level data are being collected, and
California is beginning the process to analyze, both internally and externally though contracted
researchers, how putting a price on carbon changes the behavior and economic health of
California businesses and individuals. The data will be used to inform microeconomic models
estimating the direct and indirect costs of AB 32, including expenditures on energy, capital,
and labor. This analysis will allow the impacts of AB 32 to be quantifed over a variety of time
horizons, geographic regions, industrial sectors, and income groups, and will provide fexibility
in the interactions of regulatory policies. Further, California will continue to track technological
developments and the various pathways that industries use to comply with environmental
regulations in order to better understand program costs.
The ex post assessment of economic impacts will also inform the design of California’s long-term
climate change regulatory portfolio. Estimating the economic impact of the current suite of AB
32 measures will provide guidance in establishing long-term emission targets. Assessing the
costs and environmental beneft of each regulatory measure over time can lead to modifcations

120

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



of specifc measures as well as the mix of programs within AB 32. This will ensure that the
interaction of regulatory measures achieves the goals of AB 32. Thus, the ex post assessment
can inform the scope, scale, and stringency of measures in the climate change mitigation
portfolio to achieve California’s long-term emission targets.
Ongoing Economic Assessment
In addition to the longer-term objectives of the ex post assessment, there are analyses under
way to estimate the facility-level regulatory costs and benefts of AB 32 on specifc sectors,
to inform near-term regulatory modifcations. Currently, two analyses are under way at ARB to
assess the ability of industrial entities in the Cap-and-Trade Program to maintain competitiveness
while incorporating the carbon price into their production processes. In each analysis, external
researchers are reevaluating the leakage classifcation, a measure of the energy intensity and
trade exposure of an industrial sector, of California producers using facility-level data on energy
consumption, trade fows, and market transfers.118 The results of the leakage analyses will be used
to inform the level of transition assistance needed to minimize leakage in the industrial sector in
the third compliance period of the Cap-and-Trade Program. Results are expected by 2016.
External research has also informed the longer-term design of measures under AB 32— most
notably the Cap-and-Trade Program and the LCFS—to identify the link between program design
and the California economy. For example, the Market Simulation Group (MSG) was established
under contract to inform ARB on issues pertaining to market rules and effciency. It has provided
input in assessing program costs, as well as the supply and demand for allowances in the
Cap-and-Trade Program.119 In addition, ARB co-sponsored a symposium in 2012 that brought
together economic researchers and regulators to identify the metrics required for the effective
analysis of the Cap-and-Trade Regulation.120 Academic researchers are also providing input to
ARB on the design of the LCFS and the near-term cost of compliance.121 Discussions between
regulators and expert economists has spawned ongoing research that is helping to inform the
work plan for the ex post analysis of AB 32.
California agencies have also actively engaged the general public and stakeholders to ensure that
the economic costs of AB 32 measures are not overly burdensome to specifc sectors or income
groups. ARB has conducted workshops on the economic costs of LCFS and the Cap-and-Trade
Program and solicited comments on internal white papers discussing potential options for cost
containment.122 Gaining insight into the economic market conditions faced by stakeholders allows
for the more accurate modeling of economic impacts under AB 32 and provides a measure of
some of the compliance costs faced by covered entities.
Along with the collection of data and the active engagement of researchers and stakeholders,
ARB is also monitoring the impact of AB 32 on the supply and demand of energy in California.
Partnering with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and CAISO, ARB is monitoring
energy and fuel markets to identify the impact of AB 32 on energy markets and the wholesale
energy costs faced by industrial, commercial, and residential consumers.123 These analyses will
assist ARB in identifying areas in which to improve the design and stringency of Scoping Plan
measures in order to achieve AB 32 emissions goals with minimal economic impact.
118 Stephen Hamilton of Cal Poly San Luis Obispo and a team of researchers from UC Berkeley are conducting an
analysis on the food processing sector, while Meredith Fowlie of UC Berkeley and a team of researchers from
Stanford, Resources for the Future, and Clark University are conducting an analysis that covers all remaining
industrial sectors. The results of these analyses will be publically available on the ARB website upon completion.
119 The draft analysis is available at http://ei.haas.berkeley.edu/pdf/Forecasting%20CA%20Cap%20and%20Trade.pdf.
120 More information is available at www.bren.ucsb.edu/events/AB32.htm.
121 The analysis of the LCFS and compliance costs is available at www.des.ucdavis.edu/faculty/Lin/California_LCFS.pdf.
122 The LCFS white paper is available at www.arb.ca.gov/fuels/lcfs/regamend13/20130522ccp_conceptpaper.pdf;
the Cap-and-Trade Program white paper is available at
www.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/meetings/062513/arb-cost-containment-paper.pdf.
123 More information is available at www.caiso.com/Documents/2013SecondQuarterReport-MarketIssues_
Performance-Aug2013.pdf and www.ferc.gov/EventCalendar/Files/20121220111740-A-4-Presentation.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

121



Achieving Near-Term and Long-Term Goals
The Cap-and-Trade allowance price can be used as a proxy for the cost of some GHG emission
reductions (those that remain after reductions from the other AB 32 regulatory measures have
occurred). By projecting the allowance price through 2020, models estimate the overall cost of
a portion of the emissions abatement required under AB 32. Recent analyses suggest that the
allowance price in 2020 will likely be near the price foor at the time, around $17 per metric ton.
124
These analyses highlight the uncertainty inherent in the projection of future market conditions,
as well as the critical need to identify a “Business as Usual” emissions baseline. While there is
much uncertainty in these analyses, the projected allowance prices are lower than the allowance
price projected by ARB in the 2010 Updated Economic Analysis to the Scoping Plan.125 ARB
estimated that the 2020 emissions limit could be met with an allowance price of $21 per metric
ton and an associated 0.1 to 0.2 percent change in Gross State Product relative to the forecasted
2020 “Business as Usual” baseline.
The similarity of the external estimates of the 2020 allowance price and the projected allowance
price in the 2010 Updated Economic Analysis to the Scoping Plan may offer evidence that the
assessment of the projected economic impacts of AB 32 is reasonable and that California can
reach the near-term 2020 emissions limit without sacrifcing economic stability.
The assessment of economic impacts will continue as California develops a climate mitigation
portfolio to achieve its long-term climate change mitigation goals. The assessment of the overall
economic impacts of the current suite of AB 32 measures will inform the design of the long-term
regulatory portfolio as well as the analysis of its impact. However, extending the time horizon
of the assessment of economic impacts will present new challenges. Regulatory and climate
uncertainty, as well as the performance and costs of existing AB 32 measures, will need to be
incorporated in the estimation of potential economic impacts of the long-term climate change
mitigation portfolio.
Isolating the specifc macroeconomic effects of AB 32 from other economic volatility will continue
to present a signifcant challenge as California looks to the future and achieving long-term climate
goals. Long-term economic shifts will need to be incorporated into the assessment of economic
impacts. For example, household energy demand and vehicle miles traveled will be infuenced
by demographic changes in the California population, changes in land use, and the built
environment. These issues are the direct focus of regional planning agencies and sustainable
community legislation and will require the inclusion of policy interaction and jurisdictional
overlap in the long-run modeling of policies affecting energy demand.
Challenges will also arise in estimating the long-term effects of AB 32 across sectors,
jurisdictions, and natural resources. The promulgation of climate change mitigation and adaption
policies worldwide has highlighted the importance of understanding the far-reaching impacts,
both in terms of costs and co-benefts, of climate change and climate change regulations. In 2011,
ARB acknowledged the importance of analyzing the impact of the Cap-and-Trade Regulation on
localized air quality impacts, special status species, sensitive habitats, and federally protected
wetlands in the Adaptive Management Plan. Measuring the long-term impacts of AB 32 will
require new methodologies to parse the impacts of individual climate mitigation polices across
sectors, jurisdictions, and natural resources. Accounting for the co-benefts and the economic
costs of AB 32 will allow California to maximize emission reduction towards long-term climate
change mitigation targets while also maximizing the benefts, through improved air quality and
natural resources for all Californians.

124 In $US 2013 (the price foor is currently at $11.34 and rises fve percent plus infation each year). See, for example,
the MSG report linking in footnote 105.
125 The projected allowance price of $21/ton ($US 2007) corresponds to -0.2 percent change in gross state product
in 2020. Available at www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/economics-sp/updated-analysis/updated_sp_analysis.pdf.

122

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



ARB will continue to consult with external experts to develop new analytical tools and methods
to incorporate these issues in the assessment of economy-wide and distributional impacts of
California’s long-term climate change mitigation portfolio.

B. Climate Change and Public Health Assessment
Climate change has been identifed as the greatest health threat of the twenty-frst century.126
As described in Chapter II, in California, climate change is expected to increase temperatures,
change precipitation patterns, increase the frequency and severity of extreme weather events,
and increase wildfres and sea level rise—all of which could have signifcant impacts on the health
of California’s residents.
Efforts to reduce GHGs minimize the impacts that climate change will have on human health. In
addition to combatting climate change and its subsequent health impacts, many of these efforts
have additional direct and indirect public health impacts. It is challenging to assess the magnitude
of health impacts that result specifcally from AB 32 mitigation measures. However, assessing the
directionality of the relationship between many mitigation actions and health based on current
empirical literature indicates that overall, the State’s climate control program has many health
co-benefts, particularly for chronic diseases. In the instances in which mitigation measures may
be at odds with positive health outcomes, California must ensure that positive health outcomes
are maximized as we address climate change. Local governments, and in particular local public
health departments, are important partners in this work.
Assessing the Health Impacts of AB 32 Implementation
As with economic impacts, efforts to fully quantify the health impacts due to Scoping Plan
measures remain challenging and are complicated by many factors. Communities and individuals
are infuenced by a multitude of factors, including socioeconomic conditions, occupational
and environmental exposures, the natural and built environments, and personal choices. The
infuence of all these factors impairs the ability to assign causation between a discrete set of
policies, such as the State’s climate program, and quantifed health impacts. In addition, the long
time scale over which certain health impacts may appear—particularly for chronic diseases—
complicate attribution to specifc actions. Efforts to quantify health impacts by modeling
the reduction of co-pollutants to estimate health impacts associated with reductions of GHG
measures are diffcult because they rely on assumptions about what would have happened
if those measures had not been implemented. Assessing the magnitude of health impacts
that result specifcally from AB 32 mitigation measures remains challenging; however, the
directionality of the relationship between many mitigation actions and health can be evaluated
using current empirical literature. Efforts are now under way to develop health co-beneft
modeling tools to be used in conjunction with regional transportation demand models used by
California’s Metropolitan Transportation Organizations to help quantify health co-benefts of
active transport in future Sustainable Community Strategies (Table 10). For instance, the Strategic
Growth Council has convened a Technical Advisory Committee to provide recommendations on
the development and use of a health module as part of the Urban Footprint model—a scenario
development and modeling tool designed to inform planners on the impacts of development
decisions. In addition, CDPH has advanced a model—the Integrated Transport and Health Impact
Modeling tool (ITHIM)—that quantifes the health impacts of active transportation and low carbon
driving scenarios. The ITHIM model is currently being evaluated by MPOs for use in their regional
planning processes.

126 Costello, A., et al. 2009. “Managing the health effects of climate change.” The Lancet 373: May 16, 2009.
www.ucl.ac.uk/global-health/project-pages/lancet1/ucl-lancet-climate-change.pdf.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

123



Table 10:

Current Models Designed to Quantify Health Co-Benefts
of Sustainable Community Strategies
Model

Timeline

Urban Footprint

SGC Advisory Committee recommendations
anticipated Spring 2015

Integrated Transport and Health Impact
Modeling Tool (ITHIM model)

Under evaluation by MPOs

Health Impacts of Unmitigated Climate Change
Left unchecked, climate change will affect health in a number of ways. Increasing temperatures
from climate change will increase the severity and frequency of heat waves. As California saw
in the 2006 heat wave, which resulted in over 650 excess deaths, over 16,000 excess emergency
department visits and almost 1,200 excess hospitalizations,127, 128 extreme heat events create a
signifcant risk of adverse health effects and heat-related mortality. Older adults with chronic
health problems, and agriculture, construction, and other outdoors workers are particularly
at high risk for adverse effects of extreme heat. Increasing temperatures may exacerbate air
pollution in California; in particular, ozone and fne particulate matter.129 In addition to increasing
air pollutants directly, higher temperatures will also likely increase and intensify wildfres in
the State, exacerbating poor regional air quality.130 An increase in air pollution can increase
the number of cases of exacerbation of asthma, allergies, and cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases, as well as incidents of cancer, neurological and reproductive disorders, and premature
death.131 These impacts are especially felt among our most vulnerable populations, including
children, elderly, people with cardiovascular or respiratory diseases, low-income communities,
and people without access to health insurance.132 Changes in climate can also affect the
prevalence and geographic location of food-, mosquito-, and vector-borne diseases. While hard
to predict, it is possible for infectious diseases like West Nile Virus and Lyme disease to become
more prevalent in California as the climate changes.133 Extreme weather events can lead to both
physical and mental health problems.134 In addition, climate change is associated with higher
pollen levels, which contribute to allergies and asthma attacks.135 Additional climate change
impacts, including changes in precipitation patterns, can threaten the quality and supply of water,
endanger agriculture production, and lead to many other health-impacting consequences.
The impacts of climate change will not affect everyone the same way. Climate change is expected
to more seriously affect the health and well-being of the communities in our society that are
the least able to prepare for, cope with, and recover from its impacts. For instance, low-income
communities and communities of color are expected to be hit harder by extreme heat, extreme
weather events, and worsened air pollution; and are more sensitive to the economic stresses
associated with climate change, like increased prices for basic needs and threat of job loss in
the agricultural and tourism sectors.136 If this “climate gap” is not addressed, climate change will
exacerbate many of the health and social disparities among California residents. Fortunately,
127 Hoshiko, S., P. English, D. Smith, and R. Trent. 2010. “A simple method for estimating excess mortality due to
heat waves, as applied to the 2006 California heat wave.” Int J Public Health 55(2): 133–7.
128 Knowlton, K., M. Rotkin-Ellman, G. King, et al. 2009. “The 2006 California heat wave: Impacts on hospitalizations
and emergency department visits.” Environ Health Perspect 117(1): 61–7.
129 Drechsler, D. M. 2009. Climate Change and Public Health in California.
130 Ibid.
131 CARB. ARB Fact Sheet: Air Pollution and Health. www.arb.ca.gov/research/health/fs/fs1/fs1.htm.
132 Shonkoff, S., R. Morello-Frosch, M. Pastor, and J. Sadd. 2009. Environmental health and equity impacts from
climate change and mitigation policies in California: A review of the literature. California Climate Change Center.
www.energy.ca.gov/2009publications/CEC-500-2009-038/CEC-500-2009-038-D.PDF.
133 Drechsler, D. M., N. Motallebi, M. Kleeman, D. Cayan, K. Hayhoe, L. S. Kalkstein, N. Miller, S. Sheridan, J. Jin,
and R. A. VanCuren. 2005. Public health-related impacts of climate change in California.
134 CDC. 2013. CDC’s Climate Change and Health Program: www.cdc.gov/nceh/information/climate_and_health.htm.
135 lbid.
136 lbid.

124

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



many of the actions that reduce GHG emissions also improve the health and well-being of these
vulnerable communities, providing an opportunity to address many of our current environmental
and health disparities.
Health Impacts of AB 32 Mitigation Measures
Climate change mitigation efforts not only help combat the direct adverse health impacts
of climate change, many of the strategies laid out in the Scoping Plan have additional health
co-benefts—many of which can improve existing health disparities. In addition, these climate
strategies have implications for chronic disease—which accounts for the vast majority of ill health
in California. Chronic disease and injury account for 80 percent of deaths in California, and affect
the lives of millions of Californians. Chronic disease is also the key driver of health inequities, lost
workforce productivity, and rising health care costs.137
The strategies California has employed to reduce GHG emissions from the transportation sector
include cleaner and more fuel-effcient vehicles and land use strategies that reduce vehicle miles
traveled and promote active transport (bicycling and walking—alone and in combination with
public transit.) Putting cleaner and more fuel-effcient vehicles and heavy-duty trucks on the road
is reducing GHGs and criteria air pollutants and toxics, including NOx (which forms ozone and
PM2.5) and directly emitted PM2.5 (which includes toxic diesel PM). Since statewide monitoring
efforts began in 2000, PM2.5 levels have decreased by an average of four percent each year.138
Strategies that will help us achieve our 2050 climate goals, including zero emission vehicles and
increased electrifcation of goods movement, will further reduce air pollutants and bring health
co-benefts throughout the State. These improvements will particularly beneft many low-income
communities of color, who are disproportionately exposed to traffc-related air pollutants.139
The impact that our built environment—including land use decisions, transportation systems,
and our buildings—has on human health and well-being has long been recognized.140 Statewide
efforts to reduce GHG emissions through integrated land use and transportation planning will
fundamentally change our communities, bringing with it public health benefts. The Sustainable
Community Strategies (SCSs) adopted by Metropolitan Planning Organizations are planning for
communities in a way that reduces travel demand per person, provides greater mobility options,
increases access to employment and services, and creates more vibrant surroundings. Reducing
vehicle travel will reduce GHG emissions and improve regional air quality. For instance, Southern
California’s 2012–2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (RTP/
SCS) is expected to result in a 24 percent reduction in total pollution-related health incidences,
saving over $1.5 billion per year in total costs.141 In an effort to improve mobility options for
California residents, the RTP/SCSs are also increasing opportunities for residents to use
bicycling and walking as travel alternatives. Active transportation increases physical ftness
and improves mental health.142, 143 The health benefts of physical activity are extensive and well
documented: physical activity—even in modest amounts—has been linked with a decreased risk
of cardiorespiratory diseases, type 2 diabetes, breast and colon cancer, depression, cognitive
137 CDPH. 2013. The Burden of Chronic Disease and Injury.
www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/Documents/BurdenReportOnline%2004-04-13.pdf.
138 ARB staff analysis.
139 Shonkoff, S., R. Morello-Frosch, M. Pastor, and J. Sadd. 2009. Environmental health and equity impacts from
climate change and mitigation policies in California: A review of the literature. California Climate Change Center.
www.energy.ca.gov/2009publications/CEC-500-2009-038/CEC-500-2009-038-D.PDF.
140 U.S. EPA. 2013. Our Built and Natural Environments. A Technical Review of the Interactions Among Land Use,
Transportation, and Environmental Quality. Second Edition,
www.epa.gov/smartgrowth/pdf/b-and-n/b-and-n-EPA-231K13001.pdf.
141 SCAG. 2012–2035 RTP/SCS; American Lung Association Analysis:
www.lung.org/associations/states/california/assets/pdfs/advocacy/smart-growth/smart-growth-analysis.pdf.
142 Atkinson, M., and L. Weigand. 2008. A Review of Literature: The Mental Health Benefts of Walking and Bicycling.
www.pdx.edu/ibpi/sites/www.pdx.edu.ibpi/fles/Mental%20Health%20Benefts%20White%20Paper.pdf.
143 Ewing, R., T. Schmid, et al. 2008. “Relationship Between Urban Sprawl and Physical Activity, Obesity,
and Morbidity.” Urban Ecology 567–582.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

125



decline, all-cause mortality, and improved musculoskeletal health.144 These regional plans are not
just providing more travel options, they also have implications for other health-related factors,
like improved access to health services and employment opportunities and safer, more cohesive
neighborhoods. The SCS plans created by regions are key mechanisms for improving factors that
have indirect but broad implications for the health and well-being of California’s communities.
Climate change strategies that also reduce urban heat islands improve public health and
help build climate change resiliency. Increasing urban tree canopy and green space combats
climate change directly through sequestration of GHGs and indirectly by reducing ambient
air temperatures145 and reducing the energy needed to heat and cool buildings.146 The cooling
effects of urban trees reduce urban heat islands and can lessen the severity of extreme heat
events. Additional health-related benefts of urban trees include reduced air pollutants,147 reduced
noise from traffc,148 and other psychological and social benefts that help decrease stress and
aggressive behavior.149, 150, 151 Cool roofs and cool pavements also combat climate change while
cooling our communities.152
Strategies to build more energy-effcient, green buildings—if done right—also can have public
health benefts. Improving indoor air quality through source reduction and strategies such as
high-effciency air fltration can greatly improve indoor air quality and occupant health. The
State’s green building code (CALGreen) includes both required and voluntary measures that
improve public health. A number of these measures help assure healthful indoor air quality,
such as those addressing chemical emissions from composite wood products, carpets, resilient
fooring materials, paints, adhesives, sealants, and insulation, as well as those addressing
ventilation. ARB has been active in improving building indoor air quality by sponsoring and
conducting research, regulating indoor air cleaners and consumer products, and helping to
develop green building standards and guidelines that both reduce GHG emissions and protect
indoor air quality.
Reducing the use of nitrogen fertilizers can reduce GHG emissions and improve water quality.
Many Californians live in agricultural areas that have water nitrogen levels well above national
health-based standards.153 Central Valley residents in areas with contaminated drinking water
must also spend far more than average to purchase safe water, reducing the ability to spend on
other health-protective necessities such as food and housing.154
144 PAGAC. 2008. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee Report, 2008. U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.
145 Trees can lower outdoor air temperatures by as much as 9°F (5°C) through evapotranspiration: EPA. 1992.
Cooling our Communities: A Guidebook on Tree Planting and Light-Colored Surfacing. U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Offce of Policy Analysis, Climate Change Division. p. 32.
146 Akbari, H., D. Kurn, S. Bretz, and J. Hanford. 1997. “Peak power and cooling energy savings of shade trees.”
Energy and Buildings 25:139–148. (Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies Trees and Vegetation, p. 5)
147 Nowak, D. J., D. E. Crane, and J. C. Stevens. 2006. “Air pollution removal by urban trees and shrubs in the
United States.” Urban Forestry and Urban Greening. 4(2006):115–123. (Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands:
Compendium of Strategies - Trees and Vegetation, p. 6)
148 Nowak, D. J., and J. F. Dwyer. 2007. Understanding the Benefts and Costs of Urban Forest Ecosystems. In: Kuser,
J. E. Handbook of Urban and Community Forestry in the Northeast. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
25–46. (Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies - Trees and Vegetation, p. 9)
149 Wolf, K. 1998. Urban Nature Benefts: Psycho-Social Dimensions of People and Plants. Center for Urban
Horticulture, College of Forest Resources, University of Washington, Fact Sheet #1. Seattle, Washington.
(Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies - Trees and Vegetation, p. 9)
150 Laverne, R. J., and K. Winson-Geideman. 2003. “The Infuence of Trees and Landscaping on Rental Rates at Offce
Buildings.” Journal of Arboriculture 29(5): 281–290. (Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of
Strategies - Trees and Vegetation, p. 9)
151 Kuo, Francis E., and W.C. Sullivan. 2001. “Environment and Crime in the Inner City: Does Vegetation Reduce
Crime?” Environment and Behavior 33(3): 343–367. (Accessed via Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium
of Strategies - Trees and Vegetation, p. 9)
152 U.S. EPA. No date. Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies — Cool Roofs.
153 UC Davis. 2011. Addressing Nitrate in California’s Drinking Water. http://groundwaternitrate.ucdavis.edu.
154 Pacifc Institute. 2001. The Human Costs of Nitrate-contaminated Drinking Water in the San Joaquin Valley.
www.pacinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/nitrate_contamination3.pdf.

126

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



Ongoing Evaluation
As California looks beyond 2020, there will be many opportunities to address long-standing air
quality and public health issues through the implementation of sustainable community strategies,
the expanded deployment of zero and near-zero emission vehicles in the light- and heavy-duty
sectors, and the more effcient use of electricity and natural gas. But we must be mindful of how
current and future strategies are implemented, so that they maximize the health benefts while
minimizing unintended negative health impacts. For instance, pursuing more compact, transitoriented development will help reduce GHG emissions and regional air pollutants; however,
without appropriate preventative measures, it may have the potential to displace current
residents who are disproportionately from low-income and minority communities, as well as to
increase near-roadway exposure for some individuals. Additional efforts are needed to prevent
any adverse health impacts that may be exacerbated by future land use and transportation
decisions. ARB is pursuing research to help improve health impacts from near-roadway exposure.
While the Cap-and-Trade Regulation is designed to reduce GHG emissions, co-benefts such as
reductions in criteria and toxic air pollutants, are expected to follow. However, concerns have been
raised that these reductions in criteria and toxic air pollutants may not occur in some areas, or
that the Cap and Trade Program may exacerbate some localized air pollution impacts. To address
these concerns, ARB is working with CAPCOA to design elements of a Cap-and-Trade adaptive
management process to identify and respond to concerns about the potential for localized
emission increases due to the Cap-and-Trade Regulation. The effort will involve a transparent
process to collect, review, and evaluate data to determine if any potential adverse localized air
quality impacts might have occurred as a result of implementing Cap-and Trade. If a potential
impact is identifed through this process, ARB is committed to developing appropriate responses
through a public process, including consideration and approval by the Board as necessary.
Despite the diffculties in quantifying the health impacts that result from AB 32 implementation,
additional action can be taken to better understand the relationship between climate control
measures and health impacts. Several efforts undertaken by the California Department of Public
Health will aid in this endeavor, including the development of land use/transportation health
impact assessment tools and the development of health community data and indicators to
facilitate monitoring and tracking of progress. Additional effort will be needed to advance the
development and adoption of tools to evaluate the health benefts of land use and transportation
planning, as well as to better educate policymakers, local offcials, and the public of these
impacts. Moving forward, ARB will continue to monitor and track statewide air pollution levels
and community pollutant levels to ensure that our policies and programs continue to improve
air quality for all Californians. In addition, ARB will continue to ensure that efforts to reduce GHG
emissions through the building sector continue to simultaneously improve indoor air quality and
occupant health and safety. Continued research and analysis is needed on the short- and longterm health co-benefts of climate strategies to help communities maximize the positive impacts
of local actions.
Federal air quality requirements could be an important driver in infuencing how and when
California achieves mid-term climate targets. The South Coast and San Joaquin Valley Air Quality
Management Districts, together home to more than half of the State’s population, must reduce
emissions of smog-forming pollutants by about 90 percent below 2010 levels by 2032 to meet the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Since many of the technologies to reduce smog-forming
pollution are the same as those to reduce GHG emissions, and recognizing that it is imperative to
integrate planning to meet multiple objectives, complying with federal air quality standards will
likely accelerate climate action in California.
In addition, ARB will continue to evaluate ways to monitor the public health of disadvantaged
communities. As with economic impacts, communities and individuals are subjected to a
multitude of factors that affect their health; consequently, teasing out the impacts of one discrete
set of policies, such as the climate program, is very challenging.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

127



C. Environmental Justice and Disadvantaged Communities
State law defnes environmental justice as the fair treatment of people of all races, cultures,
and incomes with respect to the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. ARB is committed to considering environmental
justice in every program and process.
In 2001, ARB adopted Policies and Actions for Environmental Justice (Policies) to provide a
framework for incorporating environmental justice into its programs. The Policies apply to all
communities in California, but recognize that environmental justice issues have been raised
mostly in the context of low-income and minority communities. These Policies are intended to
promote the fair treatment of all Californians and cover the full spectrum of ARB activities. The
Policies recognize the need to engage community members as ARB develops and implements
its programs. ARB is committed to work closely with all stakeholders, environmental and public
health organizations, industry, business owners, other State and local agencies, and all other
interested parties, to successfully implement these Policies.
Climate change will present additional challenges to those that environmental justice
communities are already facing. Climate change has both direct and indirect impacts on health.
These health effects disproportionately impact vulnerable individuals—the young, elderly, and
people with chronic illness—and people in environmental justice communities.
Climate change will affect human health, infrastructure, and transportation systems, as well as
energy, food, and water supplies. Environmental justice communities may face greater challenges
to adapting to climate change due to limited resources. To the extent feasible, the State should
work to identify and address any adverse effects of the State’s climate programs, policies, and
activities on environmental justice communities. In addition, the State must ensure that its climate
programs, policies and actions also result in benefts to environmental justice communities.
Potential Impacts and Benefts to Environmental Justice Communities
The implementation of air pollution control programs in California at the federal, State, and
local levels targeting GHGs, criteria pollutants, and air toxics will together result in a reduction
of air pollution throughout the State. These statewide emission reductions are intended to
improve the health of all of California’s residents. Specifcally, the implementation of the
Scoping Plan will result in signifcant GHG emission reductions in California, accompanied by
criteria and toxic pollutant emission reductions at the State and local level. ARB will work to
ensure that implementation of the Scoping Plan and all of its programs do not adversely affect
environmental justice communities. ARB will continue to work closely with the local air districts
to monitor air pollution to ensure that emission reductions at the State, local, and regional levels
are occurring as intended, and that environmental justice communities are also sharing in the
benefts of cleaner air.
In addition, as part of a focused effort, ARB will continue to work with CAPCOA to design
elements of a Cap-and-Trade adaptive management process to identify and respond to concerns
about the potential for localized emission increases due to the Cap‐and‐Trade Regulation. The
effort will involve a transparent process to collect, review, and evaluate data to determine if any
potential adverse localized air quality impacts might have occurred as result of implementing
Cap-and-Trade. If a potential impact is identifed through the process, ARB is committed to
developing appropriate responses through a public process, including consideration and
approval by the Board as necessary.
Environmental justice communities will also beneft directly from the expenditure of Cap-andTrade auction proceeds. SB 535 requires CalEPA to identify disadvantaged communities based
on geographic, socioeconomic, public health, and environmental hazard criteria for purposes of

128

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



expending Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds. SB 535 also requires that at least 25 percent of
Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds be allocated to projects that beneft these communities, and
at least ten percent of the proceeds be allocated to projects located in the communities.
To the extent feasible, all State, regional, and local government agencies with a role in
implementing AB 32 should employ available data sources to help target resources, programs,
incentives, and enforcement efforts to ensure that residents of EJ communities receive benefts
from climate-related efforts and to guard against worsening conditions or creating new
environmental justice problems.
Assessing the Effects of AB 32 Climate Change Programs in Environmental Justice Communities
ARB, in coordination with CalEPA and the Offce of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
(OEHHA), is working on developing a method to assess the effects of California’s climate change
mitigation efforts on environmental justice communities. AB 32 requires that, to a feasible extent,
ARB must ensure that activities undertaken to address climate change do not disproportionately
impact disadvantaged communities and that those communities also beneft from statewide
efforts to reduce GHG emissions.
The Environmental Justice Advisory Committee, formed pursuant to AB 32, has expressed
signifcant interest in the development of metrics for tracking, assessing, and quantifying
the potential impacts and benefts of the State’s climate programs, policies, and actions on
California’s economy, environment, and public health, particularly with respect to environmental
justice communities.
Tools such as CalEnviroScreen (released by CalEPA and OEHHA) have been developed to
evaluate multiple indicators of environmental and socioeconomic vulnerability in disadvantaged
communities. These tools do not show the impacts of any single program, but are intended to
evaluate a community’s vulnerability to pollution’s adverse effects.
In contrast, the effort discussed here attempts to focus on the impacts of AB 32 programs that
reduce GHGs and other climate change pollutants. Any effort to track the effects of AB 32 will
require, at a minimum, the identifcation of indicators that could be tied to the programs of
interest and a method for assessing those indicators. An effective and meaningful evaluation
of AB 32 programs must rely on indicators expected to fuctuate with government, community,
and industry actions to implement climate change mitigation programs.
Project Concept
ARB staff, in coordination with CalEPA, OEHHA and other agencies, is undertaking an effort
to assess the effects (benefts and potential impacts) of AB 32 programs on disadvantaged
communities. The key objective is to develop a quantitative mechanism to gauge the
effectiveness of AB 32 programs with respect to disadvantaged communities. Specifcally,
to help address the question “Is the implementation of AB 32 programs fulflling the statutory
responsibility to provide benefts and avoid disproportionate harmful impacts to the extent
feasible in those communities?”
ARB is developing a multi-phase approach, beginning with identifying sources of existing
available and accessible data. This frst phase would look at changes in emissions of multiple
air pollutants at individual facilities and include a visual tool to support ready public access to
those data. ARB will rely on a process of extracting and reviewing criteria and toxics emissions
information, developed by and in concert with the local air districts, in order to understand
localized impacts. The next phase would expand in scope to encompass entire disadvantaged
communities (per SB 535), refecting emissions from both facilities and mobile sources in

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

129



each area. In a later phase, we would include relevant emission reduction and economic data
from projects funded through the investment of Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds to beneft
disadvantaged communities. Table 11 below describes the phases of the proposed approach.
The Scoping Plan Economic Advisors, other State agencies (like OEHHA), and local air districts
may aid ARB by supplementing these data and analyses, which would provide an expanded view.
Existing data sources include the following:
• California Electronic Greenhouse Gas Reporting Tool (Cal e-GGRT)
• Cal e-GGRT is California’s Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reporting
Program that provides quality assured and third-party verifed emissions data
from sources that contribute the most to Statewide GHG emissions.
• California Emission Inventory Development and Reporting System (CEIDARS)
• CEIDARS data are the result of facility reports to air districts that are passed
to ARB. CEIDARS provides facility criteria and toxic emissions data.
• EMissions FACtors for emissions from California’s on-road vehicles (EMFAC)
• EMFAC is California’s model for estimating GHG, criteria and toxic
emissions from on-road vehicles operating in California.
• Off-Road Motor Vehicles and Equipment
• Category-specifc methods and inventory models are being developed for specifc
regulatory support projects to replace the OFFROAD model. The following ARB website
lists the categories that have been or are being updated with new methods and data:
www.arb.ca.gov/msei/categories.htm#offroad_motor_vehicles.
The goal is to provide an evaluation of the effects of AB 32 programs, considering multiple
variables, including greenhouse gases, criteria pollutants, and toxic air contaminants. This
assessment would not only meet the goals of the Cap-and-Trade Adaptive Management Plan
but would also include impacts not otherwise attributed to Cap-and Trade. The results of this
assessment would provide an evaluation of the effects of all AB 32 programs on disadvantaged
communities. Data collected could provide information needed for ARB to plan and implement
investment, regulatory, or policy responses to any identifed adverse localized impacts on specifc
disadvantaged communities.
Staff intends to present this effort as part of the Cap-and-Trade Adaptive Management Plan public
workshops scheduled for mid-2014. Additionally, staff anticipates that with the Cap-and-Trade
Adaptive Management Plan, an update on the progress of this effort will be presented to the
Board before the end of 2014.

130

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI



Table 11:

Project Phases for Assessing the Effects of
AB 32 Programs on Disadvantaged Communities
Phase

Description

Phase 1
Collect and Make
Available Facility Data

The focus will be on facilities that are required to report consistent with
ARB’s Mandatory Reporting Regulation. We will compile several years of
climate, criteria pollutant, and air toxics emissions data for these facilities.
We will also make this information available for review and analysis by the
public, including communities, academics, and government.

Phase 2
Evaluate Facility
Emissions Data

Analyze the information collected in Phase 1. We intend to utilize the
data evaluation process developed for the Cap-and-Trade Adaptive
Management Plan and annually provide a summary of fndings for public
review.

Phase 3
Collect and Make
Available Community Data

The focus will be on disadvantaged communities as defned by CalEPA
under SB 535. We will integrate “community-level” mobile source
emission data and investment data from Cap-and-Trade auction proceeds.
In this phase, we will also quantify trends and provide data biennially for
public review and analysis.

Phase 4
Evaluate Community Data

Conduct a detailed analysis of the information collected in Phase 3. We will
summarize our fndings and biennially release results for public review.

Phase 5
Respond to Evaluations
in Scoping Plan

Respond to Phase 4 results and discuss project progress in the next Update
to the Climate Change Scoping Plan.

Outreach and Community Capacity Building
As climate policy and programs are developed and implemented, community capacity building
through education and outreach efforts—as well as integration of community members into the
decision making process—are critical components of helping to ensure that the needs of these
communities are known and addressed. Additional effort is needed in communities that are
geographically, linguistically, and/or economically isolated. Collaboration with trusted sources
of information, such as community-based organizations, regional climate collaboratives, and
culturally appropriate messaging techniques, are recommended.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VI

131



Environmental Justice
Advisory Committee
To ensure environmental justice needs
and concerns are integrated into
the State’s climate programs, ARB
reconvened the Environmental Justice
Advisory Committee (Committee) to
advise the Board on the Update. On
March 21, 2013, the Board appointed
members based on nominations received
from environmental justice organizations
and community groups.

Environmental Justice Advisory Committee
Martha Dina Argüello

Physicians for Social
Responsibility

Los Angeles

Nicole Capretz
(Served on EJAC
until August 2013)

Environmental Health
Coalition

San Diego

Gisele Fong

End Oil

Los Angeles

Tom Frantz

Association of
Irritated Residents

Central Valley

Kevin Hamilton

Clinica Sierra Vista

Central Valley

Rey León

Valley LEAP

Central Valley

Penny Newman
(Appointed to EJAC
but unable to serve)

Center for
Community Action
and Environmental
Justice

Inland Empire

The Committee met four times from
June 2013 to April 2014 to discuss the
Luis Olmedo
Comite Civico Del
Imperial Valley
Update. The Committee focused their
Valley
discussions on each Scoping Plan
Susan Riggs
San Diego Housing
San Diego
sector and developed comprehensive
(Served on EJAC
Federation
recommendations that ARB considered
until March 2014)
in drafting this Update. The Committee’s
Kemba Shakur
Urban Releaf
Bay Area
“Final Recommendations on the
Mari
Rose
Taruc
Asian
Pacifc
Bay Area
Proposed AB 32 Scoping Plan” provided
Environmental
recommendations for each Scoping Plan
Network
sector and overarching environmental
Monica Wilson
Global Alliance
Bay Area
justice policy. The fnal recommendations
for Incinerator
included the need for monitoring and
Alternatives
assessing potential impacts of the State’s
Ryan Briscoe Young
The Greenlining
Statewide
climate programs; a call for a 2030 target
(Served on EJAC
Institute
of, at a minimum, 40 percent reduction
until April 2014)
from 1990 levels and a 2040 target of, at
a minimum, 60 percent reduction from
1990 levels; a call for California to reduce its energy use and transition to 100 percent renewable
energy; fnancial support for transportation in disadvantaged communities; and amendments
to the Cap-and-Trade Regulation that would exclude direct allocation and offset credits. The
Committee’s fnal recommendations can be found in Appendix E.

D. Environmental Analysis
ARB prepared an environmental analysis (EA) of the Scoping Plan Update pursuant to its
regulatory program certifed by the Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency (14 CCR 15251(d);
17 CCR 60000–60008). The draft EA is included as Appendix F. In accordance with Public
Resources Code section 21080.5 of CEQA, public agencies with certifed regulatory programs
are exempt from certain CEQA requirements, including but not limited to those preparing
environmental impact reports, negative declarations, and initial studies (14 CCR 15250).
The resource areas from the CEQA Guidelines Environmental Checklist are being used as
a framework for assessing the potential for signifcant impacts (17 CCR 60005(b)).
A draft EA was released for a 45-day public review on March 15, 2014. ARB summarized and
responded in writing to all comments submitted on the EA in a supplemental response document
for the Board to consider for approval along with the Update.

132

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter Title VI



VII. Conclusions

California is forging a path forward in the fght against climate change.
By expanding on existing policies and developing new ones, we are steadily
bending the arc of economic growth in our state in a cleaner, more sustainable
direction. And while climate change demands it, the steps we are taking to cut
emissions are the very actions we should be taking anyway to build for
the future in California.
Sustainability and climate action have increasingly become part of the DNA of who we are and
how we, as Californians, see ourselves. It is now as inconceivable to pump unlimited amounts
of carbon pollution into the atmosphere as it was once to spew mercury, lead, sulfur dioxide,
or arsenic into the air.
Day by day, in steady steps of visible progress, we are seeing the emergence of a clean energy
future. Solar panels are commonplace, whether on roofs, commercial warehouses, or in shiny
ground-based arrays across the State. Thousands of wind turbines have become part of the
California clean energy panorama, their blades describing slow graceful arcs as they generate
more than 4,000 megawatts of pollution-free energy.
Electric vehicles are a common sight on our streets and highways, and each day brings more
charging stations to parking structures and shopping malls. Biofuel is available at retail outlets.
Even big-rigs are getting a climate makeover as trailer skirts, low-rolling resistance tires, and
aggressively aerodynamic cabs mean less wind resistance, lower fuel costs, and fewer emissions.
These efforts aren’t just cutting greenhouse gases. They are cleaning our air; helping to better
preserve water, and agricultural lands, and other critical natural resources; powering the growth
of new long-term economic drivers in the state; and helping to pull together and better align
public policy priorities across programmatic silos.
As California takes these steps, public support for action also continues to grow. Recent polls
show that 79 percent of Californians believe global warming is happening, and a majority want
to see more action by the State; 73 percent say corporations and industry need to do more;
70 percent feel they, themselves, should be doing more to address the issue.
This public consensus aligns with the dictates of science, which tell us unequivocally that we
must continue on the path we are on, and even accelerate our efforts in the coming years.
That is exactly what this Update does. It builds on California’s framework for climate action with
a range of strategies that will keep pushing our state toward a cleaner, more sustainable future.
It is a continuation of what we have already begun. Now is the time to make it a reality.

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter VII: Conclusions

133



134

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter Title & Section



135



California Environmental Protection Agency

0

Air Resources Board

1001 I Street
P.O. Box 2815
Sacramento, CA 95812
(916) 323-2514
www.arb.ca.gov

136

Climate Change Scoping Plan: Chapter Title & Section

