BUILDING A LOW CARBON FUTURE FOR CONNECTICUT
ACHIEVING A 45% GHG REDUCTION BY 2030

RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
DECEMBER 18, 2018



Page left blank intentionally



TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary .............................................................. i

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies .................................. 18

GHG Emissions Reduction Recommendations and Suite of
Strategies ............................................................................iv

Put a price on Carbon............................................................... 18

Introduction ........................................................................ 1
The Science of Climate Change ...................................................... 1
The Cost of Inaction ....................................................................... 3
Leadership & Demonstration ......................................................... 5
Connecticut’s GHG Reduction Path ............................................... 8

Expand consumer education and awareness efforts to increase
the uptake of zero- and low-carbon technology measures ..... 19
Pursue an integrated approach to GHG mitigation, adaptation,
and resiliency ........................................................................... 21

Electric Sector .................................................................... 22
Recommendations and Suite of Strategies .................................. 22

Governor’s Council on Climate Change............................... 10

Commit at least 50 megawatts of demand reduction per year
to the ISO-New England forward-capacity market .................. 22

Executive Order No. 46 ................................................................ 10

Achieve at least 66% zero-carbon energy generation by 2030 23

Meetings, Process, and Accomplishments to Date...................... 10
Mid-term Target........................................................................... 11

Optimize grid management strategies to reduce carbon
emissions .................................................................................. 25

GHG Emission Reduction Analysis ...................................... 12

Transportation Sector ........................................................ 26

Economy-wide Projections of GHG Emissions — The Business-asUsual Scenario.............................................................................. 12

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies .................................. 26

GHG Mitigation Scenarios ............................................................ 13
Economic and Fiscal Impact of Achieving the 2030 Target ......... 14

GHG Emissions Reduction Recommendations and
Strategies .......................................................................... 15
Introduction ................................................................................. 15
Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................ 16

Cross Sector ...................................................................... 18

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Maintain increasing fuel economy and low- and zero-emissions
standards.................................................................................. 26
Increase light-duty ZEV penetration rate to at least 20% by
2030 ......................................................................................... 28
Develop sustainable funding for transportation electrification
and transit infrastructure ......................................................... 32

Building Sector................................................................... 34
Recommendations and Suite of Strategies .................................. 34



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Accelerate adoption of building thermal energy conservation
improvements such as weatherization, insulation, efficient
windows, and HVAC ................................................................. 34
Transition building fossil fuel thermal loads to efficient
renewable thermal technologies ............................................. 36
Improve training and technical capacity of workforce ............ 38

Non-energy GHG Emissions ............................................... 39
Connecticut’s Non-Energy Sector GHG Commitments ................ 39

Appendices ....................................................................... 41
Appendix A: Executive Order Number 46 ................................ 41
Appendix B: Members of the Governor’s Council on Climate
Change ..................................................................................... 43
Appendix C: Connecticut Business-As-Usual Case ................... 44
Appendix D: Technology & Measures ...................................... 46

CREDITS
The development, analysis and writing of this report included input
from the following state agencies, businesses and organizations:
Connecticut Fund for the Environment
Connecticut Green Bank
Connecticut Institute for Resilience and Climate Adaptation
Connecticut Round Table on Climate and Jobs
Department of Administration
Department of Economic and Community Development
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
Department of Housing

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Department of Insurance
Department of Transportation
Institute for Sustainable Energy at Eastern Connecticut State
University
Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management
Office of Policy and Management
Public Utilities Regulatory Authority
The Hartford
Stanley McMillen, Ph.D., Consultant
Lead Authors
Keri Enright-Kato, Director, Connecticut Department of Energy &
Environmental Protection
Jeff Howard, Environmental Analyst, Connecticut Department of
Energy & Environmental Protection
Jeremy Hunt, Research Analyst, Connecticut Department of Energy
& Environmental Protection
IMAGES
Electric truck, Gonzalo Bravo
Electric car, Nicholas DeForest
House, Alexander Skowalsky
Commercial Building, LAFS
Buildings, Laurene Smith
Electric leaf bolt, Curve



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the greenhouse gas (GHG) that represents
the greatest warming potential, due to its atmospheric abundance
and long atmospheric lifetime (hundreds to thousands of years).1
The global CO2 concentration has surpassed 400 parts per million
(ppm), a level higher than at any time in the last 3 million years.
Since the start of the 20th century, the Earth has warmed 1°C (1.8oF)
since the pre-industrial period2; and the last four years have been
the warmest years on record. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) recently released a Special Report on Global
Warming of 1.5oC, stating that there is high confidence that “global
warming is likely to reach 1.5°C (2.7oF) between 2030 and 2052 if it
continues to increase at the current rate.”3 The last time
temperatures were 1-2oC (1.8-3.6°F) higher than they are now —
some 125,000 years ago — sea levels were 5-6 meters (16-19 feet)
higher. A 1.5°C (2.7oF) change in temperature will also have
devastating impacts on ecosystems, water supplies, human health,
and socioeconomic sectors.
The IPCC Special Report notes that if anthropogenic GHG emissions
stopped today, the 1.5oC (2.7oF) limit would not be exceeded, but
global emissions to date “will persist for centuries to millennia.” The
clear and sober findings of this report deepen our urgency to

1 Why does CO get most of the attention when there are so many other heat-trapping gases?
2

Union of Concerned Scientists. August 3, 2017. Retrieved from
https://www.ucsusa.org/global-warming/science-and-impacts/science/CO2-and-globalwarming-faq.html#bf-toc-1
2 Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, B. DeAngelo, S. Doherty, K. Hayhoe, R. Horton, J.P.
Kossin, P.C. Taylor, A.M. Waple, and C.P. Weaver, 2017: Executive summary. In: Climate
Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W.
Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change
Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 12-34, doi: 10.7930/J0DJ5CTG.
3
IPCC, 2018 [In Press]: Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5 °C an IPCC
special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

accelerate mitigation and adaptation efforts to reduce the risks and
impacts associated with a 1.5-2°C (2.7-3.6°F) increase in global
temperature from pre-industrial levels.
Moreover, the recently released Fourth National Climate
Assessment, Volume II draws a direct connection between the
warming atmosphere and the resulting changes that affect lives,
communities, and livelihoods. The impacts of observed warming are
already being felt in the United States and are projected to intensify
in the future. The severity of future impacts will depend largely on
actions taken to reduce GHG emissions and our ability to integrate
climate adaptation strategies into existing investments, policies, and
practices.4
With over 600 miles of coastline and 2.2 million people living in
shoreline communities in Connecticut, the State’s residents and
communities are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of weather
and climate events. Connecticut residents are already beginning to
experience such effects as climate change ramps up. For instance, in
Connecticut alone, Hurricane Irene (2011) caused power outages
affecting 754,000 customers and over $1 billion in damage, and
Hurricane Sandy (2012) caused power outages affecting more than
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty.
4 Jay, A., D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D. Barrie, B.J. DeAngelo, A. Dave, M. Dzaugis, M. Kolian,
K.L.M. Lewis, K. Reeves, and D. Winner, 2018: Overview. In Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in
the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W.
Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.S.
Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH1)

i



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
600,000 customers and inflicted almost $2 billion in statewide
damages.5 The latter forced thousands of Connecticut residents to
evacuate, saw thousands apply for FEMA assistance, damaged roads
and infrastructure, and took nine days for utilities to restore
power.6 Many of Connecticut’s coastal communities and assets face
escalating risk of storm events exacerbated by climate change.
Connecticut’s commitment to address climate change is evident in
the policies, programs, and voluntary actions it has pursued over
the past 15 years. Passage of the 2008 Global Warming Solutions
Act, which set forth a statutory requirement to reduce GHG
emissions 10 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 and 80 percent
below 2001 levels by 2050, establishes a commitment that the State
will mitigate harmful GHG emissions. While long-term GHG
reduction trends indicate the Connecticut is on a trajectory to meet
its targets, the urgency of action cannot be overstated. Beyond
2020, far deeper cuts are needed to ensure meeting the State’s
reduction targets.
Anticipating the need to ensure the State maintains a downward
trajectory, Governor Malloy issued Executive Order No. 46, creating
the Governor’s Council on Climate Change (GC3). The GC3 was
tasked with 1) “examining the efficacy of existing of existing policies
and regulations designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
identify new strategies”; 2) “establish[ing] interim goals that, if met,
will ensure that the state will achieve the 2050 target”; 3)
“recommend[ing] policies, regulations, or legislative actions that will
assist in achieving the interim goals and 2050 target”; and 4)
“monitor[ing] greenhouse gas emission levels … annually to
establish whether the state is poised to meet the interim goals and
5

NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather
and Climate Disasters (2018). Retrieved from https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

the 2050 target.” After a thorough review of a variety of scenarios
on how the State can drive down GHG emissions in the electric,
building, and transportation sectors, the GC3 unanimously
recommended an economy-wide GHG emission reduction target of
45 percent below 2001 levels by 2030. As one of the most ambitious
mid-term reduction targets in the nation, the target places the State
on a linear downward trajectory from today’s GHG emissions to the
80 percent reduction by 2050 required by the Global Warming
Solutions Act.
The GC3’s mid-term reduction target recommendation was adopted
by the Connecticut General Assembly when it passed An Act
Concerning Climate Change Planning and Resiliency (Public Act 1882). The 2030 target of reducing GHG emissions 45 percent below
2001 levels was signed into law by Governor Malloy on June 20,
2018.
Summary of Recommendations
The recommendations in this report build upon the successful
policies and measures the State has implemented to date, propose
strengthening existing programs, and put forth new strategies to
help Connecticut reach its mid- and long-term GHG reduction
targets. The recommendations underscore that there is no single
solution; instead, they offer a balanced mix of strategies that allow
for flexibility and mid-course adjustments as technologies and costs
change over time.
The GC3’s analysis of a variety of scenarios to determine the best
pathway to meet the 2030 and 2050 targets helped establish a long-

6 Burgeson, John. Rising Above the Tide: 5 Years Since Sandy. CTPost. October 28, 2017.

Retrieved from https://www.ctpost.com/local/article/Rising-above-the-tide-5-years-sinceSandy-12313727.php

ii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
term vision for decarbonizing Connecticut’s economy. Three broad,
fundamental objectives emerged from this vision:
1. Zero-carbon electricity generation
2. Clean transportation
3. Clean, efficient, and resilient buildings
The following proposed strategies and suite of recommendations
would put Connecticut on track to meet these objectives and help
build a strong foundation for achieving a zero-carbon future.
Additional actions, beyond those proposed in this report, will need
to be regularly evaluated and integrated into state and local
planning efforts, and acted upon by public and private entities alike.
Whenever possible, climate change policymaking should assess the
multiple added benefits, also known as co-benefits, of policies
enacted to reduce GHG emissions. The co-benefits of reduced GHG

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

emissions include: job growth and local economic benefits; livable
and resilient communities; public health benefits; and potential
innovation in technology, energy, and resource management
practices. These benefits, which depend on the specific nature of
the policy enacted, could consist of improved air and water quality,
improved soil and ecosystem health, energy cost savings,
sustainable land management, and so on. While co-benefits can be
difficult to monitor, quantify, and monetize, when properly valued
they often help demonstrate that the positive societal impacts of
climate policy actions outweigh the costs.
Utilizing existing and proven technologies, the following set of
sector-specific recommendations and supporting suite of strategies
were developed with the above objectives in mind. We believe they
put Connecticut on a sustainable path to meeting its ambitious 2030
target and help position it to meet its transformative 2050 target.

iii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

GHG EMISSIONS REDUCTION RECOMMENDATIONS AND SUITE OF STRATEGIES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

iv



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

v



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vi



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

viii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ix



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

x



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xi



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xiii



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

INTRODUCTION
The Science of Climate Change
Since the start of the 20th century, the Earth has warmed 1°C (1.8oF)7; and the past four years have been the
warmest on record. This temperature rise has been accompanied by disruptions in the atmospheric and
oceanic systems, including increased frequency of severe weather events, sea level rise, and ocean
acidification. These changes, in turn, have had many implications for natural ecosystems and processes that
humans depend on for survival.8

Temperature histories from paleoclimate data (green line) compared to the history based on modern instruments (blue
line) suggest that global temperature is warmer now than it has been in the past 1,000 years, and possibly longer.
(Graph adapted from Mann et al., 2008.) Retrieved from https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/

The terms global warming and climate change are often applied and used interchangeably to describe
these changes. However, they do not refer to exactly the same phenomenon. Global warming refers to the
rising temperature of the Earth system, whereas climate change encapsulates the set of effects that the
warming has on humans and the environment. While Earth’s climate has historically varied due to natural
causes such as changes in the sun’s radiation, 97 percent of the scientific community is in agreement that
climatic changes observed since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution are primarily anthropogenic, or
human-caused.9 By combusting fossil fuels and cutting down forests, humans have dramatically increased
the levels of CO2 in the atmosphere, which causes global temperatures to increase due to the greenhouse
effect.10 According to the IPCC, the internationally accepted authority on climate change, evidence suggests
with greater than 95 percent probability that the recent warming trend is caused by human activity since
the mid-20th century and is proceeding at a rate that is unprecedented over decades to millennia.11

7 Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, B. DeAngelo, S. Doherty, K. Hayhoe, R. Horton, J.P. Kossin, P.C. Taylor, A.M. Waple, and C.P. Weaver,

2017: Executive summary. In: Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A.
Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 12-34, doi:
10.7930/J0DJ5CTG.
8 Ibid.
9 John Cook et al 2013 Environ. Res. Lett. 8 024024
10
Causes of Climate Change. United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2016. Retrieved from
https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climate-change-science/causes-climate-change_.html
11 IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)].

INTRODUCTION

1|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Greenhouse effect refers to the capability of some
gases in the atmosphere to absorb heat energy from
the sun. These gases, collectively known as
“greenhouse gases,” include CO2, methane, and
chlorofluorocarbons. Carbon dioxide represents the
greatest warming potential due to its atmospheric
abundance.12 When the concentration of GHGs in the
atmosphere increases, more heat energy from the
sun becomes trapped in the atmosphere rather than
radiating back into space, thus heating the Earth
system.13 This overall temperature increase causes
melting of land-based ice and the thermal expansion
of ocean water, which contribute to sea level rise, as
well as a host of local and regional climate effects. In
A build-up of CO2 in the atmosphere causes heat to be
2015, the Parties to the United Nations Framework
trapped in the Earth’s atmosphere, instead of escaping.
Convention on Climate Change developed the Paris
Source: Greenovate Boston, 2014 Climate Action Plan
Agreement at COP 21, aiming to limit global
temperature rise in this century to 2°C (3.6°F) above pre-industrial levels.14
The Greenhouse Gas Effect

Part I of the Fourth National Climate Assessment, released in 2017, reported that “Without major
reductions in emissions, the increase in annual average global temperature relative to preindustrial times
could reach 5°C (9°F) or more by the end of this century.” And in an IPCC special report released in October
2018, it was stated that climate scientists are highly confident that global warming is likely to reach 1.5°C
(2.7oF) between 2030 and 2052 if temperatures continue to increase at the current rate. The last time
temperatures were 1-2oC (1.8-3.6oF) higher than they are now, 125,000 years ago, sea levels were 16-20
feet (5-6 meters) higher. A 1.5oC (2.7oF) change in temperature will also have devastating impacts on
ecosystems, water supplies, human health, and socioeconomic systems. Based on several lines of evidence,
the intensity and frequency of some climate and weather extremes are also projected to increase. In 2017
alone, extreme weather events such as Hurricane Harvey, Hurricane Maria, and California’s raging wildfires
caused over $306.2 billion in losses,15 the costliest year for climate- and weather-related events.16
Since the mid-20th century, annual average temperatures across the region have already risen more than
0.7°C (1.26°F)17 and annual precipitation has increased by approximately 7 percent.18 In Connecticut
average annual temperatures have risen by over 0.9°C (1.62oF) between 1980 and 2018. Over the same
period, winter temperatures have warmed by 1.6°C (2.88oF). In conservative estimates, climate projections
12 Why does CO get most of the attention when there are so many other heat-trapping gases? Union of Concerned Scientists. August 3, 2017.
2

Retrieved from https://www.ucsusa.org/global-warming/science-and-impacts/science/CO2-and-global-warming-faq.html#bf-toc-1
13 Ibid.
14
What is the Paris Agreement? United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Retrieved from https://unfccc.int/process-andmeetings/the-paris-agreement/what-is-the-paris-agreement
15 Lawson, Ashley. A Dubious Record: Increasing Costs of Climate Change – Blog. Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. January 11, 2018.
Retrieved from https://www.c2es.org/2018/01/setting-dubious-records-increasing-costs-of-climate-change/
16 Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Overview. National Centers for Environmental Information, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Retrieved from https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/overview
17 Vose, R.S., D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, A.N. LeGrande, and M.F. Wehner, 2017: Temperature changes in the United States. In: Climate Science
Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K.
Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 185-206, doi: 10.7930/J0N29V45.
18
Easterling, D.R., K.E. Kunkel, J.R. Arnold, T. Knutson, A.N. LeGrande, L.R. Leung, R.S. Vose, D.E. Waliser, and M.F. Wehner, 2017: Precipitation
change in the United States. In: Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A.
Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 207-230,
doi: 10.7930/J0H993CC.

INTRODUCTION

2|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
for Connecticut robustly indicate that annual mean temperature will rise by 3-6°C (5.4-10.8oF) by the end of
the 21st century with winter warming at three times the rate of summer.19
In general, the Northeast has experienced a greater recent increase in extreme precipitation than any other
region in the nation. Mean annual precipitation is likely to increase, particularly in winter and spring,
contributing to increased flooding risk throughout the region. Additionally, weather and climate extremes
are projected to be more frequent and intense, which will impact both natural and socioeconomic systems.
As temperatures increase along the coast, humidity will also rise, resulting in amplified heat stress during
summer months. In inland areas, drought events will become longer and more severe, causing increased
competition for limited water resources, agricultural crop damage, ecosystem stress, and risk of wildfire.
Direct and remotely sensed measurement of sea level have shown that the annual mean level of the ocean
surface is rising. In the Northeast, coastal flooding has increased due to an approximately 1-foot rise of sea
level rise since 1900. This rate of sea level rise exceeds the global average of approximately 8 inches, due
primarily to land subsidence and thermal expansion (of ocean water) along the Northeastern coast.
Sea level rise along the Connecticut coast is projected to be as high as 20 inches (approximately 0.5 meters)
by 2050.20 As a result, communities in Connecticut should expect the frequency and intensity of coastal
flooding to increase in coming decades due to accelerating trends in coastal erosion, extreme precipitation,
and storms.
Connecticut is highly vulnerable to changes in mean and extreme climate due to regional characteristics like
a dense population and aging infrastructure. Urban areas are at risk for large numbers of evacuated and
displaced populations and damaged infrastructure due to prolonged heat waves, extreme precipitation
events, and recurrent flooding. As winters become shorter and milder, tick and flea populations are
predicted to rise, leading to more annual cases of vector-borne illnesses such as Lyme disease.
Policymakers must be aware that climate change poses a serious threat to the environment, economy, and
public health — and should take decisive action to reduce the risks associated with an increase in global
temperatures.21

The Cost of Inaction
Climate inaction in the U.S. will have serious effects across the country in the near- and long-term. As air
and water temperatures continue to increase, extreme weather events such as hurricanes, heat waves, and
winter storms will become more frequent and intense, as will the physical damages and financial expenses
associated with such events. Some areas of the country may experience longer and harsher droughts and
more dangerous wildfires, while others may experience heavier flooding and rainfall due to increased
precipitation. These extreme weather events exacerbated by climate change impose major costs on
residents, businesses, and government and can damage local, state, and regional economies.
According to a Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society report in 2017, climate change was a
“significant driver” in 21 of 27 extreme weather events studied in 2016. U.S. states are already seeing the

19 Dupigny-Giroux, L.A., E.L. Mecray, M.D. Lemcke-Stampone, G.A. Hodgkins, E.E. Lentz, K.E. Mills, E.D. Lane, R. Miller, D.Y. Hollinger, W.D. Solecki,

G.A. Wellenius, P.E. Sheffield, A.B. MacDonald, and C. Caldwell, 2018: Northeast. In Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth
National Climate Assessment, Volume II[Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart
(eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH18
20 O`Donnell, J. (March 27, 2018). Sea Level Rise in Connecticut. Draft Report, Connecticut Institute for Resilience and Climate Adaptation.
21 What Climate Change Means for Connecticut, United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2016. Retrieved from
https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-09/documents/climate-change-ct.pdf

INTRODUCTION

3|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
economic impact of such events. In addition to concluding that weather and climate events in 2017 caused
over $306.2 billion in losses, the report also concluded that hurricanes Harvey and Maria, and California’s
wildfires would not have occurred naturally without manmade GHGs causing climate change. 22,23 Further,
according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, since 1980 the nation has sustained
238 weather and climate disasters, with total costs exceeding $1.5 trillion. In 2018 alone, there has been
one drought event, six severe storm events, a tropical cyclone event, a wildfire event, and two winter storm
events with losses over $1 billion each.24
With over 600 miles of coastline and 2.2 million people living in shoreline communities in Connecticut, the
State’s residents and communities are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of weather and climate events.
Connecticut residents are already beginning to experience such effects as climate change ramps up. For
instance, in Connecticut alone, Hurricane Irene (2011) caused power outages affecting 754,000 customers
and over $1 billion in damage, and Hurricane Sandy (2012) caused power outages affecting more than
600,000 customers and inflicted almost $2 billion in statewide damages.25 The latter forced thousands of
Connecticut residents to evacuate, saw thousands apply for FEMA assistance, damaged roads and
infrastructure, and took nine days for utilities to restore power.26 Many of Connecticut’s coastal
communities and assets face escalating risk of storm events exacerbated by climate change.

NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2018). Retrieved from
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/

22 Lawson, Ashley. A Dubious Record: Increasing Costs of Climate Change – Blog. Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. January 11, 2018.

Retrieved from https://www.c2es.org/2018/01/setting-dubious-records-increasing-costs-of-climate-change/
23 Explaining Extreme Events of 2016 from a Climate Perspective. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. Vol. 99, No. 1. January 2018.
24 NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2018). Retrieved from
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/
25
NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2018). Retrieved from
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/
26 Burgeson, John. Rising Above the Tide: 5 Years Since Sandy. CTPost. October 28, 2017. Retrieved from
https://www.ctpost.com/local/article/Rising-above-the-tide-5-years-since-Sandy-12313727.php

INTRODUCTION

4|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Future risks associated with increased sea level rise and tidal flooding will result in significant costs to
property owners from both damages and a decrease in the overall value of their property. For instance,
using the FloodiQ tool to assess the impacts of future sea level rise on properties located in Branford,
Connecticut, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers estimates that over the next 15 years, sea level will increase
by 6.24 inches. As a result, tidal flooding in Branford will affect 166 residential properties and decrease
property values by $16.3 million.27 This is just one example of the potential costs to Connecticut property
owners. We must continue to analyze and communicate these risks to individuals and communities who
will bear the brunt of these costs in future years.
In addition to extreme weather events, climate inaction will lead to further ecosystem degradation,
negative public health and economic impacts, and infrastructure vulnerability. Some studies estimate labor
productivity losses nationwide of $150 billion by 2099 and $53 billion in losses from reduced crop yields.28
As temperatures rise and air quality worsens, more individuals will suffer from heat-related illness,
cardiopulmonary illness, food-, water-, and vector-borne diseases, and mental health illness.29 Delays to
climate action will cause greater damages and increase future mitigation costs as climate threats continue
to escalate in the absence of significant action.

Leadership & Demonstration
Over the past two decades, Connecticut
has taken a series of strong actions to
respond to climate change. Recognizing the
value of demonstrating leadership,
Connecticut repeatedly has affirmed its
commitment to addressing climate change,
as illustrated in the timeline below.
Though the Connecticut has a relatively
small GHG footprint, policymakers,
businesses, non-profits, associations,
municipalities, and individuals understand
that a pathway to a clean and low-carbon
future is not only possible but also
profitable. As such, the State is committed
to leading the way by developing and
demonstrating credible, scalable solutions.
This explicit demonstration helps galvanize
responses in the private sector and
jurisdictions around the world.

Connecticut GHG Footprint

27

FloodiQ is a nonprofit focused on empowering homeowners to protect their property from flooding. It was created using the most advanced open
source data from partners like: NOAA, USGS, National Weather Service, US Army Corps of Engineers, and Columbia University. Retrieved from
https://floodiq.com/
28 Climate Change: Information on Potential Economic Effects Could Help Guide Federal Efforts to Reduce Fiscal Exposure (September 2017). United
States Government Accountability Office.
29 Balbus, J., A. Crimmins, J.L. Gamble, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, S. Saha, and M.C. Sarofim, 2016: Ch. 1: Introduction: Climate Change and Human
Health. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program,
Washington, DC, 25–42. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0VX0DFW

INTRODUCTION

5|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
With the goal of reducing statewide GHG emissions and demonstrating effective solutions, Connecticut has
utilized tools such as goal setting, legislation, regulations, and voluntary action to advance its climate
agenda.
Goal setting provides the basis for designing, evaluating the feasibility of, and monitoring the effectiveness
of policies that aim to reduce GHG emissions. In 2008, Connecticut legislators enacted the Global Warming
Solutions Act (Public Act 08-98), which established mandatory statewide GHG reduction targets of: 10
percent below 1990 levels by 2020; and 80 percent below 2001 levels by 2050.
Legislation provides the opportunity to establish, authorize, and fund actions that spur innovative solutions
in support of Connecticut’s climate change goals. In 2011, the General Assembly established the nation’s
first Green Bank to leverage public and private funds to accelerate the growth of green energy in
Connecticut. To date the bank has invested a total of $1.3 billion for clean energy projects across the
state.30
State agencies utilize regulations to set forth requirements for carrying out legislation necessary to reduce
GHG emissions. For example, in 2008 under Connecticut General Statute section 22a-200c, the then
Department of Environmental Protection developed RSCA Section 22a-174-31 Control of Carbon Dioxide
Emissions to implement the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). RGGI is the first U.S. mandatory
cap-and-invest program to reduce GHGs emissions from electricity-generating units.
Voluntary actions taken by Connecticut’s private companies, higher education institutions, non-profit
organizations, and other organizations demonstrate economy-wide leadership on addressing climate
change. Collectively, these institutions are advancing climate change mitigation and adaptation agendas to
protect bottom-lines, assets, investments, and customers while building brand innovation and expressing
their values. One such example of corporate climate leadership is The Hartford, a member of the GC3 and a
U.S.-based investment and insurance company headquartered in Hartford. The company recognizes that
climate change is of real and increasing concern and has exerted strong leadership to understand, manage,
and mitigate the risks associated with climate change. For instance, the company has taken aggressive
action to promote energy efficiency, and has reduced the company’s scope 1, 2, and 3 GHG emissions 66.2
percent below 2007 levels.31

30 Connecticut Green Bank Impact Report. 2018. Retrieved from https://www.ctgreenbank.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Green-Bank-

CAFR_2018.pdf
31
The Harford 2017 Sustainability Highlight Report. Retrieved from https://s0.hfdstatic.com/sites/the_hartford/files/sustainability-highlightreport.pdf

INTRODUCTION

6|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

INTRODUCTION

7|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Connecticut’s GHG Reduction Path
Under the consumption-based accounting approach for the electric sector, Connecticut’s economy-wide
GHG emissions in 2016 were 41.1 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MMT CO2e), 9 percent
below 1990 levels and 16 percent below 2001 levels.32 In comparison, emissions using the generation-based
accounting approach were 40.4 MMT CO2e, 11 percent below 1990 levels and 16 percent below 2001
levels. While there is a 2-3 year lag time in the inventory analysis, it is clear that if Connecticut is to meet its
2020 target (10% reduction below 1990 levels) the urgency of action in 2019 is critical. It is also clear that
far deeper cuts are needed to ensure the State meets the 2030 and 2050 targets.
Relative to emissions in 2015, emissions in 2016 dropped by 2.7 MMT CO2e. This decline is largely due to
reductions in overall energy consumption and an extreme temperature difference between 2015 and 2016
— in Connecticut, winter 2016 temperatures were 5-6°F above average, whereas, across much of the
Northeast, the months of January-March 2015 were the coldest on record, leading to increased energy
consumption for heating and natural gas constraints for electricity generation. This susceptibility to
weather extremes illustrates the challenges the State faces in the coming years as it seeks to implement
actions that drive emissions downward.

The three sectors with the largest GHG footprint in 2016 were transportation (38%), electric power (23%),
and residential buildings (15.5%). The others sectors — industrial buildings and processes, commercial
buildings, waste, and agriculture — together accounted for approximately 25 percent of emissions.
As the single largest source of emissions in Connecticut, transportation sector emissions are generated
primarily from the use of fossil fuels in passenger cars and light-duty trucks. Dropping 0.3 percent since
1990 and 13 percent since 2001, further transportation emission reductions are critical to meeting the
State’s targets. And, although national fuel economy standards have improved vehicle efficiency, the
number of vehicle miles driven in Connecticut have increased, which is likely the contributing factor for not
attaining greater emission reductions in the transportation sector. Significantly reducing transportation
32 Electric sector emissions are calculated using the consumption-based approach, which takes into account the regional nature of the grid and

multiplies Connecticut’s electricity consumption by the regional emission factor.

INTRODUCTION

8|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
emissions in the coming decades will require continued improvements in vehicle fuel economy and GHG
emission standards for all class sizes, increased deployment of zero-emission vehicles, and strategies that
reduce VMT.
Connecticut’s largest reduction has occurred in the electric sector — down 22 percent from 1990 to 2016
and 24.7 percent from 2001 to 2016. This reduction correlates with state and regional policies and
programs that encourage investment in energy efficiency in homes and businesses, a shift from dirtier fossil
fuels such as coal and oil to natural gas, and increased deployment of renewable energy sources. Further
reductions are expected as more energy demand will be met by renewable sources.

Overall trends in the inventory demonstrate that the carbon intensity of Connecticut’s economy has
declined — falling 53 percent from 1990 and 23 percent from 2001. This demonstrates significant long-term
decoupling of economic growth and carbon pollution. In addition, Connecticut’s per capita emissions,
among the lowest in the country, declined 20 percent between 2001 and 2016.
The State’s commitment to cutting carbon pollution through energy efficiency, low-carbon fuels, renewable
energy resources, and zero-emission vehicles will help transition Connecticut to a low-carbon economy.
However, significant and continued reductions across all sectors are necessary to meet the State’s
mandatory GHG reduction targets for 2020, 2030, and 2050.

INTRODUCTION

9|Page



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Executive Order No. 46
On April 22, 2015, Governor Dannel P. Malloy issued Executive Order No. 46, creating the Governor’s
Council on Climate Change (GC3 or Council). As delineated in the executive order, the GC3 is comprised of
15 individuals from state agencies, non-profit organizations, and businesses and is tasked with “examin[ing]
the efficacy of existing policies and regulations designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and identify
new strategies to meet the established emission reduction targets” and “establish[ing] interim goals that, if
met, will ensure that the State will achieve the 2050 target” (see Appendix A for Executive Order No. 46 and
Appendix B for GC3 membership).

Meetings, Process, and Accomplishments to Date
GC3 meetings provide opportunities for structured discussion informed by current research on GHG
mitigation strategies in order to help identify issues that need to be addressed, highlight, and discuss
various strategies for significant GHG emissions reduction, and provide members the opportunity to
contribute to the decision-making process. The chair of the GC3 is responsible for ensuring that all
members have equal opportunities to access, discuss, and respond to the issues under consideration. A
variety of opportunities for dialogue are provided before decisions are made and adequate time is allowed
for discussion and feedback.
GC3 meetings are accessible and open to the public, either in person or via webinar and teleconference. A
public notice issued prior to each meeting includes the meeting agenda, comment submission deadlines,
and instructions for attending in person or virtually. During each meeting, the Council allocates time to
receive public comments from stakeholders.
Meeting materials including agendas, presentations, and meeting minutes are posted publically on the
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection’s GC3 website. Written public comments submitted to
the Council also are posted.
Since the GC3’s first meeting on July 10, 2015, the GC3 has held 38 public meetings and 5 stakeholder
outreach events that informed the recommendations of this report and development of:


Exploring Climate Solutions webinar series which explores innovative and successful climate change
solutions in Connecticut and across the nation – 38 webinars to date



GC3 Exploratory Report – a preliminary report published in 2016 that:
o

projected GHG emissions under a business as usual scenario (reference case)

o

provided a set of recommendations to enable voluntary action across all sectors

o

outlined a transparent and effective engagement process with stakeholders on
development and implementation of statewide GHG mitigation strategies



GHG reduction scenarios that evaluated opportunities for emission-reduction pathways for the
transportation, building, and electric sectors



An economic impact analysis of the emission-reduction scenarios



A mid-term target recommendation and statement of principles

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

10 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Mid-term Target
After a thorough review of a variety of mitigation scenarios that drive down GHG emissions in the electric,
building, and transportation sectors, the GC3, through consensus, recommended an economy-wide
reduction target of 45 percent below 2001 levels by 2030. As one of the most ambitious mid-term
reduction targets in the nation, the selected target ensures Connecticut is on a downward trajectory from
today’s GHG emissions to the 80 percent reduction the Global Warming Solutions Act requires by 2050.
The GC3’s mid-term reduction target recommendation was adopted by the General Assembly when it
passed An Act Concerning Climate Change Planning and Resiliency (Public Act 18-82). The consensus 2030
target was signed into law by Governor Malloy on June 20, 2018.

GC3 Statement of Principles to Guide Implementation of 2030 Target
Connecticut has already demonstrated that reducing GHG emissions goes hand in hand with economic
growth and job creation. Transitioning to a clean energy economy will further strengthen the State’s
economic growth, creating jobs, and lowering energy bills for families and businesses. Going forward,
the GC3 recognizes that a 45 percent reduction by 2030 is an ambitious goal that will require significant
changes to all sectors of the State’s economy, and participation by all parts of society. In order to
ensure success in meeting this goal, the GC3 adopts and endorses the following statement of principles
to guide the implementation of actions needed to meet the target:


We must design and implement a major transformation of how we generate and utilize energy.
This requires a commitment to modernizing and decarbonizing our transportation system,
vehicles, building stock, heating and cooling systems, and electricity generation system.



We must prioritize and implement measures that:
o achieve the largest GHG emission reductions in a cost-effective, timely, and efficient
manner, with a focus on implementing proven, scalable strategies;
o balance and factor in measurable in-state co-benefits (such as improved health,
economic development, energy security and independence, and quality of life) as well
as life-cycle costs and the cost of inaction;
o address racial, class, gender, geographic and generational equity in both costs and
benefits.



The success of our efforts to reduce GHG emissions in Connecticut – and its value to the
national and international efforts to limit the increase in global average temperature to below
2oCelsius – requires engagement and action from all levels of government (local, state,
regional, national, and international).



We must harness and foster innovation by engaging, incentivizing, and supporting the private
sector as it develops and implements solutions that will lead to GHG emission reductions. This
includes leveraging limited public funds to attract and mobilize multiples of private investment.



We must effectively engage and incentivize individual citizens, civic organizations, religious
groups, non-governmental organizations, and other members of civil society to understand the
urgency in becoming active participants in the transition to a decarbonized economy.



We must maximize synergies between mitigation and adaptation measures, and avoid tradeoffs between the two.



We must implement a regular review process to ensure the State is on a clear and consistent
path to achieve its GHG goals, and allow for course-correction in the face of unanticipated
changes over time.

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

11 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

Economy-wide Projections of GHG Emissions — Business-as-Usual
Scenario
Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use
Management (NESCAUM) worked closely
with the GC3 to develop a Connecticutspecific business-as-usual (BAU) reference
case for future emissions through 2050 to
provide the basis for examining potential
GHG mitigation technologies and measures.
The reference case relies on: projection data
from the U.S. Energy Information
Administration; historical and projected
energy use data; and existing federal,
regional, and state regulatory requirements expected to shape Connecticut’s future energy consumption.
The BAU case serves as a point of reference for assessing various mitigation scenarios. As with any
modeling exercise, uncertainty will always exist when projecting outcomes many years into the future.
These estimates are based on the best data available at the time of the analysis, with recognition that
future conditions can evolve differently. (see Appendix C for a more detailed description of the BAU
assumptions)
The BAU reference case projected in 2050 that the transportation sector will remain the largest source of
GHG emissions in Connecticut (35%), followed by the residential buildings, electricity, and commercial
building sectors (15%, 13%, and 12%, respectively). Combined thermal energy consumption in buildings
would be equal to 37 percent.

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

12 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

GHG Mitigation Scenarios
The GC3 evaluated and discussed the feasibility, costs, and benefits of a variety of existing and proven
emission reduction measures and technologies in three key sectors: transportation, building, and electricity
(see Appendix D for a list of technology and measures). A range of measures were combined to develop
sector-specific reduction scenarios. Illustrative low- or zero-carbon technology penetration rates for each
sector were also developed to inform these discussions. Upon combining the sector-specific reduction
scenarios and reviewing the illustrative technology-penetration levels, the Council evaluated economy-wide
mid-term targets in the range of 35 to 55 percent below 2001 levels by 2030. Within this range, several
reduction pathways were evaluated and included discussions on market maturity, rate of technology
turnover, customer upfront and life-cycle costs, regional cooperation and momentum, and federal
regulations. Upon thorough review of the various mitigation scenarios, technology-penetration rates, and
costs and benefits, the Council recommended through consensus an economy-wide greenhouse reduction
target of 45 percent below 2001 levels by 2030.
The 45 percent reduction by 2030 scenario is designed to provide high-level direction on the sector-specific
actions needed to achieve the mid-term target (see reduction pathways diagram below). The high-level
recommendations in this report are guided by the following key conclusions, which emerged from the
analysis of reduction pathways:
Beneficial Electrification – To achieve deep decarbonization across all sectors, electrification of energy end
uses is essential. This will require shifting away from utilizing fossil fuels to power transportation and
building thermal loads to electric technologies that have no direct emissions. Widespread deployment of
electric technologies such as electric vehicles and heat pumps will be a primary means to achieve deep
economy-wide reductions.
Zero-Carbon Electricity Generation – As Connecticut moves to electrify energy end uses, it will see
increased demand in electricity and a simultaneous shifting of emissions away from the building and
transportation sectors to the electric sector. While electricity generation has become increasingly cleaner
over the past 15 years, we will need to continue to decarbonize the electric grid – achieving 84 percent
carbon-free electric generation by 2050.
Energy Efficiency – Cost-effective energy efficiency measures are essential in the early years to drive down
energy consumption and GHG emissions from fossil fuels. However, in the long term, as the electric-grid
decarbonizes, the marginal impact of efficiency leads to less potent reductions in carbon emissions.
Nevertheless, in the long run energy efficiency measures will help reduce the extent of increased electricity
demand and avoid the costs of developing unnecessary generation and transmission/distribution capacity.
Scale and Pace of Change – The scale and pace of change needed to achieve Connecticut’s emissionreduction targets require immediate and consistent action. Moreover, action across all sectors of the
economy is necessary, in part because of interactive effects between them.
Economic Impacts – Meeting Connecticut’s near- and long-term GHG emission reduction targets will have a
small net positive economic impact. Economic analysis of the 45 percent reduction by 2030 scenario
concluded there will be a small net positive impact on employment levels (0.9% per year) and state GDP
(0.62% per year) from 2020 to 2030.

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

13 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Economic and Fiscal Impact of Achieving the 2030 Target
To inform its decision-making, the GC3 conducted a macro-economic analysis of the mid-term target. This
included an analysis of the transportation, building, and electric sector mitigation pathways, as well as all
pathways combined. The economic analysis focused on 2020 through 2030 due to increasing uncertainty of
economic outcomes beyond 2030.
A consultant and adjunct professor from the Department of Economics at the University of Connecticut
(and former economist for the Department of Economic and Community Development) was retained to
conduct the macro-economic analysis. Using the Regional Economic Models, Inc., software modeling tool,
the analysis looked at the effects of changes in the economy comparing a baseline forecast against the
selected scenario forecast. The analysis evaluated the difference between anticipated economic conditions
with and without the implementation of a policy scenario(s) and compared them.
The analysis looked at each sector individually and then combined them to show net economic impacts. A
more detailed report of the economic and fiscal impact of the 45 percent below 2001 level scenario is
provided as a supplement to this report. The key outcomes of the analysis are:
New Job Creation – Net new job creation averages 22,000 jobs (or 0.9%) more than the baseline
forecast each year over the period 2020 to 2030. The 19,200 net new jobs created in 2020
represent 0.8 percent of Connecticut’s workforce. In 2030, 22,540 net new jobs (0.91%) are added
relative to the baseline forecast.
Increased State GDP – Net new state GDP averages $2.34 billion (in current dollars) higher than the
baseline forecast (or 0.62%) each year over the period 2020 through 2030. Net new state GDP in
2020 is $1.91 billion (in current dollars) and represents 0.62 percent of state GDP. In 2030, net new
state GDP increases by $2.54 billion (in current dollars; 0.54%) relative to the baseline forecast.
This pattern of economic and fiscal change arises from the offsetting positive and negative economic
activities occurring in Connecticut as it transitions from a petroleum-based economy to a “significantly
reduced-carbon” economy. The employment gains are primarily in the construction industry, wholesale

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION ANALYSIS

14 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
trade, waste and remediation services, and the professional and technical services sectors. The
employment losses are primarily in the retail sectors.
It is important to note that the assumptions underpinning the economic analysis may be optimistic.
Without significant incentives, some of the projected developments will not materialize. Whatever
incentives that may be implemented may offset the benefits because they entail additional costs (for
example, road tolls, a carbon price, grants, and loans subsidized by an increased system benefits charge,
net-zero building codes, among other GHG-reducing regulations). Further, the positive co-benefits of
improved health and averted environmental damage were not considered in this analysis.

GHG EMISSION REDUCTION RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

Introduction
The recommendations in this report build upon the successful policies and measures the State has
implemented to date, proposes strengthening existing programs, and recommends pursuing new strategies
to ensure Connecticut is on a sustainable path to reach its mid- and long-term GHG emission- reduction
targets. The recommendations underscore that there is no single solution, instead, they offer a balanced
mix of strategies that allow for flexibility and mid-course adjustments as technologies improve and costs
change over time.
The GC3’s analysis of a variety of scenarios to determine the best pathway to meet the 2030 and 2050
targets helped establish a long-term vision for decarbonizing the State’s economy. Three broad,
fundamental objectives emerged from this vision:
1. Zero-carbon electricity generation
2. Clean transportation
3. Clean, efficient, and resilient buildings
The following strategies and suite of recommendations serve as foundational steps to put Connecticut on
track to actualize these objectives. Additional actions, beyond those proposed in this report, will need to be
regularly evaluated and integrated into state and local planning efforts and acted upon by public and
private entities alike.
It also is important to recognize that climate change policymaking should, when possible, assess the
multiple added benefits, also known as co-benefits, of policies enacted to reduce GHG emissions. The
known and potential co-benefits of reduced GHG emissions include: job growth and local economic
benefits; public health benefits; new innovation in technology, energy, and resource management
practices; and benefits for ecological systems. Depending on the specific nature of the policy enacted, cobenefits could consist of improved air and water quality, improved soil and ecosystem health, energy cost
savings, sustainable land management, and so on. Co-benefits can be difficult to quantify, monetize, and
monitor. However, when properly valued, co-benefits often help demonstrate that the positive societal and
environmental impacts of climate policy actions outweigh the costs.
Utilizing existing and proven technologies, the following set of sector-specific priorities and supporting suite
of recommended strategies were developed to put Connecticut on a sustainable path to meeting its
ambitious 2030 target.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

15 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Roles and Responsibilities
Legislators, state agencies, municipalities, businesses, non-profit organizations, and residents must work
together if Connecticut is to meet its emission-reduction goal of 45 percent below 2001 levels by 2030.
Legislative support is necessary to research, draft, and enact policy that places the State on a path to
achieve its GHG emissions reduction goals. State agencies will be responsible for establishing the proper
regulatory framework and programs to enforce the State’s environmental policy agenda. Home rule
enables municipalities to lead by example in: adopting modern, efficient, and sustainable building codes;
transitioning their vehicle fleets to zero-emission vehicles; and sharing resources to help residents and
businesses achieve energy savings and emission reductions. Businesses can advance climate leadership by
investing in renewable energy, deploying low-carbon technologies, sustainably sourcing resources, and
developing transformative solutions. Non-profit organizations can contribute to policymaking processes by
advocating for equitable outcomes. Connecticut’s residents will be critical to adopting the technologies and
behaviors necessary to reduce emissions and supporting progressive climate action.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

16 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Sustainable CT — Local Actions. Statewide Impact.
Successful achievement of Connecticut’s GHG reduction targets requires the engagement and
commitment of all sectors. Perhaps the most impactful starting point is in our communities, taking action
at the local level.
Sustainable CT, launched in 2018, provides a powerful platform for progress on the State’s climate
goals through “local actions, statewide impact.” Sustainable CT is an independently funded program
created by towns, for towns to accelerate, support, and recognize sustainability action by Connecticut
municipalities. The program provides municipalities with a detailed menu of actions, resources and
technical support, peer learning, and certification awards for ongoing sustainability achievements.
Sustainable CT embraces a broad and inclusive definition of sustainability, with actions that provide
multiple benefits for all residents, leading to:
• Inclusive and equitable community impacts
• Thriving local economies
• Well-stewarded land and natural resources
• Vibrant and creative cultural ecosystems
• Dynamic and resilient planning
• Clean and diverse transportation systems and choices
• Efficient physical infrastructure and operations
• Strategic and inclusive public services
• Healthy, efficient and diverse housing
The municipal actions within the categories listed above align with the key GHG priorities in this report:
zero-carbon electricity generation; clean, efficient, and resilient buildings; and clean transportation.
Furthermore, Sustainable CT strengthens civic infrastructure, equity, and community engagement while
also saving money, promoting health, and increasing residents’ connection and sense of place.
During Sustainable CT’s first year, 40 percent of Connecticut’s municipalities registered to participate
and 22 municipalities achieved the prestigious Sustainable CT certification.
Sustainable CT is scaled for greater global impact through similar programs across the U.S. and the
world. The Sustainability States Network (www.nnsso.com), co-chaired by Sustainable CT, is one such
organization catalyzing change at the local level and advancing sustainability and climate solutions
across the nation.

Sustainable CT communities strive to be thriving, resilient, collaborative, and forward-looking. They build
community and local economy. They equitably promote the health and well-being of current and future
residents, and they respect the finite capacity of the natural environment. www.sustainablect.org

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

17 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

CROSS SECTOR
As Connecticut decarbonizes its statewide economy, solutions must focus on a systematic approach that
adequately integrates the electric power, building, and transportation sectors. Several strategies for
reducing emissions will cross two or more sectors, including but not limited to, technology integration, grid
management and time-of-use (TOU) rates, price signals and incentives, and education and outreach.
Accordingly, the cross-sector impacts of specific strategies must be considered by policymakers, regulators,
municipalities, and utilities.
A key example is the electrification of end uses in the building and transportation sectors. For electrification
of these to reduce overall emissions, Connecticut must continue to aggressively decarbonize its electric
power sector. Electrified technologies such as EVs and heat pumps will become increasingly cleaner as the
regional grid’s dependence on fossil fuel generation diminishes.
To accelerate EV deployment, building codes must be updated to require EV supply equipment (EVSE)
installation or pre-wiring for EVSE in new construction. At the same time, price signals, rebates, and lowinterest financing options will be required to support the nascent EV market; and electric utilities can
advance EV adoption by introducing dynamic TOU rates that incentivize consumers to charge their EVs
during off-peak periods. Moreover, EVs and RTTs may provide demand-response capabilities and other
grid-management services, in addition to reducing overall energy consumption and GHG emissions.
The recently released IPCC Special Report recommended that putting a price on carbon (combined with
other policy measures) may be the most efficient and effective way to reduce carbon emissions. This is
because the damage from burning carbon-intensive fuels is largely “externalized”—meaning the price of
carbon-intensive fuels, goods, and services does not reflect the cost of climate damage. While Connecticut
and other jurisdictions have implemented policies that foster adoption of zero-carbon renewable energy
technologies and promote energy conservation and load management, economists widely agree that,
without putting a price on carbon we will not be able to transition to a zero-carbon economy at the pace
and scale necessary to avoid 1.5-2°C (2.7-3.6°F) warming. Worldwide, there is growing attention on using
market-based mechanisms that sets a fee or price on the carbon content of fuels or places a cap on carbon
emissions that sets a price on price through the sale of allowances. Internalizing the cost of carbon can
most efficiently reduce emissions, change behavior, and transform the market.

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies
Put a price on carbon
1.

Implement an economy-wide carbon fee that assesses the carbon content of fossil fuels and sets a price
per ton of carbon emitted.

A carbon fee policy represents the greatest opportunity to raise revenue while reducing economy-wide
GHG emissions. A carbon fee charges a fee based on the amount of CO2 emissions released through fossil
fuel combustion. A properly priced carbon fee will provide a strong, systematic monetary incentive to
transition away from fossil fuels toward a more innovative, clean energy economy.33 Revenues generated
from a carbon fee can be reinvested in climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts that provide
meaningful local and state economic, environmental, and public health benefits.34 In addition, because
33 What’s a carbon tax? Carbon Tax Center. Retrieved from https://www.carbontax.org/whats-a-carbon-tax/
34 Kennedy, K.,

Obeiter, M., and Kaufman, Noah. Putting a Price on Carbon: A Handbook for U.S. Policymakers. World Resources Institute. April
2015. Retrieved from http://www.wri.org/sites/default/files/carbonpricing_april_2015.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

18 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
carbon fees increase according to a predetermined schedule, they provide market certainty allowing
companies and consumers alike to effectively plan how to adjust their operations and behaviors. Carbon
fees can also be set in a manner that protects low-and moderate-income households from higher costs, and
supports a just transition for impacted workers, communities and businesses.
In 2008, the Canadian province of British Columbia implemented the first comprehensive, revenue-neutral
carbon fee in North America, beginning at $10 per ton CO2e and increasing $5 per ton until it reached $30
per ton in 2012. From 2007 to 2015, British Columbia’s carbon fee produced 4.7 percent net emission
reductions while provincial GDP grew more than 17 percent.35 Recognizing the program’s effectiveness,
British Columbia set its carbon fee at $35 per ton in 2018 and will increase it $5 per ton per year until it
reaches $50 per ton in 2021. Program revenues will help provide carbon fee relief and protect affordability
for consumers, maintain industry competitiveness, and encourage new green initiatives.
2. Implement an economy-wide cap-and-invest program that sets a limit on carbon emissions and allows
the market to determine a price on carbon based on least-cost reduction measures.
An economy-wide cap-and-invest program is another effective, low-cost market-based approach to reduce
emissions. It establishes a mandatory GHG emissions limit that lowers over time, and then reinvests
proceeds from the auction of emissions allowances into strategies that drive emission reductions, provide
benefits for residents, and mitigate costs to consumers. Compliance entities are required to purchase an
equal number of allowances through an auction to meet its carbon budget. The price of the allowances are
determined by the market demand, allowing for emission reductions at the lowest cost. This policy option
would reduce economy-wide GHG emissions while generating revenue that could be invested in energy
efficiency, clean vehicles, transit and infrastructure, zero-carbon electricity generation, and green job
training.
Nine Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states have already imposed a cap on carbon emissions in the electric
sector through the implementation of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). The cap represents a
budget negotiated by the member states, and the price of allowances is a function of supply and demand.
In its 10 years, RGGI has demonstrated that along with complementary policies, a cap-and-invest marketbased mechanism can successfully reduce emissions and generate economic development. From 2005 to
2016, RGGI states reduced electric-sector carbon emissions by over 50 percent while the region’s GDP
continued to grow.

Expand consumer education and awareness efforts to increase the uptake of zero- and lowcarbon technology measures
1. Increase visibility of EnergizeCT resources.
2. Enhance outreach efforts by using social media campaigns, webinars, case studies, testimonials, and
customer engagement platforms.
In order to increase consumer uptake of energy efficiency and low-carbon technology, the state
government and its partners must enhance consumer outreach efforts across all media and social platforms
— social media such as Twitter and Facebook, informational webinars, Connecticut- and New Englandbased case studies, consumer testimonials, and customer engagement feedback platforms.

35 British Columbia’s Carbon Tax. Government of British Columbia. Retrieved from https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climate-

change/planning-and-action/carbon-tax

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

19 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
The Connecticut Green Bank, Eversource, Avangrid, and the Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection have worked through the public-private partnership known as “Energize Connecticut,” or
EnergizeCT, to prepare a vast number of resources for Connecticut residents, businesses, and municipalities
to adopt cost-effective and comprehensive clean energy solutions. The website, EnergizeCT.com, provides
information regarding available rebates, low-interest loans, and financing; available technologies; tips for
energy conservation; lists of certified contractors and installers; and information on past and upcoming
events. Connecticut agencies and municipalities should use social media and outreach events to increase
the visibility and utilization of EnergizeCT resources, particularly to increase awareness around energy
efficiency programs and technologies that can be utilized by low-income households that suffer a
disproportionate energy burden.
Connecticut’s Statewide Energy Efficiency and Clean Energy Communities dashboards, launched in 2012,
have documented energy efficiency and renewable-energy deployment across the state.36 The Statewide
Energy Efficiency Dashboard tracks and provides performance metrics for energy spending, energy demand
savings, annual energy savings, and lifetime energy savings for Eversource Energy gas and electric
companies and the Avangrid companies (United Illuminating, Connecticut Natural Gas, and Southern
Connecticut Gas). The Clean Energy Communities dashboard tracks town-level CO2 emissions avoided,
electricity savings, natural gas savings, and renewable energy capacity in addition to mapping municipal
energy reduction pledges and providing case studies. Additional efforts should be made to promote
awareness and use of these valuable tools.
Leveraging opportunities to enhance public awareness of the advantages of EV ownership is an important
strategy for increased adoption. Private and public entities across Connecticut should utilize and promote
the recently announced Drive Change. Drive Electric. campaign to “advance consumer awareness,
understanding, consideration and adoption” of EVs.37 The campaign, developed jointly with auto
manufacturers and Northeastern states, offers a variety of tools to educate consumers on the advantages
of EV ownership by exploring real-life scenarios and helping consumers find vehicles that fit their needs.
Several studies have found that consumers exposed to EVs are more likely to value the benefits of EV
ownership and as a result are more inclined to consider purchasing an EV in the future.38,39 As a result, DEEP
has partnered with several workplaces to host “Ride and Drive” events to let consumers test-ride EVs. We
must continue to support and encourage “Ride and Drive” opportunities through programming coordinated
by state agencies, local governments, non-profits, and businesses.
3.

Increase training of real-estate industry professionals on integrating U.S. DOE Home Energy Scores and
information on energy efficiency, renewables, and resiliency into real-estate transactions processes.

Mainstreaming energy efficiency is key to market transformation. One key strategy to achieve this is
through demonstrating the value of energy efficiency in the real-estate market. In 2015, Connecticut
became the first state in the nation to fully adopt the U.S. Department of Energy’s Home Energy Score, an
assessment that estimates a home’s energy use, associated costs, and cost-effective efficiency upgrade

36

CT Energy Efficiency Dashboard. Retrieved from www.ctenergyefficiencydashboard.com

37 Drive Change. Drive Electric. Press Release, March 29, 2019. Retrieved from https://driveelectricus.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Drive-

Change-Drive-Electric-Press-Release.pdf
38 Zeinab Rezvani, Johan Jannson, and Jan Bodin, “Advances in consumer electric vehicle adoption research: A review and research agenda,”
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, Volume 34, January 2015, 122-136. Retrieved from
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920914001515.
39 Kenneth S. Kurani, Nicolette Caperello, & Jennifer TyreeHageman, New Car Buyers’ Valuation of Zero-emission Vehicles: California, Institute of
Transportation Studies, University of California Davis, March 2016. Retrieved from https://www.arb.ca.gov/research/apr/past/12-332.pdf.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

20 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
recommendations in its energy-efficiency assessment programs.40 A score provides potential homebuyers
and renters with directly comparable and credible information about a home’s energy use, allowing them
to adequately predict energy costs and in turn value the energy efficiency of the home. To date, more than
25,000 Connecticut residences have received Home Energy Scores that are usable in the real-estate market.
Connecticut should continue to promote the integration of U.S. DOE’s Home Energy Score in the industry’s
Multiple Listing Services to ensure accurate and consistent sharing of energy data in real-estate
transactions.

Pursue an integrated approach to GHG mitigation, adaptation, and resiliency
1. Prioritize opportunities for achieving synergies among actions that cut carbon pollution and prepare for
the impacts of climate change.
2. Ensure state building codes and performance standards are coordinated to incorporate Insurance
Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS) best practices for resiliency.
Climate change mitigation refers to actions taken to stabilize and reduce the levels of GHGs in the
atmosphere, whereas climate change adaptation refers to actions taken in anticipation of adverse effects
of climate change to minimize and adapt to the resulting impacts. Climate change resilience refers to the
capacity to withstand, respond to, and recover rapidly from climate-caused disruptions. As much as
possible, Connecticut should pursue an integrated approach to mitigation, adaptation, and resiliency. When
discussing and funding infrastructure investments on behalf of Connecticut citizens, the State should be
asking: does it reduce GHG emissions while also preparing for and responding to climate impacts?
Much of our infrastructure — buildings and transportation, energy, water, and sanitation systems — is not
currently designed to withstand the projected increased frequency of extreme weather events in the
coming decades. In order to adapt to the changing climate and its impacts, we should strive to design and
build infrastructure to meet current functionality with an appropriate level of risk tolerance. This includes
adoption, application, and enforcement of up-to-date building codes that incorporate the best-available
data on future risks; zoning and land-use policies that encourage development in less-vulnerable areas and
improve resilience; and a regulatory framework that improves the resiliency and reliability of our energy
infrastructure.
One clear opportunity for a synergistic approach is at the intersection of energy, waste management, and
our built environment. A commitment to constructing stronger, more resilient buildings is an integral part
of a holistic approach to resiliency and recovery and needs to be a consideration in our policies.
Consistently enhancing Connecticut’s building codes will result in structures that are better able to
withstand the natural perils of a coastal state – hurricanes and tropical storms. Constructing buildings using
IBHS best practices can reduce the volume of building materials that end up in our waste-stream after a
major event and reduce the energy “embedded” in the building over its lifetime. For example, according to
the National Hazard Mitigation Saves: 2017 Interim Report, mitigation funding can save the nation $6 in
future disaster costs, for every $1 spent on hazard mitigation.41

40 U.S. Department of Energy. Home Energy Score. Retrieved from https://www.energy.gov/eere/buildings/downloads/home-energy-score
41 National Institute of Building Sciences Issues New Report on the Value of Mitigation. National Institute of Building Science. January 11, 2018.

Retrieved from https://www.nibs.org/news/381874/National-Institute-of-Building-Sciences-Issues-New-Report-on-the-Value-of-Mitigation.htm

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

21 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

ELECTRIC SECTOR
As the second-largest source of emissions, the electricity sector makes up 22.6 percent of Connecticut’s
economy-wide GHG emissions. Connecticut has taken numerous actions to accelerate the transition toward
a cleaner energy future while reducing energy costs, improving system reliability, and minimizing negative
environmental impacts. However, the State must pursue additional actions to decarbonize the electric
sector to the levels needed to achieve the 2030 target.
Illustrative zero-carbon electricity generation based on the “45% below 2001 levels by 2030” scenario

As the building and transportation sectors move towards electrification, zero-carbon electricity generation
will play an ever more crucial role in achieving a low-carbon future. This first requires retaining zero-carbon
nuclear resources in the near term and developing a comprehensive plan to ensure that in the long term
these resources are replaced with zero-carbon supply or demand reduction by the time their licenses
expire. To bring more zero-carbon renewables online, RPS throughout New England have helped provide a
clear signal to attract diverse resources; in the coming years Connecticut will need to ensure that RPS
eligibility reflects the need for a zero-carbon portfolio. Distributed resources hosted by residents,
businesses, and government can help alleviate the siting challenges faced by grid-scale projects, and a new
compensation design will make these resources more cost-effective for Connecticut ratepayers. In addition
to supply changes, demand-side measures and conservation will also play an important role in reducing the
sector’s emissions. In New England, electricity demand-reduction measures can now compete with supply
options to meet (or reduce) total system need, helping to achieve emission reductions at minimal cost. This
transition will require a combination of technological innovation, innovative financing, price signals, and
state, regional, and federal policies.

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies
Commit at least 50 megawatts of demand reduction per year to the ISO-New England forward
capacity market
Due to electric energy efficiency investments, Connecticut’s electric demand has begun to flatten, relieving
pressure on the grid and minimizing peak periods of carbon-intensive power generation. Importantly, over
the next 10 years, electric energy efficiency efforts are expected to eliminate growth in peak demand in
Connecticut, decreasing it by about 0.4 percent annually. Continuing to reduce peak demand will become
even more critical as the transportation and building sectors are electrified.
Recognizing energy efficiency as a reliable and predictable energy resource, the ISO-New England Forward
Capacity Market (FCM) permits market participants to bid energy-efficiency resources into its annual
auction. Resources competing in the auction commit supply capacity in exchange for a market-priced
capacity payment. In the past few auctions, Connecticut electric utilities have bid in demand-reduction
sources that are a result of the C&LM program. FCM payments are then re-invested in further C&LM

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

22 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
programs, providing an important and sustainable source of energy efficiency funding. In 2017, revenue
from FCM payments comprised over 12 percent of the total C&LM Plan budget.42 As a critical benefit to all
ratepayers, Connecticut should continue to commit at least 50 megawatts (MW) per year to the FCM.
1. Reduce electricity consumption by 1-2 million megawatt hours by replacing existing inefficient electricresistance space- and water-heating equipment with high-efficiency renewable thermal technology
(RTT). This reduction should be implemented through the Conservation and Load Management Plan and
other efficiency-procurement strategies.
All inefficient electric space- and water-heating equipment should be replaced with high-efficiency RTTs
that save consumers energy and money. According to a recent Yale study, Feasibility of Renewable Thermal
Technologies in Connecticut: Market Potential, replacement of conventional electric technologies with RTTs
for space and water heating are financially beneficial across all customer groups.43 Accordingly, as a first
priority, the State should target households that heat with inefficient electric resistance space- and waterheating equipment and replace these systems with high-efficiency RTTs. These conversions would result in
emissions reductions and significant annual energy and cost savings to customers.
2. Invest in electric measures that reduce peak demand such as exterior lighting, retail lighting, lighting in
state buildings, and high efficiency refrigeration. These type of reductions should be implemented
through the C&LM Plan and other efficiency procurement strategies.
Electric energy efficiency helps reduce emissions by lowering overall system demand, but it can have an
even greater impact by reducing peak demand. Peak electric demand for New England is typically highest
during the summer, when warmer weather leads to increased use of energy-intensive air conditioning.
Peak demand during the winter months typically occurs in the late afternoon and early evening when the
sun sets and people return home from work. In both winter and summer, meeting peak demand requires
grid operators to call on inefficient, expensive, carbon-intensive generating units.44
While energy-efficiency measures lower overall system demand year-round, their marginal value is greatest
when they are deployed as a demand-capacity resource through demand response during peak-demand
events. By lowering the peak and minimizing the need for more expensive and polluting generation, energy
efficiency as a demand response helps reduce emissions and prices. Thus, to effectively maximize peak
demand reductions, C&LM programs should continue with a targeted approach, deploying efficient electric
measures for exterior and retail lighting, replacing inefficient window cooling units with efficient RTTs, and
deploying high-efficiency refrigeration.

Achieve at least 66% zero-carbon energy generation by 2030
1. Meet the RPS target of 40% by 2030, with an aim to reduce the carbon intensity of the RPS.
Earlier this year, Public Act 18-50 doubled the state’s RPS, boosting it from 20 percent by 2020 to 40
percent by 2030. This increase in the RPS helps deploy new Class I renewable energy sources, aligning state
policy to support achievement of the 2030 GHG-reduction target. A combination of cost-effective grid-scale
and behind-the-meter generation that ensures affordability and reliability for all ratepayers will be
necessary to meet the 2030 RPS target.

42 Connecticut Energy Efficiency Board. State Legislative Report 2017.

2017. Retrieved from https://www.energizect.com/sites/default/files/Final2017-Annual-Legislative-Report-WEB-2-20-18.pdf
43 Gronli et al. Feasibility of Renewable Thermal Technologies in Connecticut: Market Potential. Yale Center for Business and the Environment.
March 2017.
44 ISO-NE, New England’s Energy Use. Retrieved from https://www.iso-ne.com/about/key-stats/electricity-use/

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

23 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Connecticut’s commitment to phase down RPS Class I biomass renewable energy credits (RECs) will lead to
increased Class I renewable energy development and further GHG emission reductions. The gradual phasing
out of Class I biomass RECs will require EDCs to purchase RECs from other renewable energy sources such
as offshore wind, grid-scale solar, and small-scale hydropower. The State should consider further RPS
revisions, such as including energy storage as Class I sources and phasing out natural gas-powered fuel cells
as a Class I source. Energy storage inclusion in the RPS would enable Connecticut to take full advantage of
renewable energy sources during high-generation periods. Various forms of energy storage, including
batteries and pumped hydro, can be controlled remotely to dispatch energy during peak periods.
2. Ensure a transparent and predictable compensation framework to maintain at least the historical
annual average 40-90 megawatts of residential behind the meter renewable energy resources.
The current compensation structure for behind-the-meter output in Connecticut is based on net energy
billing (also known as “net metering”) and is linked to retail electricity rates. As retail electricity rates
continue to rise, the State must develop a transparent and consistent compensation structure for behindthe-meter renewable energy generation to enable future renewable deployment. The compensation
structure implemented should be consistent and easy to understand, and it should ensure a reasonable
rate of return for customers and project developers that continues to incentivize deployment of distributed
generation sources to facilitate grid decarbonization.
3. Deploy at least 50 megawatts per year distributed solar and 10 megawatts per year of fuel cells.
The Low and Zero Emissions Renewable Energy Credit (LREC/ZREC) Program established in 2012 requires
the state’s utilities to procure Class I RECs under 15-year contracts through annual auctions. Under this
program, Eversource Energy and United Illuminating have procured 133 MW and 69 MW of RECs,
respectively. Given the success of the LREC/ZREC program, Connecticut passed Public Act 18-50 to create a
new auction opportunity for commercial, industrial, and virtual-net metering eligible customers
(agricultural, state, and municipal). Instead of conducting an auction for RECs, the utilities will ask projects
to bid the full project cost, including both REC and energy costs, with the resulting contract providing a
replacement for both net metering and LREC/ZREC. This new auction is authorized for up to 50 MW of solar
and 10 MW of fuel cells per year. As the cost of solar power is rapidly declining, increasing procurement
levels to support the state’s clean energy goals may become optimal.
4. Maintain in-state zero-carbon nuclear generation and develop a long-term zero-carbon replacement
strategy equivalent to 2100 megawatts.
Connecticut currently receives approximately 24 percent of its load from carbon-free nuclear power,
specifically the Millstone 2 and 3 units in Connecticut and the Seabrook plant in New Hampshire. The
Millstone units are critical to Connecticut’s and New England’s energy generation and GHG emissions
reduction goals. The State must retain zero-carbon nuclear generation as it develops a transition plan to
replace it. A transition plan must consider: the costs of nuclear retirement borne by ratepayers; a diverse
mix of replacement energy sources; and the economic, environmental, health, and social impacts of
potential replacement generation sources.
5. Implement a shared clean energy program deploying at least 25 megawatts per year, with a focus on
low- and moderate-income customers.
Building on the 6 MW pilot program solicitation conducted in 2017, DEEP is now developing a 25 MW per
year program. A shared clean energy program provides access to customers who rent, live in a multi-family
dwelling, or otherwise cannot host an onsite solar PV system. Further, as required by statute, 20 percent of
program subscribers must be low- or moderate-income (LMI) customers. This program element is
important because LMI households are more likely to face physical and financial barriers to participation in
behind-the-meter programs and do not have equitable access to lowering their energy bill. The new

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

24 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
program will incorporate best practices from the pilot project, including a price cap, the possibility of an
auction structure, and consumer-protection measures. The new program should be scalable so that as
demand grows and costs continue to drop, the state can continue to expand the program.
6. Exercise procurement authority for zero-carbon energy through competitive bidding processes that drive
down prices.
As outlined in the 2018 Comprehensive Energy Strategy, competitive procurement of zero-carbon
generation is a key tool for decarbonizing Connecticut’s electric sector. Utilizing a competitive bidding
process this past June, DEEP committed to the purchase of 200 MW of zero-carbon, offshore wind to supply
3 percent of the State’s load. DEEP should exercise its full discretionary procurement authority for gridscale renewable and zero-carbon energy. Continued investment in diverse, zero-carbon, renewable energy
technologies will be necessary for Connecticut to meet its GHG emissions reduction goals.

Optimize grid management strategies to reduce carbon emissions
1. Increase adoption of smart-management technologies to optimize flexibility of distributed energy
resources.
Connecticut’s grid should be modernized to better accommodate zero- and low-carbon generation sources
and increase system safety, reliability, security, and resiliency in a cost-effective manner. Grid
modernization will optimize electricity-grid assets such as distributed-generation sources, enable greater
consumer engagement and two-way communication, and facilitate bi-directional energy flows that help
reduce peak energy demand. Modernizing the grid will enable electric distribution companies (EDCs) be
better prepared for future high penetration of EVs and RTTs. In addition, grid modernization will inform
utilities’ distribution-system planning efforts and help avoid unnecessary infrastructure upgrades.
EDCs should accelerate grid modernization by deploying advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
technologies that enable optimal grid management and enhance grid security and resiliency. AMI
technologies provide for better, more-timely communication between utilities and customers, in addition
to enabling utilities to implement TOU rate programs and incentives to reduce peak energy demand.
Moreover, AMI technologies enable demand-response technologies such as electric water heaters and EVs
to provide energy storage capacity which, when actively managed, can help match energy demand to
energy supply. These technologies can store energy at times when overall energy demand is low and
energy generation is cheap. This type of storage is increasingly beneficial as more renewable energy
resources are deployed, helping to optimize renewable resources during times of oversupply. Integration of
AMI and demand-response technologies can improve grid resiliency, reduce operating costs, and provide
costs savings to all consumers.
As thermal electrification expands, there will be a resulting increase in electricity demand, therefore
demand response and energy-efficiency measures will become increasingly important. Demand-response
technologies offer the potential to minimize overall electricity consumption and peak demand, minimize
transmission and distribution costs, and mitigate price effects in the wholesale electricity market.
EnergizeCT demand-response pilots must inform continued investment in optimized building electrification.
Additional pilot programs could target communities with high RTT penetration rates to track energy
consumption, energy savings, load shifting, and grid benefits. For example, Avangrid and Eversource
Energy’s Wi-Fi thermostat pilot program enables the utility to control residents’ heat pump and thermostat

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

25 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
technologies to shift electricity loads and financially reward participating customers through peak-time
rebates for reduced demand.45
2. Over the next 2-5 years, research and identify opportunities to integrate battery storage and distributed
renewable energy technologies to reduce and displace carbon emissions.
Battery storage is an energy resource that can provide value to the grid across a wide variety of
applications, including: providing additional, flexible capacity; enhancing the reliability of the transmission
and distribution system; and minimizing peak demand. By storing energy during times of low demand and
providing a peaking resource when demand is high, storage can reduce, defer, or eliminate the need to
build additional generation capacity. To maximize emission reductions, a key strategy may be pairing
energy storage with renewable energy generation. Batteries can store clean, renewable energy generation
when demand is low and discharge it when demand is high, maximizing the availability of renewable energy
on the grid and offsetting dirtier, fossil fuel generation. Another application may be the pairing of storage,
distributed generation, and EV charging or electric thermal demand to manage peak demand.
Connecticut should continue to research and identify appropriate applications of integrated battery storage
and clean, renewable energy generation. This should include developing pilot projects that evaluate
different use cases, system and non-energy benefits, and compensation structures.

TRANSPORTATION SECTOR
The transportation sector continues to be the single largest source of emissions in Connecticut, contributing
38 percent of economy-wide emissions, principally from the use of fossil fuels in passenger cars and lightduty trucks. Critical to achieving the necessary emission reductions in the transportation sector,
Connecticut must accelerate its transition toward a modern, clean transportation system. This includes
facilitating access to low- and zero-emitting passenger vehicles, public transit options, alternative modes of
travel, and the efficient movement of goods and services. The primary strategies for the clean
transportation transformation include retaining stringent fuel economy and low- and zero-emission
standards, creating price signals to accelerate the adoption of EVs, reducing VMT through increased use of
public transit services and alternatives modes of transportation, supporting transit-oriented development
(TOD), and encouraging sustainable land-use planning. Identifying sustainable funding to implement these
strategies will be essential.

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies
Maintain increasing fuel economy and low- and zero-emissions standards
1. Maintain adherence to Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) and GHG emission standards mid-term
review 2016 final determination.
2. Maintain adherence to California low-emissions and zero-emission vehicle requirements.
Connecticut must maintain its strong commitment to stringent fuel economy and low-emission vehicle
standards. In 2009 the California Air Resources Board (CARB), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), and the auto manufacturers agreed to harmonize California’s Motor Vehicle Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Program and related standards with the National Program (i.e., EPA tailpipe standards and
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) CAFE standards). Connecticut, 12 other states, and
the District of Columbia, under Section 177 of the Clean Air Act (CAA), have adopted California’s more
45 Eversource Connecticut DR Pilots Overview and Status. Eversource Energy. October 27, 2016. Retrieved from

https://www.ct.gov/deep/lib/deep/energy/ces/Eversource_Demand_Resources_Presentation_10-27-16.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

26 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
stringent rules.46 These standards are a foundational strategy for achieving the emission reductions needed
in the transportation sector and were included in GC3’s BAU scenario. Accordingly, Connecticut, along with
several other states and vehicle manufacturers, strongly support the 2016 mid-term review final
determination of current CAFE and GHG emission standards, which concluded that the model year (MY)
2025 targets were attainable given advances in automotive manufacturing technologies. These standards
would reduce fuel consumption by 4 million barrels of oil per day, save consumers up to $5,000 in fuel
costs, and reduce GHG emissions by roughly 2 billion metric tons over the lifetimes of vehicles produced in
MYs 2017-2025.47
However, with the changeover in the federal administration, the U.S. EPA and NHTSA recently announced
they would abandon the mid-term determination and proposed the Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient Vehicles
Rule for MYs 2021-2026 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks (SAFE Vehicles Rule), which would freeze the
standards at the MY 2021 level. This proposed new rule would not only significantly weaken the CAFE and
GHG standards but may also revoke the CAA waiver that allows California to set tailpipe emissions stricter
than federal law.48,49 If finalized, the proposed new standards would result in $37 billion in annual public
health and environmental costs due to increased CO2 pollution,50 with drivers paying an additional $193
billion to $236 billion in oil and gas expenses through 2035.51 Moreover, revocation of California’s waiver
would greatly limit Connecticut’s ability to reduce GHG emissions from light-duty vehicles. Connecticut has
thus joined 18 states and the District of Columbia in opposition to the proposed rule. In addition,
Connecticut is currently in the process of taking regulatory action to ensure it maintains adherence to the
more stringent standards.

Amending R.C.S.A section 22a-174-36c
As a means to provide flexibility for auto manufacturers when the standards were harmonized in 2009,
CARB agreed to adopt a “deem to comply” provision which accepts manufacturers’ compliance with the
National Program standards as compliance with the California program. In 2013, DEEP updated the
existing Low Emission Vehicle Program, originally adopted in 2004 pursuant to 22a-174g of the
Connecticut General Statutes, by adopting section 22a-174-36c of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies (RCSA), which incorporates the California Program standards for 2017-2025, including the
“deem to comply” provision.
On August 10, 2018, CARB proposed amendments to the California Program to amend the “deem to
comply” provision to disallow compliance with the National Program as a means of compliance with the
California Program if it is modified via a final rule in the Federal Register after October 25, 2016, the last
date of modification for the National Program. The CAA requires states that have adopted the California
standards for vehicles to remain identical or risk being unable to enforce standards for a model year in
which the standards are not identical. For this reason, given California’s current rulemaking process,
Connecticut began the process necessary to amend RCSA section 22a-174-36c to mirror the
amendments sought by CARB.

46 Low-Emission Vehicle Program. California Air Resources Board. January 25, 2017. Retrieved from

https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/levprog/levprog.htm
47 2017 and Later Model Year Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards, Vol. 77, No. 199 Fed.
Reg. (October 15, 2012) 49 CFR Parts 523, 531, 533, 536, and 537.
48 Joselow, Maxine. “Trump proposes rollback of Obama’s clean car rules.” E&E News. August 2, 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.eenews.net/stories/1060091945
49
Section 209 of the federal Clean Air Act (CAA) permits California to seek a waiver of the preemption which prohibits states from enacting emission
standards for new motor vehicles due the state’s existing emission standards that preceded the federal CAA. Under the Act, California may submit a
waiver to set emissions standards more stringent than the federal government.
50 Akpan, Nsikan. “What Trump’s plan to roll back fuel-economy standards means for your wallet and the environment.” PBS News Hour. August 2,
2018. Retrieved from https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/what-trumps-plan-to-roll-back-fuel-economy-standards-means-for-your-wallet-andthe-environment
51 Larsen, K., Houser, T., and Mohan, S. Sizing Up a Potential Fuel Economy Standards Freeze. Rhodium Group. May 3, 2018. Retrieved from
https://rhg.com/research/sizing-up-a-potential-fuel-economy-standards-freeze/

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

27 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Increase light-duty ZEV penetration rate to at least 20% by 2030
1. Implement price signals to incentivize EV adoption and reduce electric system impacts.
2. Expand EV charging network to ensure consumer confidence and reduce range anxiety.
3. Develop a state fleet transportation Lead by Example program that sets annual emission-reduction
targets and enables increasing adoption of zero-emission vehicles.
As depicted in the 45 percent reduction scenario, the leading measures to reduce emissions in the
transportation sector are accelerating the pace of vehicle electrification coupled with deep decarbonization
of electricity generation. The illustrative number of passenger and heavy-duty vehicles projected to be
needed to achieve the 45 percent reduction scenario requires ramping up the EV adoption rate significantly
over the next 12 years (see illustrative penetration rates below).
Illustrative deployment of electric vehicles based on GC3 “45% below 2001 levels by 2030” scenario

Battery technology improvements continue to reduce EV ownership costs, and EV costs are projected to
reach parity with gasoline-powered vehicles at the point of sale by 2025. Automobile manufacturers are
increasing investment in EVs to boost the variety of vehicles available as well as vehicle range.52 EVs also
have significantly lower maintenance costs than gasoline-powered vehicles and operate at about onequarter the cost of the average conventional vehicle due to the their highly efficient drivetrains. The rapid
pace of advancements in technology, declining costs, customer cost-savings, and policy drivers are all
reasons why several independent firms have continued to recalculate and increase their EV sales forecasts
over the past few years. For instance, in 2016 Bloomberg New Energy Finance forecasted 35 percent of all
light-duty vehicle sales in 2040 would be electric, but its 2018 forecast bumped the figure to 55 percent of
all new cars sold.53
Recognizing the benefits of EV adoption, Connecticut has already signaled its commitment to electrify its
public and private light-duty vehicle fleet by signing onto the Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) in 2011. Under the MOU, Connecticut and eight other states are committed to
putting 3.3 million ZEVs on the road by 2025. To meet this target, member states have implemented
financial incentives and consumer-outreach and -education programs that raised consumer awareness and
confidence, made ZEVs more affordable, spurred sales growth, and demonstrated the viability of the ZEV
program. Coordinated action to implement ZEV programs across all member states is a key strategy for
achieving both Connecticut’s 2025 share of the MOU (approximately 125,000 EVs) and the 2030 GHG
reduction target. Accordingly, Connecticut should work to implement the applicable list of priority actions
outlined in the recently released Multi-State ZEV Action Plan: Accelerating the Adoption of Zero Emission
Vehicles 2018-2021.54 The action plan presents strategies in five core areas: consumer education and
52 Schmidt, Eric. SmartCharge New York and $10,000 Nissan Rebate Makes Switching to an Electric Vehicle the Easiest It’s Ever Been. FleetCarma.

August 9, 2017. Retrieved from https://www.fleetcarma.com/smartcharge-new-york-10000-nissan-rebate-makes-switching-electric-vehicle-easiestever/
53 Bloomberg New Energy Finance, Global sales outlook. Retrieved from https://about.bnef.com/blog/electric-vehicles-to-be-35-of-global-new-carsales-by-2040/ & https://bnef.turtl.co/story/evo2018?teaser=true
54 Multi-State ZEV Task Force. Retrieved from https://www.zevstates.us/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/2018-zev-action-plan.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

28 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
outreach, charging and hydrogen fueling infrastructure, consumer purchase incentives, light-duty fleets,
and dealerships.
Connecticut’s 2018 Comprehensive Energy
Strategy calls on DEEP to initiate an EV
Roadmap process that identifies Connecticutspecific policies, programs, and strategies to
optimize deployment of EVs and associated
infrastructure. In concert with the Multi-State
ZEV Action Plan, the EV Roadmap will outline
how the State can further support
development of a self-sustaining EV market
and the necessary infrastructure. Commencing
in 2018, the public process will include a multifaceted dialogue that considers how proposed
efforts will impact Connecticut’s citizens,
businesses, and environment.

Connecticut EV Roadmap
The Roadmap will evaluate and make
recommendations on the following:
• Education, outreach, and marketing
• Public and private fleet strategies
• Bringing ZEVs to market (incentives, financing,
and partnerships)
• Partnering with dealerships
• Bringing clean transportation options to low-tomiddle income communities
• Role of fueling/charging infrastructure
• Rate design and demand charges
• Streamlining building codes and permitting

• Role of advanced metering infrastructure
Ahead of other states, Connecticut has taken
• Future proofing
steps to help bridge the price gap between
• Interoperability
conventional and electric vehicles by offering
customers “on-the-hood” rebates through the
• Consistency of customer experience
Connecticut Hydrogen and Electric Automobile
• Data collection
Purchase Rebate (CHEAPR) program (rebates
• Medium- and heavy-duty vehicle and non-road
electrification
up to $5,000 for fuel cell vehicles, $2,000 for
battery electric vehicles, and $1,000 for plug-in
• VW settlement funds for EVSE infrastructure
hybrid electric vehicles). When these are
coupled with the federal tax incentives (up to
$7,500), the full cost of EV ownership is often
more advantageous to the customer than a conventional gasoline vehicle. However, the federal EV tax
incentive will phase out and expire after individual automobile manufacturers’ domestic EV sales reach
200,000 units, potentially creating a funding shortage in an emerging market. And while the CHEAPR
program has provided over $8 million in rebates deploying over 3,000 EVs, the program will soon run out of
funding. Sustainable funding into the future, will be necessary to ensure Connecticut meets its EV
deployment goals. DEEP’s EV Roadmap process should recommend a sustainable source of funding that
incentivizes EV purchases as the market continues to mature.

High EV penetration will certainly increase overall electricity demand and revenues for utility providers. To
effectively minimize the effects of increased demand, regulators should ensure implementation of
incentives and rate structures that encourage off-peak charging that shifts demand to low-emission, lowcost charging times. Price signals such as TOU rates provide a financial disincentive to charging during peak
load times and provide EV owners an incentive by offering a lower rate during non-peak times. Through its
EV Roadmap process, DEEP should provide recommendations to the Public Utilities Regulatory Authority on
how best to provide EV customers with appropriate prices signals to incentivize off-peak EV charging.
While there has been significant progress in creating adequate EVSE in Connecticut, the current charging
network is insufficient to meet the number of EVs that GC3 envisions will be on the State’s roads in the
coming years. To meet anticipated EV demand by 2030, the State must deploy roughly 831 Level 3 chargers,

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

29 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
6,704 Level 2 public chargers, and 11,085 Level 2 workplace chargers.55 While 80 percent of EV charging
takes place at home, Connecticut should assess where EV charging gaps exist, particularly as they relate to
multi-unit dwellings. In addition, supporting the deployment of faster charging along highway corridors will
help consumers feel more confident in their vehicle’s range and accelerate widespread EV adoption.
Ramping up public and private investment in EVSE infrastructure is a critical step to ensure consumer
confidence and reduce range anxiety. The EV Roadmap should recommend strategies for public and private
investment that enables a robust buildout of the State’s EV charging infrastructure. Connecticut will set
aside 15 percent of its total Volkswagen (VW) settlement funds for EVSE infrastructure. Electrify America,
the company created to oversee investment of VW settlement funds across the nation, has completed
installation of two DC fast chargers in Stratford and Waterford as part of Cycle 1 of Electrify America’s
investment plan. The company is now evaluating DC fast charging projects in Connecticut under Cycle 2.
Electrifying state, corporate, and institutional vehicle fleets offers the greatest opportunity to transition
toward EVs while increasing consumer exposure. Connecticut should introduce a multi-agency Lead by
Example fleet program aimed at reducing GHG emissions from state and local government vehicle fleets.
Targets for ZEV and LEV deployment should be adopted and aligned with the 2030 GHG emission reduction
target. In order to set targets and right-size fleets, agencies could monitor and benchmark GHG emission
data from fleet vehicles.
The Connecticut Department of Transportation (CTDOT) is now utilizing Federal Transit Administration Low
or No Emission Program funding to launch an electric bus pilot in Bridgeport. Once the pilot demonstrates
the reliability and viability of electric buses, CTDOT should commit to a fully electric transition and seek to
expand electric bus services to additional transportation corridors. CTDOT should share its experiences and
best practices with municipalities to increase transit electrification across the State.

Advance initiatives that eliminate the rate of VMT growth by 2030
1. Implement transit-oriented development (TOD) projects and adopt state policies and local zoning
regulations that support walkable, mixed-use, and sustainable urban and suburban development in
areas served by transit.
Connecticut should implement initiatives that advance opportunities to reduce VMT by expanding TOD,
enhancing public transit, and encouraging alternative modes and active transportation options. Reducing
VMT provides the potential for reduced traffic congestion, reduced transportation costs, and shorter
commute/travel times.
Over the past 20 years, VMT in Connecticut has grown at an average rate of 0.6 percent annually.56
Connecticut follows national trends that demonstrate a correlation between VMT growth in periods of
higher economic GDP output and lower growth in economic recessions. The graph below shows the
correlation in Connecticut VMT to the economic recession of 2007, when VMT decreased, and the more
recent economic stabilization, beginning in 2012, when VMT began increasing again. The chart shows a
positive correlation between economic expansion and contraction.

55 National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Projection Tool (EVI-Pro) Lite. Retrieved from https://afdc.energy.gov/evi-

pro-lite
56 CTDOT Roadway Inventory Section

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

30 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

32.2

Connecticut Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled
2006 - 2017

32
31.8

Billion Miles

31.6
31.4
31.2
31
30.8
30.6
30.4

The Federal Highway Administration’s long-range forecast of VMT released in the spring of 2018
incorporates three economic factors: U.S. national economic GDP outlook, population growth, and gasoline
and diesel prices. 57 The forecast presents multiple scenarios, each scenario closely tied to economic output
for a 20- or 30-year period. Projected VMT growth in the 20-year forecast is 0.9 percent in the loweconomic-growth scenario, 1.2 percent in the baseline economic-growth scenario, and 1.3 percent at the
high-economic-growth scenario, with overall VMT increase of 0.4 percent primarily based on the national
economic GDP output.
A critical strategy for Connecticut to reduce VMT is ensuring the CTDoT has the means to follow through on
its long-term transportation plan. Planned initiatives like extending CTfastrak east of the Connecticut River,
extending the Shore Line East line to Rhode Island, increasing service on the branch lines, and completing
gaps in the regional and statewide trails networks are important measures for bolstering statewide VMT
reductions. Such improvements, coupled with complementary land-use policies, can create urban and
suburban communities that promote shorter trips, reduce automobile trips, and ultimately reduce the rate
of VMT growth.
TOD supports walkable, mixed-use, and sustainable urban and suburban community development aimed at
increasing public transit ridership. TOD typically focuses development around central transit locations in
high-density areas to prevent suburban sprawl through well-managed land-use planning practices that
enables a “live-work-play” lifestyle in one location, eliminating the need for frequent automobile trips. TOD
reduces GHG emissions, expands individuals’ transportation options, provides greater mobility to LMI
residents, reduces transportation costs, and spurs economic development in nearby dense population
centers.58 California communities implementing TOD have reported annual GHG emission reductions of 2.5

57

FHWA Forecasts of Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT): Spring 2018, Office of Highway Policy Information, Federal Highway Administration, May 2018.
Retrieved from https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/tables/vmt/vmt_forecast_sum.pdf
58 Smart Growth and Transportation. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/smartgrowth/smart-growth-andtransportation

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

31 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
to 3.7 tons, annual fuel savings of $3,000-$4,000, and 20-40 percent reduced VMT per household.59
Connecticut should continue to focus on deploying policies and funding that support smarter TOD, zoning
and land-use decisions.
2. Encourage, incentivize, and support alternative modes and active transportation that reduce singleoccupant vehicle driving.
Employers should encourage and incentivize carpooling and carpool-matching services, such as CT rides,
that encourage a shift from single-occupant to multiple-occupant commutes. CT rides has nearly 50,000
users and since 2005 has saved commuters $111 million in travel costs and prevented 91,284 tons of GHG
emissions.60 Employer incentives to encourage carpooling and mass-transit ridership may include transit
subsidies and reduced or free parking for participants. Expanded mass transit services such as commuter
rail and bus rapid transit may increase ridership and reduce automobile dependence. Expanded “active
transportation” such as bicycling and walking also promote emission-free travel but are often limited to
urban areas.
Municipalities across the state should adopt a Complete Streets policy that helps ensure that streets are
safe for all users, especially cyclists, pedestrians, and public transit users. Safe walking paths and bikeways
connect system users to public-transit hubs, making a commuter more likely to use transit. To date, CTDOT
and 10 municipalities have adopted Complete Streets policies.
Furthermore, municipalities should investigate opportunities to bring more travel options to citizens. New
Haven and Hartford both recently introduced bike-share programs that encourage residents and visitors
alike to utilize an alternative mode of transportation.

Develop sustainable funding for transportation electrification and transit infrastructure
Sustainable funding will be critical to Connecticut’s efforts in electrifying the transportation sector and
maintaining and improving transit-system infrastructure. The State should consider implementing market
mechanisms that utilize price signals and generate needed revenue for reinvestment. Possible options
include fuel tax increases, VMT fees, tolls, congestion pricing, and a multi-state carbon fee or cap-andinvest program for the transportation sector.
Ensuring sustainable funding for transportation infrastructure will be critical to maintaining public roadways
and expanding low-carbon transit options such as bus rapid transit and commuter rail. Earlier this year,
hundreds of transportation projects were postponed due to the insolvency of the Special Transportation
Fund that finances the State’s transportation system. Increasing the State’s gasoline tax from 25 cents to 32
cents per gallon would provide $105 million per year in additional revenue to support the transportation
system’s evolution.61
1. Implement a multi-state cap-and-invest program that sets a limit on transportation-sector emissions
and reinvests program proceeds in measures that drive down emissions; provides benefits to citizens;
protects existing transportation funding; generates sufficient additional funding to support
transportation infrastructure and operation; and mitigates costs to consumers.

59 T. Parker, G. Arrington, M. McKeever, and J. Smith-Heimer, Statewide Transit-Oriented Development Study: Factors for Success in California

(Sacramento: California, Department of Transportation, 2002).
60
CT rides. Viewed August 14, 2018. Retrieved from https://ctrides.nuride.com
61 Gov. Malloy Outlines Proposal to Stabilize Special Transportation Fund. Office of Governor Dannel P. Malloy. January 31, 2018. Retrieved from
https://portal.ct.gov/Office-of-the-Governor/Press-Room/Press-Releases/2018/01-2018/Gov-Malloy-Outlines-Proposal-to-Stabilize-SpecialTransportation-Fund

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

32 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
A cap-and-invest program sets a GHG emission limit and penalizes companies that exceed that limit. The
program allows companies to buy and sell allowances that permit a certain amount of emissions,
incentivizing these companies to reduce emissions and to trade allowances for profit.62 This market-based
program reduces emissions at the lowest cost and produces revenue that can be invested in energy
efficiency, transit infrastructure, clean energy development, and green job training. As a regional policy
option, this would require concurrent adoption by other New England states, as RGGI does. Connecticut
should continue to play a leading role in this regional effort.
2. Implement transportation user fees — market mechanisms to reduce traffic congestion and improve
efficiency of travel for all drivers.
VMT fees are being explored across the country as gas tax revenues decline. Also known as a road usage
charge, a VMT fee can be charged to individual drivers based on their mileage driven. The objective often is
two-fold: to provide a substitute for fuel tax revenue, which is declining as fuel economy increases; and to
encourage reduction of VMT. Oregon and California are piloting VMT fees, but a VMT fee has not been
implemented in any state. Oregon’s pilot charges drivers 1.5 cents per mile traveled, measured by a device
added to vehicles, and is not susceptible to revenue loss from fuel efficiency.63 A 2017 report estimates that
statewide adoption of VMT fees in Oregon would generate $340 million more in gross revenue over the
next 10 years than a fuel tax system.64
Congestion pricing is a travel-demand-management strategy to reduce wasted time and energy associated
with traffic congestion. According to the Federal Highway Administration there are four main types of
pricing strategies:
Variably priced lanes — variable tolls on separated lanes within a highway, such as express toll
lanes or high occupancy toll Lanes.
Variable tolls on entire roadways — both on toll roads and bridges, as well as on existing toll-free
facilities during rush hours.
Cordon charges — either variable or fixed charges to drive within or into a congested area within a
city.
Area-wide charges — per-mile charges on all roads within an area that may vary by level of
congestion.
These pricing strategies incentivize drivers to use the highway during low volume periods, allowing the
system to flow more efficiently during peak periods. Economists agree that congestion pricing may be the
most efficient and sustainable mechanism to reduce traffic congestion. It also encourage drivers to shift
their travel from single-occupancy vehicles to bus, rail, or carpool. Several cities and counties across the
nation have implemented one of the above pricing strategies to effectively reduce traffic congestion. For
example, Lee County, Florida introduced variable pricing in 1998 on the Midpoint and Cape Coral toll
bridges. Drivers crossing the bridge were given a 50 percent discount on their toll if they traveled during
specific discount periods and paid their toll electronically. This “time-of-use rate” encouraged drivers to
shift from peak periods to off-peak periods. Congestion pricing is a way for Connecticut to implement

62 How cap and trade works. Environmental Defense Fund. Retrieved from https://www.edf.org/climate/how-cap-and-trade-works
63

Miller, Stephen. Oregon’s Pay-Per-Mile Driving Fees: Ready for Prime Time, But Waiting for Approval. StreetsBlog USA. June 26, 2017. Retrieved
from https://usa.streetsblog.org/2017/06/26/oregons-pay-per-mile-driving-fees-ready-for-prime-time-but-waiting-for-approval/
64 Oregon’s Road Usage Charge: The OReGo Program, Final Report. Oregon Department of Transportation. April 2017. Retrieved from
https://usa.streetsblog.org/2017/06/26/oregons-pay-per-mile-driving-fees-ready-for-prime-time-but-waiting-for-approval/

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

33 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
electronic tolling without risk of losing federal highway funding. Connecticut would benefit from
congestion pricing, as it would both produce revenue and reduce GHG emissions and traffic congestion.

BUILDING SECTOR
Non-electric thermal loads in residential, commercial, and industrial buildings contribute approximately 30
percent of total GHG emissions in Connecticut. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning comprise roughly
60 percent of all building energy consumption, and over 80 percent of Connecticut households and
commercial and industrial buildings are heated with fossil fuels.65 In concert with building energy
conservation improvements, Connecticut must accelerate decarbonizing building energy end-uses through
increasing deployment of RTTs such as cold-climate air- and ground-source heat pumps and heat pump
water heaters. This will require increased education and training of the HVAC workforce as well as
expansion of consumer education and outreach regarding building energy efficiency measures and
technologies.
Obstacles to high RTT penetration include: lack of public awareness of RTTs and RTT benefits; upfront RTT
capital and installation costs that often are higher than those of less-efficient equipment; lack of a
comprehensive RTT deployment plan; HVAC companies’ long-standing familiarity with fossil-fuel
equipment; and limited workforce development resources for skilled technicians installing RTTs.
Connecticut’s clean-energy programs and industry also face uncertainty due to the Connecticut General
Assembly’s diversion of $165 million in total funds in fiscal years 2018-2019 C&LM Plan funds, Connecticut
Green Bank funding, and RGGI auction proceeds. This resulted in deep cuts to programs and incentives
provided through the C&LM Plan and the Connecticut Green Bank, hindering GHG emission reductions from
the building sector.

Recommendations and Suite of Strategies
Accelerate adoption of building thermal energy conservation improvements such as
weatherization, insulation, efficient windows, and HVAC
Investments in building-envelope improvements such as air sealing, insulation, efficient windows, and
energy-management systems for existing and new buildings greatly improve energy efficiency, minimize
energy losses due to leakage, and reduce energy demand for heating and cooling. Energy conservation and
the associated cost savings can be maximized by pairing building-envelope improvements with deployment
of energy-efficient thermal technologies.
1. Prioritize building envelope improvements and expand access to thermal energy-efficiency measures
through innovative financing options for all income levels.
The C&LM Plan, developed and implemented in three-year planning cycles by Connecticut’s electric and
natural gas utilities, is designed to implement energy-efficiency measures beyond what is required by
building codes and to mainstream energy efficiency through market-transformation techniques. The plan’s
various energy-efficiency programs for residential, commercial, and industrial customers has spurred CO2
emission reductions equal to 262,511 tons per year and has saved residents, businesses, and state agencies
over $80 million annually.

65 Gronli et al. Feasibility of Renewable Thermal Technologies in Connecticut: Market Potential. Yale Center for Business and the Environment.

March 2017.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

34 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Connecticut must continue to ensure diverse financing options are available to expand thermal energyefficiency measures for all income levels. EnergizeCT’s successful financing partnerships should be
continued. This includes the Connecticut Green Bank’s Smart-E and Smart-E Bundle Loans. These
partnerships have been successful in integrating building envelope efficiency measures with RTTs. Similarly,
the Home Energy Solutions Micro Loan Financing Program, which offers three-year zero percent loans up to
$3,000 for high-efficiency insulation, should be continued and marketed toward LMI residents. Technicians
administering home energy audits through EnergizeCT should harmonize recommended thermal energyefficiency measures with these financing options.
2. Ensure building codes are continuously aligned with the most recent International Energy Conservation
Code standards.
The primary mechanisms through which Connecticut motivates and invests in thermal efficiency
improvements are changes in state building codes, changes in product and appliance efficiency standards,
and market transformation via implementation of the C&LM Plan. Connecticut must continue to adopt
progressive building codes that incorporate the latest International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
standards, including product-efficiency and resiliency standards, while working regionally with other states
to advance federal product-efficiency standards. Building codes help to standardize installation of energy
efficient HVAC in new construction and can be amended to incentivize electrification by prohibiting the use
of electric-resistance space heating as a primary heat source in buildings and setting performance-based
compliance standards that account for dynamic, TOU electricity rates.66 Connecticut is presently in the
process of updating its State Building Code to conform with 2015 IECC standards.
3. Track and reduce energy consumption and associated GHG emissions in state and municipal buildings,
including Lead by Example targets for 2030.
State buildings represent about 9 percent of Connecticut’s commercial and industrial sector energy
consumption, the equivalent of roughly 44.8 trillion BTUs. Through the Lead by Example program, state
agencies are able to identify and implement comprehensive energy-efficiency projects that reduce the
energy intensity of government buildings. Lead by Example helps state agencies that lack the technical and
financial resources to identify and invest in efficiency upgrades. As of December 2017, the DEEP-led Lead by
Example process has approved 72 energy-efficiency projects in state buildings, 60 of which are completed
and have collectively achieved an annual cost avoidance of approximately $2.9 million. As these projects
represent only about 1.5 percent of the total state buildings in Connecticut, this is only the beginning of the
program’s energy-savings potential. Within the limits of available funding, DEEP will continue to
aggressively identify opportunities for improving building envelopes to minimize energy losses and
installing thermal systems that improve efficiency and reduce emissions. Connecticut should work on a
predictable funding stream for Lead by Example projects with an annual investment commitment to
support additional projects, which will pay of themselves and save money over time.
Recently, DEEP instituted an energy tracking and management system called EnergyCAP across all state
agencies. The system utilizes a web-based platform to collect energy consumption data in a consolidated
format, and tracks State building energy use and costs. The platform’s features include the capability to:
feed data directly into EPA Portfolio Manager; analyze GHG emissions and weather-normalized data; track

66 Deason et al. (March 2018) Electrification of buildings and industry in the United States. Energy Analysis and Environmental Impacts Division,

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Retrieved from http://ipu.msu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/LBNL-Electrification-of-Buildings2018.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

35 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
cost avoidance; process and audit utility bills; and create reports. Once EnergyCAP has been fully deployed
and opportunities for reduction have been assessed, state agencies should set reduction targets for 2030.
4. Review consistency of energy efficiency cost-effectiveness testing with public policy goals.
Cost-effectiveness testing plays an important role in shaping the C&LM Plan’s energy-efficiency programs,
ensuring they are designed and implemented to obtain energy savings and system benefits greater than the
costs of the programs. Consistent with its role and
responsibilities in CGS §16-245m and CGS §22aResource Value Framework Steps,
1a, Connecticut should evaluate best practices
National Standard Practice Manual, 2017
and modify its cost-effectiveness testing to
ensure consistent, effective valuation of the
services energy efficiency provides. DEEP will
implement the Resource Value Framework steps
outlined in the 2017 National Standard Practice
Manual, utilizing its principles, concepts, and
methods for developing a balanced costeffectiveness test. This process will include
public informational meetings, written
comments, and opportunities for consulting with
the Connecticut Energy Efficiency Board.

Transition building fossil fuel thermal loads to efficient renewable thermal technologies
Beneficial electrification of building thermal-energy end-uses such as space heating and cooling and water
heating will reduce GHG emissions and total customer energy consumption and costs over the life of the
technology. As illustrated in the 45 percent reduction scenario, Connecticut must significantly increase
deployment of RTT technologies in residential and commercial buildings (see illustrative building
penetration rates below).
Illustrative deployment of renewable thermal technologies based on GC3 “45% below 2001 levels by
2030” scenario

Heat pumps reduce end-use energy consumption in homes and businesses — and lower emissions —
because of their inherent efficiency. By extracting heat from the air (rather than generating heat), common
air-source heat pump space and water heating systems are 200-300 percent more efficient than electric
resistance heating systems or water heaters, and 70-80 percent more efficient than traditional oil or natural
gas boilers — and heat pumps provide both heating and cooling services (see table).67

67 Department of Energy. Retrieved from https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/heat-pump-systems/air-source-heat-pumps

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

36 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Thermal Electrification Efficiency Gains
Technology
Electric resistance for heating replaced with cold-climate
air-source heat pump
Oil-fired boiler replaced with cold-climate air-source heat
pump
Natural gas-fired boiler replaced with cold-climate airsource heat pump

Approximate Average Efficiency Gain
↑ 300%
↑ 68-78%
↑ 73-83%

Calculations include efficiency of electric generation from EGUs in ISO-NE

In addition, heat pump water heaters provide important opportunities for energy storage, and when
actively managed, can help match energy demand to energy supply. These devices can store energy at
times when the overall energy demand is low and energy generation is cheap. Such storage will be
increasingly important as more renewable energy resources are deployed, helping to optimize these
resources during times of oversupply. The beneficial use of these technologies can help improve grid
efficiency, reduce operating costs, and provide costs savings to all consumers.
1. Develop sustainable funding mechanisms to incentivize replacement of fossil fuel space and water
heating with efficient renewable thermal technologies.
Currently, electric and natural gas customers contribute to implementation of the C&LM Plan through a
consumption-based charge on their electricity and natural gas bills. The C&LM Plan provides all electricity
customers incentives for measures they take to reduce their household or business energy consumption.
However, there is no heating consumption-based charge on the bills of oil or propane customers to support
the conservation programs, even though oil customers are the largest segment of participants in the C&LM
Plan programs, constituting over 50 percent of Home Energy Solutions projects and rebate uptake.68 Due
to this unbalanced contribution mechanism, heating oil and propane customers who participate in state
energy-efficiency programs essentially have been subsidized by natural gas and electric customers who are
charged a conservation assessment on both their heating and their non-heating consumption. Further, in
light of the General Assembly’s diversions of RGGI auction proceeds that funded conservation and
efficiency investments in homes not heated with electricity or natural gas, it is now more important than
ever to establish an equitable and sustainable funding source for promotion of energy-efficiency measures
in Connecticut’s 600,000 oil- and propane-heated homes.
One way to provide sustainable funding for oil and propane thermal energy efficiency improvements is
implementation of an oil and propone conservation charge (applied on a per-gallon and per-ccf basis) to
fund weatherization services and incentivize installation of high-efficiency equipment.
Carbon pricing on heating fuels is another possible approach. As described in the Cross Sector
recommendations section of this document, carbon pricing for all heating fuels could provide an incentive
to invest in energy-efficiency measures as well as support a transition to lower-carbon thermal alternatives.
Monies collected through a conservation or carbon charge can help provide sustainable funding for lowinterest financing and rebate incentives, which are important to catalyze decisions to switch to air-source
heat pumps for heating and cooling. Current incentives and financing products available for heat pumps
include: low-interest loans for efficient heating equipment, water heating, and renewable energy

68 HES is a home weatherization and energy efficiency program funded by the Connecticut Energy Efficiency Fund and administered by Eversource,

United Illuminating, Yankee Gas Services Company, Connecticut Natural Gas Corporation, and Southern Connecticut Gas Company. Retrieved from
www.energizect.com.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

37 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
improvements; low-cost building energy assessments; and rebates for air- and ground-source heat pumps,
mini ductless air-source heat pumps, and heat-pump water heaters.
The Connecticut Green Bank should work with municipalities and RTT contractors to explore launching a
“Thermalize” campaign, modeled after its successful SolarizeCT community-based program that leverages
social networks to reduce costs and expand solar deployment through a declining block grant group-pricing
scheme.69 SolarizeCT works with city governments, the Connecticut Green Bank, and qualifying contractors
to: provide free, no-obligation solar site assessments; connect residents with certified local solar installers;
offer high-quality solar equipment at reduced prices; and provide information regarding federal and state
tax credits. Given that RTTs integrate well with existing solar PV installations, towns where successful
Solarize campaigns have taken place should be among the first communities targeted for widespread
adoption of RTTs, integrated with building envelope improvements, including air sealing and insulation.
Synergies in these areas will realize even greater GHG emission reductions and overall energy-system
efficiency and cost savings.
2. Incentivize installation of renewable thermal technologies in new construction.
Because building codes and practices have improved, a new building is more likely than an existing building
to have a well-insulated envelope. This makes newly constructed buildings prime candidates for RTT
installation.70 The Department of Economic and Community Development reported 3,803 building permits
in 2017.71 Connecticut should focus on capturing the opportunity these projects provide for renewable
thermal deployment and market transformation.
The 2019-2021 C&LM Plan the utilities submitted to DEEP in November 2018 outlines an increased focus on
programs that push the building marketplace toward high-efficiency and “renewable-ready” construction.
The New Constructions, Additions & Major Renovations program will provide a new, all-electric package
that gives homeowners a clear path to strategic electrification of residential energy end-uses through
incentives for air-source or ground-source heat pumps, building envelope measures, and thermal-energy
efficiency measures. Additionally, participating new construction projects will be encouraged to incorporate
passive house design principles such as passive solar, which reduces space heating demands. The utilities
plan to target geographic regions across the state, including those that do not have access to natural gas.
For these incentive programs to have maximum effect, the building and construction community needs to
be aware of and educated on the benefits they provide. The C&LM Plan commits to continue offering
community education and training on high-efficiency building standards and code compliance for the 2015
IECC and Home Energy Rating System Index.

Improve training and technical capacity of workforce
1. Expand training programs to include renewable thermal technology installations and standards training.
Increasing technology awareness and training among HVAC contractors about RTT and new building
standards is essential for widespread deployment at the scale needed to meet our goals. Equipment
installers must possess strong knowledge of the available energy-efficient technologies and their
integration into new and existing buildings. The number of RTTs and manufacturers is increasing, and HVAC
69 Solarize Connecticut. Connecticut Green Bank. Retrieved from http://solarizect.com
70

Gronli et al. Feasibility of Renewable Thermal Technologies in Connecticut: Market Potential. Yale Center for Business and the Environment.
March 2017.
71 Connecticut Housing Information. Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development. Retrieved from
http://www.ct.gov/ecd/cwp/view.asp?a=1106&q=250640.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

38 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
industry professionals must have the knowledge and experience necessary to service the technologies
regardless of the manufacturer or equipment model. The expertise needed includes proper equipment
selection, right-sizing of equipment, and customer education to optimize the efficiency of building energy
systems. For example, heat pump or water heater thermostats should be programmed to communicate
with adaptive building energy management systems to facilitate demand response and grid flexibility, and
heat pumps systems can be paired with PV and energy storage systems to minimize the incremental cost of
increased electric demand.72
EnergizeCT has advanced-training opportunities through building-code training for professionals and
Building Operator Certification (BOC) training for building managers and operators. The training aims to
ensure that building managers and operators gain the skills and knowledge necessary to optimize building
energy systems.73 Tunxis Community College also offers a two-year Associate of Applied Science Degree in
Energy Management to prepare students for careers in renewable energy, energy efficiency, HVAC and
lighting, energy auditing, and building management. Efforts should be undertaken to expand training
programs to include RTT installation and standards training across the state.

NON-ENERGY GHG EMISSIONS
Non-energy sector emissions include emissions from the agricultural, industrial, and waste sectors.
Combined, these sectors accounted for approximately 10 percent of Connecticut’s GHG emissions in 2016.
Agricultural-sector emissions are caused by crop and livestock production and processing. Industrial sector
emissions are produced by industrial processes (e.g., manufacture and use of refrigerants). Waste sector
emissions are caused by incineration and methane releases from landfills and wastewater treatment plants.

Connecticut’s Non-Energy Sector GHG Commitments
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) such as methane, HFCs, and black carbon have a shorter atmospheric
lifetime but have a high global warming potential. This means they warm the Earth at a much faster rate
compared to CO2. Taking immediate steps to reduce SLCPs has an near-term beneficial impact and thus
should be prioritized.
The State’s first step toward addressing SLCPs should be to implement the SLCP reduction strategies as
outlined in the U.S. Climate Alliance SLCP Challenge to Action Roadmap.74 The roadmap details SLCP
reduction strategies concerning energy generation and distribution, agricultural and livestock operations,
waste treatment and landfill management, SLCP emissions monitoring and accounting, refrigerant
destruction and management, transportation fuel combustion, wildfire and open biomass burning, and
energy efficiency.
HFCs are a class of SLCPs used in refrigeration, air conditioning, foam blowing, aerosols, fire protection, and
solvents. HFCs have 1,000 to 3,000 times the global warming potential of CO2. In September 2018,

72 Driving the Heat Pump Market: Lessons Learned from the Northeast. Vermont Energy Investment Corporation. February 20, 2018.
73 Building Operator Certification Training. EnergizeCT. Retrieved from https://www.energizect.com/your-town/solutions-list/Building-Operator-

Certification-BOC-Training-UP
74
From SLCP Challenge to Action: a roadmap for reducing short-lived climate pollutants to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement. United States
Climate Alliance. September 2018. Retrieved from
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5a4cfbfe18b27d4da21c9361/t/5b9a9cc1758d466394325454/1536859334343/USCA+SLCP+Roadmap_final+
Sept2018.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

39 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Governor Dannel Malloy directed DEEP to develop regulations to phase out the use of HFCs.75 Connecticut
must transition toward climate-friendly, HFC-free technologies and HFC substitutes in refrigerators, airconditioning equipment, and vehicle air-conditioning systems by setting achievable timelines for the phaseout. Connecticut should closely examine California’s adopted regulations to phase out HFCs in new airconditioning and refrigeration systems as well as work with Maryland and New York as those states develop
regulations to phase out HFCs.
Natural and working lands consist of forests, farms, rangelands, and wetlands that sequester carbon and
support Connecticut’s economy, communities, and ecosystems. Collectively, these lands provide us with an
important carbon sink. Connecticut should work with the other New England states to measure and
account for changes in land-use practices to inform smart growth and protect valuable core forestland and
prime farmland. Connecticut and three other New England states have already committed to U.S. Climate
Alliance goals to: improve inventory methods for land-based carbon flux; identify best practices to reduce
GHG emissions and increase resilient carbon sequestration; advance programs, policies, and incentives to
reduce GHG emissions and enhance resilient carbon sequestration; undertake actions that will maintain
natural and working lands as a net sink of carbon and protect and increase carbon storage capacity, while
balancing near- and long-term sequestration objectives; and integrate priority actions and pathways into
state GHG plans by 2020.76 DEEP should work with land trusts, forest owners, and working lands managers
to help adopt carbon accounting methodologies that further support sustainable land-use practices.

75 Gov. Malloy Joins Connecticut in Coalition Committed to Phasing out Coal Power in Favor of Clean Energy. The Office of Governor Dannel P.

Malloy. September 13, 2018. Retrieved from https://portal.ct.gov/Office-of-the-Governor/Press-Room/Press-Releases/2018/09-2018/Gov-MalloyJoins-Connecticut-in-Coalition-Committed-to-Phasing-out-Coal-Power
76 The U.S. Climate Alliance Commits to Maintain Lands as a Net Carbon Sink and Develop Pathways to Act by 2020. United States Climate Alliance.
August 23, 2018. Retrieved from https://www.usclimatealliance.org/publications/2018/8/23/the-us-climate-alliance-commits-to-maintain-lands-asa-net-carbon-sink-and-develop-pathways-to-act-by-2020

RECOMMENDATIONS AND STRATEGIES

40 | P a g e



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

APPENDICES
Appendix A: Executive Order Number 46

APPENDICES

41



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

APPENDICES

42



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Appendix B: Members of the Governor’s Council on Climate Change

Council members, listed below in alphabetical order, will serve two year appointments.
















Claire Coleman, Climate and Energy Attorney, Connecticut Fund for the Environment
Melody Currey, Commissioner, Department of Administrative Services
Katie Dykes, Chair, Public Utilities Regulatory Authority
Bryan Garcia, President and Chief Executive Officer, Connecticut Green Bank
T.J. Hanson, Product Director, Thule Inc.
John Humphries, CT Roundtable on Climate and Jobs
Rob Klee [Council Chair], Commissioner, Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
Rebecca French, Director of Resilience, Department of Housing (serving on behalf of
Commissioner Klein)
James O'Donnell, Executive Director, Connecticut Institute for Resilience and Climate
Adaptation
James Redeker, Commissioner, Department of Transportation
David Robinson, Executive Vice President and General Counsel, The Hartford Financial Services
Group, Inc.
Catherine Smith, Commissioner, Department of Economic and Community Development
Lynn Stoddard, Director, Institute for Sustainable Energy at Eastern Connecticut State University
David Kalafa, Comprehensive Planning and Intergovernmental Policy, Office of Policy and
Management (serving on behalf of Secretary Barnes)
Katharine Wade, Commissioner, Connecticut Insurance Department

APPENDICES

43



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Appendix C: Connecticut Business-As-Usual Case
The first step in developing a climate strategy is building a Connecticut-specific business-as-usual
reference case to provide a basis for examination of potential GHG mitigation technologies and
measures. Utilizing projection data from the Energy Information Administration and factors expected to
shape Connecticut’s future energy consumption, Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management
(NESCAUM), GC3’s technical consulting group, developed a reference case projection of future
emissions through 2050.
The below table is a summary of informational resources used to develop the Connecticut greenhouse
gas emissions reference case in the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning (LEAP) framework. The
reference case incorporates historical and projected energy use data from publicly available resources
to create a greenhouse gas (GHG) baseline from which future GHG mitigation scenarios in Connecticut
were evaluated.
Energy use data for individual technologies and end uses form the basis of the reference case, and these
individual technologies and end uses collectively comprise the main aggregated transportation, electric
power, residential, commercial, and industrial sectors.

Reference Case Assumptions

Description

The LEAP reference case projection includes
existing federal, regional, and state regulatory
requirements expected to shape future energy
use in Connecticut.

Examples of rules included in the reference case are federal
energy efficiency standards, state renewable portfolio
standards (RPS), and the revised power plant GHG emissions
cap under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI).
For state EE programs not in AEO 2015, we use data from
Energize CT, which provides evaluation reports from CT
utilities on energy savings from their energy efficiency
programs: http://www.energizect.com/connecticut-energyefficiency-board/evaluation-reports.

Transportation Sector
The transportation sector within the LEAP
reference case is based on emissions estimated
using the Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator
(MOVES2014a) emissions model. MOVES2014a
is the latest version of MOVES. It incorporates
significant improvements in calculating on-road
and non-road equipment emissions.

MOVES is the EPA-accepted mobile source emissions model
for state air quality planning and emissions inventory
development under the Clean Air Act. The MOVES runs for
the LEAP reference case use input data specific to
Connecticut for projecting state vehicle miles travelled
(VMT), energy consumption, and emissions out to 2050 by
vehicle type for all key vehicle classes (e.g., passenger cars,
passenger trucks, long haul trucks, refuse trucks, etc.). The
vehicle emission estimates from MOVES include vehicles
meeting the latest federal fuel efficiency (CAFE) standards
and low sulfur gasoline requirements (“Tier 3”).

APPENDICES

44



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Electric Power
The electric power sector in the LEAP reference
case is based on the state’s consumption of
electricity, which can be supplied by power
plants inside and outside of Connecticut. For
this reason, the LEAP approach is to
characterize the generation mix for the overall
ISO-NE region out to 2050.

The generation mix depends upon a number of key variables,
such as capacity in megawatts by fuel type, operating
efficiency, availability factor, capital cost, and operations and
maintenance costs. Capacity data are based on the ISO-NE
Capacity, Energy, Loads, and Transmission (CELT) 2016
report. Operating characteristics and economic data are
based on the input assumptions for power plants used in the
U.S. Energy Information Administration’s Annual Energy
Outlook (AEO) 2015 projections.

Residential, Commercial, and Industrial
The residential, commercial and industrial
sectors in the LEAP reference case are
developed using detailed model outputs from
AEO 2015 to project energy consumption and
emissions for specific end-use technologies out
to 2040. AEO 2015 assumptions are given at the
links below:
NEMS Residential Demand Module
NEMS Commercial Demand Module
NEMS Industrial Demand Module

The LEAP reference case continues the projection to 2050 as
a straight-line extrapolation based on the average annual
growth rate from 2030 to 2040. Specific examples of enduse technologies are natural gas furnaces in commercial
space heating applications and distillate oil boilers for
residential space and water heating applications.

Assumptions NOT included in the
reference case

Description

The reference case projection does not include
proposed rules or policies that are not yet
adopted as requirements.

Examples of rules and policies not included are state-specific
energy efficiency programs that are in the planning stages
and EPA’s recently proposed heavy-duty vehicle GHG
standards. EPA’s currently suspended Clean Power Plan rule
is also not in the reference case as it was still a proposal at
the time the latest energy use data were collected. The
revised RGGI cap, however, would likely meet the
requirements of the Clean Power Plan, should it be
implemented, for Connecticut and the other New England
states covered by the ISO-NE grid.

The reference case does not reflect potential
long-term contracts for renewables or natural
gas that emerge from the PA 15-107
procurement process.

The LEAP modeling tool does not use existing or projected
expansion of pipeline capacity as a basis for projecting
increased natural gas use. Expanded use of natural gas is
incorporated through the AEO 2015 projections.

APPENDICES

45



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Appendix D: Technology & Measures
TECHNOLOGY/
MEASURE

DESCRIPTION

SUITE OF POLICY OPTIONS

ESTIMATED CO2
REDUCTION POTENTIAL*

Buildings (residential & commercial)

Deep envelope retrofits for existing
buildings

Expanded High-efficiency lighting

Renewable thermal technologies

District heating/cooling

Expanded advanced energyefficient appliances

APPENDICES

Insulation, window, envelope improvements, building
energy management systems in existing and new
buildings to make them substantially more efficient.
(Could be achieved through advanced building codes
e.g. Beyond IECC 2012.)

 State Building Codes
 Efficiency Procurement
 Establish a Residential
Property Assessed Clean
Energy Program
 Lead by Example Program
 EE incentives

Large

LEDs and advanced control systems.

 State Building Codes
 Efficiency Procurement
 Lead by Example Program
 EE incentives

Large

Renewable energy used for heating or cooling (e.g.,
air/ground source heat pumps, solar thermal for
domestic water heating, biomass, biofuels).

 State Building Codes
 Establish a Residential
Property Assessed Clean
Energy Program
 Thermal Renewable Energy
Credit Program (T-REC)
 Lead by Example Program
 EE incentives
 CPACE

Large

 CPACE
 Incentives

Large

 State EE appliance
standards
EE incentives

Medium

System for distribution of a heating and/or cooling
resource (e.g., chilled water) generated in a
centralized location to nearby residential and
commercial facilities to satisfy their requirements for
space heating, water heating, air conditioning, etc.
Adoption of state standards for appliance energy
efficiency which are more stringent than federal
standards.

46



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

High-efficiency HVAC

High-efficiency water heating

High-efficiency heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning equipment.

Heat-pumps and other high-efficiency domestic water
heaters.

 State Building Codes
 Efficiency Procurement
 CPACE
 EE incentives
 State Building Codes
 Establish a Residential
Property Assessed Clean
Energy Program
 Thermal Renewable Energy
Credit Program (T-REC)
 CPACE

Medium

Medium

EE incentives

Lower carbon fuel switching

Shifting from high-carbon fuel oil to lower-carbon
natural gas.

EE incentives

Small

Electric Power Generation

Utility-scale renewable
technologies

Large-scale zero-carbon generation using solar
photovoltaic, on-shore/off-shore wind, hydroelectric,
geothermal, or tidal power.

 State procurement
 Clean Energy Standard
 Increased RPS
 Shared clean energy
program

Large

 State procurement
 Clean Energy Standard
Expanded nuclear

APPENDICES

Expansion of nuclear generation beyond present level.

Large

47



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Combined heat and power(CHP)

Generate electricity and useful thermal energy in a
single, integrated system. Heat that is normally wasted
in conventional power generation is recovered as
useful energy, which avoids the losses that would
otherwise be incurred from separate generation of
heat and power.

Distributed generation

Non-centralized generation using zero-carbon
renewable energy -- e.g., rooftop solar photovoltaic

Distributed energy storage

Diversion of organics to anaerobic
digestion

Utility-scale energy storage

Demand response

APPENDICES

Storage of electricity for subsequent use at or near the
point of generation (e.g., using batteries). Such
storage can make it possible to take better advantage
of variable sources (e.g., from photovoltaic
generation) and integrate them more effectively into
the regional grid.
Diversion of non-recyclable organic waste -- principally
yard waste and food scraps -- to an anaerobic
digestion facility where microorganisms break down
organic materials in the absence of oxygen. This
process produces biogas and a solid residual. The
biogas, made primarily of methane and carbon
dioxide, can be used as a source of energy similar to
natural gas. The solid residual can be land applied or
composted and used as a soil amendment.
Centralized storage of electricity for subsequent use
(e.g., using batteries, pumped water storage). Such
storage can make it possible to take better advantage
of variable renewable energy (e.g., from photovoltaic
generation) and integrate them more effectively into
the regional grid.
Programs that enable consumers to reduce their
energy usage during periods of peak demand in
response to time-based rates or other forms of
financial incentives, enabling the grid to meet energy
demands at lower cost and with lower emissions.
Methods include offering time-of-use pricing, critical

 Incentives (rebate/grant,
tax)
 CPACE

 Clean Energy Standard
 Increased RPS
 Tariff adder
 RPS multiplier
 Lead by Example

Medium

Medium

Medium

 RPS

Medium

 State Procurement
 RPS multiplier
Medium

 EE incentives
 Grid modernization
 Time of use rates

Medium

48



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
peak pricing, variable peak pricing, real time pricing,
and critical peak rebates.
Advanced natural gas combined
cycle gas turbines

Expanded use of the most efficient form of natural gas
turbines.

Reductions in natural gas leaks

Enhanced efforts to reduce leakage from natural gas
distribution network.

 RGGI
Small

N/A

Transportation

Expand zero-emissions vehicles

Battery electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.

Electrification of transit buses

Conversion to plug-in battery technology

Electrification of commuter rail

Conversion of remaining diesel locomotives to
electricity.

Low-carbon biofuels, CNG and
Propane for medium/heavy duty
vehicles

Biofuels, compressed natural gas and propane instead
of petroleum for medium-and heavy-duty vehicles/
freight modes, plus necessary fueling infrastructure.

Increased public transit service
levels and ridership

Expanded use of bus rapid transit and commuter rail
to reduce private passenger vehicle miles traveled.

 Maintaining California
LEV/ZEV standards
 Incentives (tax break,
rebate, reduced
fees/taxes, LEV/ZEV access
to HOV Lanes, free
parking)
 Time-of-use rate for EV
charging
 Lead by Example
 Time of use rates
 Time of use rates

 Low carbon fuel standard
 Congestion Pricing/Tolls
 Vehicle Miles Travel Tax

Large

Medium
Medium

Medium

Medium

Non-Energy Sectors (land use, agriculture, and waste)
Forestry BMPs

APPENDICES

Best management practices for public and private
forests to maximize carbon sequestration and storage.

Medium

49



GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Wetlands restoration for "blue"
carbon

Increased source reduction and
recycling of solid waste

Smart growth practices

Protection of salt marshes and other wetlands to
maintain their ability to sequester and store carbon.
Source reduction, often called ‘waste prevention,’ is
any change in the design, manufacturing, purchase, or
use of materials or products (including packaging) to
reduce their amount or toxicity before they become
municipal solid waste. Recycling, which occurs after
waste is produced, is conversion of materials for use in
remanufacturing.
Urban planning and transportation practices that
concentrate growth in compact urban centers to
reduce sprawl and its associated high-emissions forms
of building and transportation. Compact, transitoriented, walkable, bicycle-friendly land use, including
neighborhood schools, "complete streets," and mixeduse development.

Medium

Medium

Further Development of the
Complete Streets Program
and Multi-Mobility
Small

Improved agricultural practices

Practices to reduce GHG emissions and maintain/build
soil carbon: organic farming, nutrient reductions, notill agriculture, and improved residue management.

Small

Urban/suburban tree planting and
retention

Urban/suburban tree planting and retention

Small

Conversion of marginal agriculture
to forests

Reforestation of marginal agricultural lands to
sequester and store carbon.

N/A

Reduction of F-gas emissions

Improved management practices for fluorinated gases
(e.g., HFC refrigerants) that have high global warming
potential and are responsible for a small but growing
proportion of CT's GHG emissions.

N/A

Note: A carbon tax, cap and invest/tax program, or a variety of incentives can be utilized as policy across all of these measures.
**Carbon reduction potentials were estimated based on a literature review and expert opinion.

APPENDICES

50

