CLEAN ENERGY DC
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

AUGUST 2018
PRODUCED FOR:

GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA





LETTER FROM
MAYOR MURIEL
BOWSER
Climate change is here. While Washington, DC is already taking steps to prepare for the impacts
of climate change, it is critically important that we also reduce our own contribution to the
greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change. In December 2017, in recognition of
the importance of local action to achieve the Paris Agreement goal to limit the global
average temperature increase to 1.5°C, I pledged to make the District carbon neutral by 2050.
We cannot wait to take action if we are to achieve this goal. The Clean Energy DC climate and
energy plan laid out here within, is our roadmap to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2032
and put us on a path toward carbon neutrality by cutting energy use and increasing the use of
renewable energy, as called for by our Sustainable DC plan.
Washington, DC has made great progress on clean energy, which has been recognized
nationally and internationally. We have made the largest direct purchase of wind power by an
American city government; were recognized as the first LEED Platinum City in the world; and
have established strong and innovative programs to save residents and businesses energy and
to provide the benefits of local solar energy to low-income residents. However, we must do
much more to reduce, and ultimately eliminate, our greenhouse gas emissions while ensuring
access to clean energy is equitable and affordable.
The Clean Energy DC plan lays out a thoughtful set of actions that the District Government,
local businesses, and residents can take over the next 15 years to dramatically reduce the
District’s role in climate change. The plan identifies innovative strategies to reduce emissions from
buildings, energy supply, and transportation and sets forth roadmaps with timelines to implement
these strategies. We developed this plan after listening to ideas from our residents, community
stakeholder partners, and leading energy experts. Implementing this plan will require continued
input and involvement from residents, businesses, and stakeholders in all eight wards. We must
ensure that our plan protects District residents and businesses across the nation’s capital while it
continues to strengthen the District’s and the world’s resilience to climate change.
Taking the actions laid out in this Clean Energy DC plan will make Washington, DC more
innovative, sustainable, and resilient, and together, we can build a cleaner, stronger, and more
equitable future for our city and our global community.
Sincerely,

Muriel Bowser
Mayor



iv

CLEAN ENERGY DC



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The District of Columbia’s Department of Energy and Environment is
pleased to provide this climate and energy plan, Clean Energy DC
(Plan). The Plan articulates a bold and innovative vision to meet the
climate challenge, and to create a sustainable, reliable, and affordable
energy system that can meet the District’s needs far into the future.

WHAT IS THIS PLAN, AND WHY DOES IT MATTER?
Clean Energy DC is the District’s proposal to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions at
least 50% below 2006 levels by 2032 while increasing renewable energy and reducing energy
consumption, as directed by the landmark Sustainable DC plan; and to put us on a path
to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, a goal announced by Mayor Bowser in December
2017 in recognition of the importance of local action to achieve the Paris Agreement goal
to limit the global average temperature increase to 1.5°C.1 Sustainable DC Plan’s direction
to reduce energy use, increase renewable energy, and reduce GHG emissions proposes an
important framework for decarbonizing the District’s energy system, a framework that focuses
on resiliency, efficiency, innovation, and local action. This bold and necessary commitment
aligns the District with other global cities that are similarly working to avoid the worst impacts of
climate change. (Figure ES 1 summarizes the GHG emissions performance of a sample of U.S.
cities.) The carbon neutral commitment also provides a clear long-term vision of a transformed
and resilient energy system that reliably, efficiently, affordably, and sustainably meets the
needs of the District’s residents and businesses. The steps taken to achieve and exceed a 50%
reduction in GHG emissions by 2032 will help lay the groundwork for carbon neutrality. By 2020,
the District will also develop a plan that builds on Clean Energy DC and delivers actions that
can achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.
Energy will prove central to the District’s efforts to reach its GHG goals. Fossil fuels remain the
dominant source of energy for electricity, for heating buildings through natural gas or fuel oils,
and for motor vehicles. Over the long term, phasing fossil fuels out of the District’s energy supply
will be essential to achieving the city’s climate commitments.
DOEE’s companion climate adaptation plan, Climate Ready DC, details the effects of climate
change, including higher temperatures more dangerous heatwaves, rising sea levels, and more
severe and frequent storms, which residents and businesses are already experiencing. Climate
Ready DC outlines actions the District will take to adapt to and prepare for such changes. This
Plan shows what the District can do to reduce its GHG emissions through bold and innovative
energy strategies. If Climate Ready DC is the District’s defense, then Clean Energy DC is its
offense. These two documents represent a holistic effort by the Government of the District of
Columbia as a leader in energy innovation and in fighting climate change, to ensure that the
District remains a desirable place to live and work.

1

 ayor Bowser Commits to Make Washington, DC Carbon-Neutral and Climate Resilient by 2050”, December 4, 2017
M
https://mayor.dc.gov/release/mayor-bowser-commits-make-washington-dc-carbon-neutral-and-climate-resilient-2050

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

v



↓↓ Figure ES 1: GHG emissions per capita among leading U.S. cities (in metric tons carbon
dioxide equivalent, tCO2e)
USA

20.7
15.4

Austin
13.5

Denver
Philadelphia

12.3

Chicago

12.3

Baltimore

12.2
11

DC
9.4

Boston
7.9

Seattle

7.4

Los Angeles
San Francisco

6.2

New York City

5.8
0

5

10

15

20

Per Capita GHG Emissions (tCO2e/person)

↑↑ Figure ES 1: GHG emissions per capita among leading U.S. cities (in metric tons carbon
dioxide equivalent, tCO2e)2

2

vi

 ource: Carbon Disclosure Project’s Citywide Emissions 2016 dataset, https://data.cdp.net/Cities/2016-Citywide-Emissions-Map/iqbu-zjaj. Note that different
S
cities sometimes use different protocols, so direct, precise comparisons are difficult.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



A UNIQUE APPROACH
This Plan is unique: it serves as both a long-term GHG reduction plan and a short-term energy
plan. Importantly, it provides a roadmap to achieving the District’s 50% GHG emissions
reduction target. It identifies major consumption sectors, such as buildings, energy supply, and
transportation, and quantifies existing and proposed policies directly affecting GHG emissions in
each. These include anticipated building codes, increases in the sourcing of clean electricity,
and the District’s transportation plan, moveDC. This Plan forecasts the impact of each of those
policies and details the level of ambition needed to achieve the District’s GHG reduction
target.
While the actions outlined in this document are sufficient to achieve the GHG reduction
target, they are not sufficient to fully achieve Sustainable DC’s other 2032 targets: to reduce
energy use by 50% relative to 2012 and to increase renewable energy to represent 50% of all
energy used in the District.3 During the modeling process, the consultant team concluded that
achieving all three targets in unison will prove exceptionally difficult, if not impossible. As a
result, DOEE prioritized the GHG reduction target—one of the key Sustainable DC targets—and
chose actions shown to significantly reduce GHGs while simultaneously reducing energy use
and increasing renewable energy.4
Prioritizing the GHG reduction target over the other energy targets also makes sense for
optimizing efforts and best leveraging limited resources: Reducing GHG emissions through
innovative measures necessarily entails both reducing energy use and increasing renewable
energy. However, reducing energy use may not result in an increase of renewable energy,
and increasing renewable energy may not result in reduction of energy use, as visualized in
Figure ES 2.

GHG priority:
Full optimization

Increase
Renewables

Reduce
GHGs

Reduce
Energy Use

Increase
Renewables

Energy Use priority:
Less focus on renewables

Reduce
Energy Use
Reduce
GHGs

Increase
Renewables

Renewable
Energy priority:
Less focus on energy
efficiency

Reduce
GHGs

Reduce
Energy Use

↑↑ Figure ES 2: Benefits of prioritizing the reduction of GHG emissions
By following the actions in the Plan, the District will reduce energy use 20% below 2012 levels.
Further, depending on how electricity suppliers comply with the RPS, 30% of power delivered
to the District will originate with renewable sources such as wind and solar. DOEE will build on
this work to develop roadmaps to achieve the renewable-energy and energy-use reduction
targets, and a path to carbon neutrality by 2050.
3
4

The coordination and feasibility of these three goals are being addressed in the revision of Sustainable DC 2.0.
Note that energy use refers to energy consumption.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vii



PURPOSE AND CONTEXT
This is the first District energy plan to explicitly include a GHG reduction target. Although many
have been eager to realize the ambitions of Sustainable DC’s energy and climate targets, until
now the District had not finalized a concrete framework to deliver on them. Clean Energy DC
offers the analytical framework and measures that are needed to begin this work.
This Plan’s actions show how the District can meet its GHG target. While the District can get
going on some actions right away, others are more challenging and complex, and will require
additional analysis—including detailed technical feasibility work. As there is no one-size-fits-all
approach to technical feasibility work, DOEE intends to undertake it while designing Clean
Energy DC’s implementation.
The District understands that the ultimate success of this Plan hinges in large part on the extent
to which it addresses the concerns and priorities of those it will most impact. That’s why DOEE
has engaged and will continue to engage in robust and inclusive stakeholder consultation. The
team is committed to equitable development, and will work with stakeholders in the community
to collaboratively shape the Plan’s next steps.
This Plan does not identify every action that could potentially reduce GHG emissions; DOEE
expects additional strategies will emerge through the collaborative engagement process.
The Plan identifies the high-level energy-consuming sectors—buildings, energy supply, and
transportation—and recommends actions within those sectors that could lead to significant
reductions. The actions list would then allow stakeholders and residents to better understand
the scale of ambition needed to achieve the GHG target. The list will serve as a springboard, to
allow stakeholders to plan how best to implement each action.

A NECESSARY TRANSFORMATION
The District will not meet its GHG target unless it makes the most of every available policy lever
to address buildings, energy supply, and transportation. Taken together, the needed actions
amount to nothing short of a total transformation in how energy is bought, consumed, and
generated. It will be a significant and sustained effort, and require ongoing support of the
public and stakeholders. The District Government must develop a streamlined and robust
stakeholder process, to keep up momentum through the Plan’s future iterations.
DOEE is proposing Clean Energy DC at a time of great change: Fuel prices are volatile,
renewable-energy costs are continuing to decline, and innovation is accelerating—as is
the rate of climate change. The energy and climate landscape is dynamic. To ensure the
Plan remains relevant against this backdrop, DOEE has committed to ensuring it is open and
iterative—a flexible and adaptable “living document.”

viii

CLEAN ENERGY DC



WHAT DOES THE PLAN PROPOSE?
To recap, the Plan identifies buildings, energy supply, and transportation as the District’s major
GHG sources. To meet its target, the District will need to significantly reduce GHG emissions in
all three.
• Building actions include policies to target both new and existing buildings, plus cross-cutting
actions (Chapter 4).
• Energy actions aim to increase the supply of clean and renewable energy and modernize the
District’s energy system (Chapter 5).
• Transportation actions chiefly seek to transition passenger and transit vehicles from
conventional internal-combustion engine cars and buses to electric models that produce zero
tailpipe emissions (Chapter 6).
The Plan’s core actions for these three sectors represent a pragmatic expansion of existing
policies, such as the District’s innovative construction codes, the Renewable Portfolio Standard,
and moveDC, the District Department of Transportation’s 25-year vision, which includes actions
to increase travel by walking, biking, and public transit.
The consultant team did not calculate the anticipated GHG reductions for every action, but
did do so for significant existing and proposed policies in these three sectors. The Plan also
includes a number of actions—such as developing electric vehicle charging infrastructure—
that aim to support or facilitate core actions, but do not directly reduce GHG emissions.
Each section provides a pathway to achieving the GHG reduction targets for each of the
sectors, and identifies a suite of actions to achieve them. As stated earlier, the Plan is not
intended to provide detailed program design, specific policy language, or detailed feasibility
analysis for each action; DOEE will conduct that work during the consultative stakeholder
process that will follow this Plan’s release. This Plan does, however, include design and
implementation language, details, research, and recommendations gleaned from lessons that
other cities have already learned.
The key actions needed to achieve the District’s targets are outlined below; a full list of actions
can be found at the end of the Executive Summary.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ix



BUILDINGS
NEW CONSTRUCTION
To achieve the 50% GHG emissions reduction target, the District Government must implement
a net-zero-energy building code that serves to shift buildings away from reliance on fossil-fuels
(e.g., natural gas, coal, oil) for heat and hot water. To successfully implement such a code, the
District Government will need to provide incentives, education, and training, and demonstrate
leadership by requiring very high performance in its own new buildings. Significantly higher
energy performance from buildings under the new code is projected to help the District avoid
4.6% of the GHG emissions that would have been produced in 2032 if no action were taken.

EXISTING BUILDINGS
While net-zero energy codes will reduce fossil fuel use in new buildings, the District must retrofit
a significant portion of its existing buildings to increase their efficiency and reduce their fossilfuel reliance. Retrofits at this scale require well-financed, data-driven, and carefully targeted
programs. By retrofitting nearly one in five buildings to achieve an approximate 40% reduction
in energy use, and leading by example in its own buildings, the District will avoid 9.5% of the
GHG emissions that would have been produced in 2032 if no action were taken. The plan also
includes a significant number of supporting actions aimed at increasing energy efficiency in
existing buildings and transforming the building sector.

x

CLEAN ENERGY DC



ENERGY SUPPLY SYSTEM
CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY
To achieve its 50% GHG emissions reduction target, the District must increase its supply of
renewable energy, and the renewable portfolio standard (RPS) is a key policy to do so.
The District Government should configure its RPS to require a steadily increasing proportion
of renewable energy, and promote ways of procuring energy that will yield tangible GHG
reductions. In addition to these changes to the RPS, the District should also:
• Replace the current Standard Offer Service (i.e., the supply contracts for customers who do
not choose competitive suppliers) with a mix of short-term and long-term contracts, including
long-term power purchase agreements that maximize renewable energy.
• Develop neighborhood-scale energy system and solar proliferation strategies.
• Increase adoption and installation of solar panels and other renewable energy technologies.

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
Legacy electricity grids are not always well-suited to deal with a large number of small-scale
renewable-energy systems. A modernized system would:
• Support a substantial increase in the quantity of electricity generated within the District.
• Fully capture the economic benefits of new local generation.
• Improve overall reliability and resilience.
• Avoid costly ratepayer investments in substations and feeders by using distributed energy
resources (DER) and demand-side management practices.
• Support the development of neighborhood-scale energy systems, including microgrids.
This shift to distributed energy resources will require new regulatory frameworks, market
structures, and utility incentives. In the longer term, the energy system will need to support
distributed transactions—that is, those between individual customers and the distribution system
operator, or even transactions between individual customers.
The Plan includes recommended actions to reconsider the way ratepayer investments are
made, and to increase the use of cost-effective DER to reduce peak demand and manage
load growth in new or congested neighborhoods. Some of this work is already underway
through DOEE’s participation and leadership in the Public Service Commission’s Formal Case
1130, Modernizing Energy Delivery System for Increased Sustainability, and the recommended
actions should be taken in coordination with DOEE’s and other stakeholders' efforts in that case.
Additional research as well as regulatory and legislative changes may be required to reduce
barriers to DER integration, improve understanding of the District’s energy supply and demand,
develop cost-effective neighborhood- scale energy systems, and demonstrate the full value of
a modernized energy system.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xi



TRANSPORTATION
MODE SHARE CHANGES
To meet its target, the District will need to secure significant transportation-sector GHG
reductions. This will involve reducing dependence on private petroleum-powered vehicles
(and shifting to public transit, biking, and walking) and by transitioning to zero-emissions
vehicles. The District has long encouraged residents to pursue fossil-free travel alternatives,
and continues to do so.
The District is also investigating strategies that would reduce emissions from its own fleets. Using
the District’s existing transportation actions on mode shift found in moveDC, the District can
avoid 3.6% of the GHG emissions that would otherwise occur in 2032.
Further, the Clean Energy DC team finds that existing federal fuel-economy standards will avoid
another 7.1% of the GHG emissions projected for 2032. As specific actions regarding moveDC
and the federal fuel economy standards are beyond the scope of this Plan, the Plan does not
specify further recommendations.

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION
The District should encourage residents to pursue alternative, low to zero-GHG travel modes,
but it should also promote high efficiency hybrid and zero-emission electric vehicles.
As existing District Government plans address other areas of the transportation sector, Clean
Energy DC zeros in on the opportunities of vehicle electrification. The Plan recommends policies
and actions that provide electric vehicle infrastructure, such as public charging stations. It also
identifies financial and other appropriate incentives to make it easier for people to choose an
electric model when shopping for a new vehicle.
Data indicates that 70% of vehicles are on the road for at least 15 years, and the District
Government has few policy tools to encourage an electric car purchase.5 However, the District
Government can and should work to increase the share of electric vehicles in car-sharing and
other private-sector fleets.
The District Government should consider electric vehicle policy as one way to achieve carbon
neutrality by 2050. Through actions to increase electric vehicle adoption, the District can
avoid 0.9% of the GHG emissions that would otherwise occur in 2032, while laying essential
groundwork for carbon neutrality.

5

xii

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809952.pdf

CLEAN ENERGY DC



ELECTRIFYING TRANSIT BUSES
As more residents choose public transit, the associated energy use and GHG emissions
increase. Although transit GHG emissions are considerably smaller than passenger vehicle
emissions, if the District is to meet its energy, emissions, and carbon neutrality goals, it will
eventually need to decarbonize public transit.
The Plan recommends that the District Department of Transportation (DDOT) and the
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) replace their retired diesel buses with
electric buses, and choose those models when expanding their fleets. A shift to electric buses
over the coming 15 years will avoid 2.6% of the GHG emissions that would otherwise occur in
2032. A shift to electric buses and passenger vehicles will also eliminate a source of street-level
air pollution, allowing both citizens and visitors to breathe easier.

FUTURE TRANSPORTATION TRENDS
As of 2017, several automakers are working to develop autonomous vehicle technologies; if
successful, residents may at some future point travel around the District without a human at the
wheel. Meanwhile, self-driving or not, networked transportation companies are accelerating
the trend towards the concept of mobility as a service, and away from traditional privatevehicle ownership.
In the same way that the proliferation of private vehicles and freeways shaped 20th century
city planning and individual behaviors, self-driving cars and shared ownership models could
dramatically alter the whole transportation experience, opening up new challenges and
opportunities for cities.
From a climate and energy perspective, these changes could be positive or negative—
depending primarily on how the vehicles in question will be powered. Whatever form this
emerging transportation system ultimately assumes, the District must take steps to ensure the
vehicles at the center of it produce zero emissions.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xiii



AN EFFECTIVE PLAN
Implemented together, the actions recommended in the Plan will result in an estimated
reduction in the District’s GHG emissions of 56% by 2032 (relative to the 2006 baseline).
As success in some areas of the Plan will depend heavily on success in others, the District
Government should implement the actions in a coordinated and strategic manner. Table ES 1
below demonstrates how the recommended policies and programs will transform the District’s
energy system, drive deep and sustained GHG reductions, and continue to position the District
as a leader in climate change mitigation and energy innovation. The GHG reduction figures
shown in Table ES 1 are relative to projected GHG emissions in 2032 under business-as-usual
assumptions. A fuller version of this table, showing the historical GHG decreases and the BAU
increases, is found in Chapter 2.
Modeled GHG Reduction Actions

GHGs Reduced from 2032
Business as Usual (tCO2e)

Percent GHGs Reduced
from Total 2032 Business
as Usual*
50% reduction vs. 2006
= 40% reduction vs. 2032

Federal fuel economy standards

626,000

7.1%

New Construction Policies

408,000

4.6%

Existing Building Policies

797,000

9%

District Government Buildings

45,000

0.5%

Renewable Portfolio Standard

841,000**

9.5%**

RPS Local Solar Requirement

164,000

1.9%

PPA for Standard Offer Service

584,000

6.6%

Neighborhood-Scale Energy

49,000

0.6%

Mode Share Change

320,000

3.6%

Electric Vehicle Adoption

76,000

0.9%

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

230,000***

2.6% ***

Total GHGs Avoided vs. 2032 BAU

4,140,000

47%

Total GHGs Reduced vs. 2006 Baseline

5,870,000

55%

↑↑ Table ES 1: Summary of core GHG reduction actions
Note: All figures based on on-site energy use, and use GHG
intensity factors that account for losses from electricity
generation, transmission, and distribution, as well as
fugitive emissions from natural gas distribution. See section
Appendix A1 for more detail.
*This column measures the percentage reduction in total
GHG emissions from the 2032 level under the Business as
Usual scenario.
For example, New Construction actions decrease total
District-wide 2032 GHG emissions by 4.6%. Due to GHG
declines between 2006 and 2015, as well as projected
GHG increases between 2015 and 2032, the District must
avoid 40% of projected GHGs in 2032 to decrease GHG
emissions 50% relative to 2006 levels.

xiv

CLEAN ENERGY DC

**Assumes the District captures 57% of the total potential
GHG reductions possible under the RPS. See section 2.2.1.2.
*** Savings from transit bus fleet electrification also reflect
increased use of busses due to mode share change.



NEXT STEPS
DOEE will now work with stakeholders and residents to design an inclusive engagement and
consultation process. The team will incorporate that feedback into future iterations of the Plan,
yielding a living document that will ensure ongoing
long-term support.
The District Government will work to ensure that the Plan’s actions will support everyone in the
District, with an eye towards existing energy equity and affordability challenges. Chapter 3
discusses steps taken through the development of the Plan to make progress on these issues.
The task of transforming an energy system and achieving carbon neutrality will be exceptionally
complex. The steps forward will not always follow a straight line. But however difficult the
work ahead, the District will will make equity and affordability central considerations in the
process, seeking to support and amplify the voices that have traditionally been excluded from
the energy planning process. The Clean Energy DC team’s engagement and governance
approach uses this Plan as a springboard to empower all residents to review and shape the
path forward.
As stated previously, this collaborative and iterative process of evaluation, implementation, and
revision needs to be institutionalized to sustain the effort over many years. Guidance for how to
effectively govern and implement the Plan can be found in section 1.6 of the chapter 1. DOEE
intends to formally update and revise the Plan as often as is warranted under this process. DOEE
recognizes that the plan will succeed or fail based on the ongoing involvement of stakeholders
and residents. A meaningful process, including public education and outreach, is key to
achieving success.

A DYNAMIC AND RESPONSIVE PLAN
The Plan must be implemented in a manner that balances bold action and leadership with
public receptivity, market conditions, and technology.
The District Government will closely coordinate Clean Energy DC actions with existing agendas
and plans. Its proposed actions are already aligned with those in several major District
Government plans, including Sustainable DC (2013), moveDC (2014), and Climate Ready
DC (2016).
The District and other agencies will stay on top of emerging trends and regional, national, and
global developments that will inform program design and implementation. These insights and
developments will inform the Plan’s future iterations.
The Plan should also reflect the innovative work performed under the leadership of the District’s
Public Service Commission, particularly in Formal Case 1130, the Office of People’s Counsel, the
Department of Transportation, the Office of Planning, the Department of General Services, as
well as the District’s water and wastewater utility, DC Water.
The Plan will evolve. Ultimately, it will set the District on a path to achieving its ambitious and
necessary climate change mitigation and energy targets, and realize the ultimate goal of
making the District the best city in the nation in which to live and work.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xv



CLEAN ENERGY DC

THE PATHWAY TO CUT THE CARBON POLLUTION OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

4

CONSTRUCTING
NET-ZERO BUILDINGS
Require highly efficient and
zero emission new buildings
RAMPING UP RETROFITS
Expand and intensify
energy use reductions in
existing buildings

HOW WILL THE DISTRICT PLAY A CRITICAL ROLE?
Clean Energy DC is the
District’s plan to cut

GHG emissions
in half by 2032

The District has
committed to become

Carbon Neutral
by 2050

GROWING LOCAL SOLAR
Maximize local renewable
energy generation
ELECTRIFYING TRANSPORTATION
Electrify bus transit, vehicle
sharing, and personal vehicles

Clean Energy DC is the District’s strategic action plan to make the
District’s energy system more sustainable, resilient, and equitable.

SHIFTING TRANSPORTATION
Increase the use of walking,
biking, and mass transit

THE DISTRICT’S TARGETS FOR 2032

Reduction
in annual
GHG emissions

50%

Reduction
in energy
consumption

50%

Of all energy
derived from
renewable
sources

5

10% 10%

20%

BU
I

20%

5%
35%
RE
Y
N EW
A B L E E NE R G

SHIFTING TO CLEAN ENERGY
Move from fossil fuels to
clean and renewable energy

2 A COMPREHENSIVE ENERGY PLAN

50%

N
IO
AT

GS
IN
LD

Climate change poses a growing set of risks and challenges.
In the global effort to combat climate change, cities have
a critical role to play. This means protecting against climate
impacts, decreasing the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions
that cause climate change, reducing overall energy
consumption, and increasing the use of renewable energy.

TARGETED ACTION AREAS

TRAN
SPO
RT

1 CONFRONTING CLIMATE CHANGE

INCREASING EQUITY
AND CAPACITY
Equip people and
organizations with the
tools, knowledge, support,
and partnership they need
FUNDING THE
TRANSFORMATION
Increase funding and
financing to eliminate barriers

PROJECTED RESULTS
Clean Energy DC aims to avoid projected carbon emissions
in order to exceed the District’s GHG reduction target.

ESTIMATED GHG SAVINGS
12

2006 Baseline GHG Emissions

10

GHG Emissions (million tCO2e)

Achieving these targets means transforming buildings,
energy supply and distribution, and transportation.

3 PATHWAYS TO CLEAN ENERGY
The District will use three broad strategies
to achieve deep GHG reductions:

8

6

2032 GHG Emissions Without Action

56%

Reduction in
GHG emissions
by 2032

4

GHG emmissions after policies

2

EFFICIENT
BUILDING DESIGN
& OPERATIONS

MODERNIZED &
RENEWABLE ENERGY
SUPPLY

2032 Targeted GHG Emissions

ELECTRIFICATION
& FUEL SWITCHING

0
2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032

Buildings

i

Energy Supply

Transportation

“Taking the actions in Clean Energy DC make the
District more innovative, sustainable, and resilient.
Together, we can build a cleaner, stronger,
and more equitable future for our city.”
Mayor Muriel Bowser

Learn more and get involved at CleanEnergyDC.org



COMPLETE LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
EQUITY
EQ.1

Build capacity to plan for equity in all energy plans and programs

55

NEW CONSTRUCTION
Update Building and Energy Codes
NC.1

Establish a path to the phased adoption of net-zero codes between 2021 and 2026

65

Provide Incentives
NC.2

Provide a net-zero energy incentive package

69

Leadership and Catalyzing Change
NC.3

Issue a net-zero energy innovation request to the federal government
and regional governments

71

EXISTING BUILDINGS
Energy Efficiency Incentives and Management
EB.1

Increase access to building energy performance data for energy
efficiency programs

81

EB.2

Increase DCSEU flexibility

84

EB.3

Provide the incentives necessary to operate a District-wide deep energy
retrofit program

88

EB.4

Coordinate and centrally track District efficiency and finance programs

90

Policy and Program Recommendations
EB.5

Implement a Building Energy Performance Standard

91

EB.6

Drive energy efficiency at tenant build-out

95

EB.7

Encourage the adoption of green leases through education and training

96

EB.8

Develop a virtual energy audit program

97

Action on District Government Buildings
EB.9

Lead by example in District Government operations

98

EB.10

Develop and implement a Strategic Energy Management Plan for District
Government buildings

100

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xvii



CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
Increasing and Improving Access to Funding and Financing
CCB.1 Establish a Green Bank and increase other funding for energy efficiency and
renewable energy projects in new and existing buildings

103

CCB.2 Enhance the District’s Property Assessed Clean Energy financing program

108

Policy and Program Recommendations
CCB.3

Ensure code compliance in all buildings through increased investment in robust
code enforcement

110

CCB.4

Incentivize and require submetering

111

CCB.5

Develop a centralized online platform for residential energy efficiency programs

113

Education and Training
CCB.6

Maintain an ongoing outreach program to foster and expand awareness,
education, and opportunities for collaborating around high-performance buildings

CCB.7

Partner to support training and certification of building contractors and managers 116

CCB.8

Integrate energy performance information into residential transactions

115

118

Leadership and Catalyzing Change
CCB.9

Create or Leverage Existing Mid-Atlantic government leadership groups to
accelerate market transition

119

CCB.10 Build examples of breakthrough design in government and/or
publicly-financed buildings

120

CCB.11 Recognize leadership with a catalog of best performing buildings and a cohort
of local building energy leaders

122

CCB.12 Implement a high-performance energy media, outreach,
and communications strategy

124

CCB.13 Create a coordinated green jobs and workforce development platform

125

CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY
Renewable Electricity Supply from outside the District
CRE.1

Design and manage the RPS to drive renewable energy generation
and GHG reductions

137

CRE.2

Provide the Standard Offer Service through aggregated power
purchase agreements

141

CRE.3

Enact legislation that sets a maximum GHG intensity for electricity supplied to
the District

145

Renewable Electricity Supply within the District
CRE.4

Develop a centralized solar information and commerce platform

xviii

CLEAN ENERGY DC

147



CRE.5

Continue to refine and implement the targeted solar proliferation strategy that
has been launched under the Solar for All program

CRE.6

Adopt solar-ready and renewable energy generation building code requirements 153

149

Thermal Energy Supply and DER Integration within the District
CRE.7

Undertake a built environment thermal decarbonization study

156

CRE.8

Develop a neighborhood-scale energy strategy

158

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
Planning and Coordination
ESM.1

Define a vision of the future grid and characterize the stages of grid modernization 168

ESM.2

Adopt a framework for valuing distributed energy resource costs and benefits

170

ESM.3

Support the collaborative development of an integrated distribution plan

172

ESM.4

Intervene in Public Service Commission proceedings related to grid modernization 174

Analysis of the Electricity System Needs and Capabilities
ESM.5

Outline a path to overcome legislative and regulatory barriers to grid modernization

175

ESM.6

Conduct a hosting capacity study of the District’s distribution grid

176

ESM.7

Develop a location-based profile of energy use and GHG emissions

177

Immediate “No-Regrets” Actions
ESM.8

Generate, evaluate, and prioritize a list of actions that the can be
taken immediately

178

ESM.9

Leverage existing advanced metering infrastructure data

180

ESM.10 Identify near-term projects that should be coordinated with grid
modernization activities

181

Proof of Concept Projects
ESM.11 Pursue pilot projects related to key modernization capabilities and technologies

182

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION
Electric Vehicle Readiness­
EV.1

Adopt an EV-ready building code

196

EV.2

Adopt an EV-ready parking lot requirement

198

Electric Vehicle Adoption
EV.3

Implement an EV bulk buy program

200

EV.4

Establish an EV Showcase and Purchase Center

201

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xix



EV.5

Provide an electric vehicle purchase incentive

203

EV.6

Pursue an EV-only car sharing fleet

204

Shifting to Zero Emission Transit Vehicles
EV.7

Set target for reducing transit bus emissions 65% per vehicle mile by 2032

206

EV.8

Pursue funding options to subsidize electric transit buses, and electric
charging infrastructure

208

Anticipating electric autonomous ride-hailing vehicle future
EV.9

Prepare for reduced parking demand near activity centers

209

EV.10

Provide financial incentives encouraging shared autonomous vehicle travel

210

EV.11

Adjust approaches to managing curb space

211

xx

CLEAN ENERGY DC



EQUITY
EQ.1 Build capacity to plan for
equity in all energy actions and
programs

NEW CONSTRUCTION
NC.1 Establish a path to the
phased adoption of net-zero
codes between 2021 and 2026
NC.2 Provide a net-zero energy
incentive package
NC.3 Issue a net-zero energy
innovation request to the
Federal Government and
regional governments

EXISTING BUILDINGS
EB.1 Increase access to building
energy performance data for
energy efficiency programs
EB.2 Increase DCSEU flexibility
EB.3 Provide the incentives
necessary to operate a Districtwide deep energy retrofit program
EB.4 Coordinate and centrally
track District efficiency and
finance programs
EB.5 Implement a Building Energy
Performance Standard
EB.6 Drive energy efficiency at
tenant build-out

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xxi

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



EXISTING BUILDINGS
EB.7 Encourage the adoption of
green leases through education
and training
EB.8 Develop a virtual
energy program
EB.9 Lead by example in District
Government operations
EB.10 Develop and implement a
Strategic Energy Management
Plan for District Government
buildings

CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.1 Establish a Green Bank and
increase other funding for energy
efficiency and renewable energy
projects in new and
existing buildings
CCB.2 Enhance the District’s
Property Assessed Clean Energy
financing program
CCB.3 Ensure code compliance
in all buildings through increased
investment in robust code
enforcement
CCB.4 Incentivize and require
submetering
CCB.5 Develop a centralized
online platform for residential
energy efficiency programs

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

xxii

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.6 Maintain an ongoing
outreach program to foster
and expand awareness,
education, and opportunities
for collaborating around highperformance buildings
CCB.7 Partner to support training
and certification of building
contractors and managers
CCB.8 Integrate energy
performance information into
residential transactions
CCB.9 Create or Leverage
Existing Mid-Atlantic government
leadership groups to accelerate
market transition
CCB.10 Build examples of
breakthrough design in
government and/or publiclyfinanced buildings
CCB.11 Recognize leadership
with a catalog of best performing
buildings and a cohort of local
building energy leaders
CCB.12 Implement a highperformance energy
media, outreach, and
communications strategy
CCB.13 Create a coordinated
green jobs and workforce
development platform

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xxiii

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY
CRE.1 Design and manage the
RPS to drive renewable energy
generation and GHG reductions
CRE.2 Provide the Standard Offer
Service through aggregated
power purchase agreements
CRE.3 Enact legislation that sets
a maximum GHG intensity for
electricity supplied to the District
CRE.4 Develop a centralized
solar information and commerce
platform
CRE.5 Continue to refine and
implement the targeted solar
proliferation strategy
CRE.6 Adopt solar-ready and
renewable energy generation
building code requirements
CRE.7 Undertake a built
environment thermal
decarbonization study
CRE.8 Develop a neighborhoodscale energy strategy

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
ESM.1 Define a vision of the future
grid and characterize the stages of
grid modernization
ESM.2 Adopt a framework for
valuing distributed energy resource
costs and benefits
Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

xxiv

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
ESM.3 Support the collaborative
development of an integrated
distribution plan
ESM.4 Intervene in Public Service
Commission proceedings related
to grid modernization
ESM.5 Outline a path to overcome
legislative and regulatory barriers
to grid modernization
ESM.6 Conduct a hosting
capacity study of the District’s
distribution grid
ESM.7 Develop a location-based
profile of energy use and
GHG emissions
ESM.8 Generate, evaluate, and
prioritize a list of actions that the
can be taken immediately
ESM.9 Leverage existing advanced
metering infrastructure data
ESM.10 Identify near-term projects
that should be coordinated with
grid modernization activities
ESM.11 Pursue pilot projects related
to key modernization capabilities
and technologies

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xxv

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION
EV.1 Adopt an EV-ready
building code
EV.2 Adopt an EV-ready parking
lot requirement
EV.3 Implement an EV bulk
buy program
EV.4 Establish an EV Showcase
and Purchase Center
EV.5 Provide a vehicle
purchase incentive
EV.6 Pursue an EV-only car
sharing fleet
EV.7 Set target for reducing transit
bus emissions 65% per vehicle mile
by 2032
EV.8 Pursue funding options to
subsidize electric transit buses, and
electric charging infrastructure
EV.9 Prepare for reduced parking
demand near activity centers
EV.10 Provide financial incentives
encouraging shared autonomous
vehicle travel
EV.11 Adjust approaches to
managing curb space

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

xxvi

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



TABLE OF CONTENTS
1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

V

INTRODUCTION

1

1.1	Facilitating a Market and Energy System Transformation
1.2
Focus on GHG Reductions
1.3
How Best to Move Forward
1.4	Informed by Public and Stakeholder Engagement
1.5
A Set of Recommendations
1.6	Implementation Principles and Guidelines
1.7
Financing the Transformation
1.8
A Living Document

4
8
9
11
13
14
15
16

2	TRANSFORMING TO A LOW-CARBON DISTRICT

17

2.1

T he District Energy Use and Emissions Profile

19

2.1.1
2.1.2

Historical Energy Use
Historical GHG Emissions

19
22

2.2	Modeled Impacts of Recommended Actions

26

2.2.1
Model Data and Assumptions
2.2.2	Achieving the District’s 2032 Targets

26
30

3

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

39

3.1
3.2
3.3

Why Equity?
Equity in the Context of the District
Equity and Climate Action

42
43
46

3.1.1
3.1.2

Centering equity in planning processes
Job creation

46
46

3.4

Addressing Equity in Clean Energy DC

47

3.4.1
3.4.2

Incorporating equity into all actions
Recommended Actions

47
55

4

BUILDINGS

59

4.1

New Construction

61

4.1.1
4.1.2
4.1.3

Policy and Targets Overview
Recommended Actions
New Construction Roadmap

61
65
72

4.2

Existing Buildings

73

4.2.1
Policy and Targets Overview
4.2.2	Building Energy Benchmarking in the District
4.2.3
Recommended Actions			

73
75
81

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xxvii



4.2.4

Existing Buildings Roadmap

102

4.3

Cross-Cutting Building Actions

103

4.3.1

Recommended Actions

4.3.2	Cross-Cutting Building Actions Roadmap

103
127

5

ENERGY SUPPLY SYSTEM

129

5.1

Clean and Renewable Energy Supply

131

5.1.1
5.1.2
5.1.3

Existing Policies and Actions
Recommended Actions
Clean and Renewable Energy Supply Roadmap

131
137
162

5.2

Energy System Modernization

163

5.2.1
5.2.2
5.2.3

An Overview of Energy System Modernization
Recommended Actions
Energy System Modernization Roadmap

163
168
184

6

TRANSPORTATION

187

6.1

Electric Vehicle Readiness and Adoption

191

6.1.1
6.1.2
6.1.3

Reducing GHG Emissions from Transportation
Recommended Actions
Electric Vehicle Readiness and Adoption Roadmap

191
196
213

APPENDIX A1

MODEL OVERVIEW AND ASSUMPTIONS

215

A1.1
A1.2

Model Purpose and Overview
Model Assumptions and Data Sources

217
218

A1.2.1
A1.2.2
A1.2.3
A1.2.4

Buildings
Energy Supply
Transportation
Other Emissions Sources			

218
226
229
236

APPENDIX A2

PUBLIC REVIEW AND ENGAGEMENT REPORT

237

A2.1

Plan Development History

237

A2.1.1
A2.1.2
A2.1.3
A2.1.4
A2.1.5

Development of the Initial Plan
Peer Review
Public Engagement
Addressing Equity
Major Updates to the Clean Energy DC Plan

237
238
239
240
241

A2.2

Participating Groups

241

		

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2

xxviii

Components of a Market Transformation
Energy System Transformation Overview

CLEAN ENERGY DC

5
6



Figure 3	The District Government’s sphere of influence over key
energy system components
Figure 4
Benefits of prioritizing the reduction of GHG emissions
Figure 5
Site Energy Use by fuel type, 2006 to 2015
Figure 6
Proportion of site energy use by fuel type, 2015
Figure 7	Estimated proportion of site energy use by sector,
2015
Figure 8
GHG emissions by source, 2006 to 2015
Figure 9
Proportion of GHG emissions by source, 2015
Figure 10	Modeled proportion of GHG emissions by sector, 2015
Figure 11	Regional electricity mix (RFC-East), years available
between 2004 and 2016 at the time of publication
Figure 12	Wedge diagram showing projected GHG reduction
path from Clean Energy DC actions
Figure 13	Waterfall diagram showing each action area’s
contribution to projected reductions in 2032
Figure 14	Projected site energy use reductions from
recommended actions
Figure 15	Projected utilization of renewable energy as a result of
recommended actions
Figure 16
Income inequality in the District (Esri 2017)
Figure 17
Racial Segregation in the District (Kenton Ngo 2015)
Figure 18	Sampling of retrofit components against general energy
use reduction potential
Figure 19	Annual Energy Consumption Forecast,
WMATA and DDOT Buses
Figure 20 	Annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions Forecast, WMATA
and DDOT Buses

7
8
20
20
21
22
23
23
25
31
32
35
37
44
45
77
207
207

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1	Clean Energy DC Relative contributions of Clean Energy
DC’s emissions-reducing actions
Table 2	Relative contributions of Clean Energy DC’s energyreducing actions
Table 3	Projected renewable energy consumption
and supply requirements
Table 4	Amendments to Actions to Address Equity
Table 5	Spending and savings on energy efficiency in electricity
in selected top states, Maryland, and the District, 2016
Table 6	Spending and savings on energy efficiency in natural
gas in selected top states and the District, 2016
Table 7	Shared Ownership of Autonomous Vehicles Can Lead to
the Most Benefits

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

33
36
38
48
106
106
193

xxix



LIST OF ACRONYMS CRONYMS
ACEEE
ACPs
AMI
ASHI
ASHP
BAU
BEPS
BTU
CAEA
CAFE
CCB
CCCB
CHP
CO2
CO2e
CPP
CRE
CUSP
DCHA
DCHFA
DCPACE
DCPS
DCRA
DCSEU
DCSUN
DDOT
DER
DGS
DHCD
DMPED
DOE
DOEE
DRAM
DSM
EB
EM&V
EPA
ESM
EUI
EV
FAR
FHA
GAR
GBAC
GCC
GHG
GIS

xxx

American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
Alternative Compliance Payments
Advanced Metering Infrastructure
American Society of Home Inspectors
Air Source Heat Pump
Business-as-Usual
Building Energy Performance Standard
British Thermal Units
Clean and Affordable Energy Act
Corporate Average Fuel Economy
Cross-Cutting Building Actions
Construction Codes Coordinating Board
Combined Heat and Power
Carbon Dioxide
Carbon Dioxide Equivalent.
Clean Power Plan
Clean and Renewable Energy
Centre for Urban Science and Progress
District of Columbia Housing Authority
District of Columbia Housing Finance Agency
District of Columbia Property Assessed Clean Energy
District of Columbia Public Schools
Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility
District of Columbia Solar United Neighborhoods
District Department of Transportation
Distributed Energy Resources
Department of General Services
Department of Housing and Community Development
Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development
United States Department of Energy
Department of Energy Environment
Demand Response Auction Mechanism
Demand-Side Management
Existing Buildings
Evaluation, Measurement, and Verification
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Electricity System Modernization
Energy Use Intensity
Electric Vehicle
Floor Area Ratio
Federal Housing Administration
Green Area Ratio
Green Building Advisory Council
Green Construction Code
Greenhouse Gas
Geographic Information System

CLEAN ENERGY DC



LIST OF ACRONYMS CRONYMS
HUD
HVAC
ICLEI
IDP
ILFI
IMT
IECC
IT
kBtu
KW
kWh
LBC
LEED
LMI
MEDSIS
MDV-SEIA
MLS
MMBtu
MMTherms
MRIS
MW
MWCOG
NBI
NC
NEEP
NESEA
NZEB
PACE
PJM
PSC
PV
RCC
RECs
REDF
RFA
RFCe
RFP
RPS
SEMP
SME
SOS
SRECs
tCO2e
UDC
VMT

United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives
Integrated Distribution Planning
International Living Future Institute
Institute For Market Transformation
International Energy Conservation Code
Information Technology
Thousand British Thermal Units
Kilowatt
Kilowatt-Hour
Living Building Challenge
Leadership In Energy and Environmental Design
Low-to-Middle Income
Modernizing the Energy Delivery System for Increased Sustainability
Maryland, DC, and Virginia Solar Energy Industries Association
Multiple Listing Service
Million British Thermal Units
Million Therms
Metropolitan Regional Information System
Megawatt
Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments
New Buildings Institute
New Construction
Northeast Energy Efficiency Partnerships
Northeast Sustainable Energy Association
Net-Zero Energy Building
Property Assessed Clean Energy
Pennsylvania New Jersey Maryland Interconnection Region
Public Service Commission
Solar Photovoltaic Power
Regional Code Collaboration
Renewable Energy Credits
Renewable Energy Development Fund
Request For Application
Reliability First Corporation-East
Request For Proposal
Renewable Portfolio Standard
Strategic Energy Management Plan
Subject Matter Expert
Standard offer Service
Solar Renewable Energy Credits
Metric Tons of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent
University of District Columbia
Vehicle Miles Traveled

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xxxi



xxxii

CLEAN ENERGY DC



INTRODUCTION

i

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

INTRODUCTION

1



2

CLEAN ENERGY DC



1 INTRODUCTION
The District of Columbia’s Department of Energy and Environment is
pleased to provide this climate and energy plan, Clean Energy DC
(the Plan). The Plan articulates a bold and innovative vision to meet the
climate challenge, and to create a sustainable, reliable, and affordable
energy system that can meet the District’s needs far into the future.
The Plan is DOEE’s proposal to the District of Columbia to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions 50% below 2006 levels by 2032, while reducing energy use and increasing the
proportion of the District’s energy that is supplied from renewable sources, as directed by the
District’s sustainability plan, Sustainable DC (see Box 1)6. Sustainable DC’s direction to reduce
energy use, increase renewable energy, and reduce GHG emissions proposes an important
framework for decarbonizing the District’s energy system, a framework that focuses on
resiliency, efficiency, innovation, and local action.
In December 2017, Mayor Bowser joined other leading global cities in pledging to make the
District carbon neutral and climate resilient by 2050 7,8. This commitment demonstrates the
District’s recognition of the growing threat of climate change, the scale of action needed
to avoid significant impacts, and the advances in technology, markets, and policy tools that
are enabling cities to accelerate action. DOEE developed Clean Energy DC to focus on the
District’s 2032 targets, but the Plan also puts the District on the path to carbon neutrality. The
District has begun planning the follow-up work required in 2018 to better understand and
develop the path from 2032 to 2050.9

A reduction in GHG
emissions by...

A reduction in District-wide
energy use by...

An increase in the use of renewable
energy to make up 50% of the
District’s energy supply by 2032.

50% 100%

50%

50%

by 2032

by 2032

by 2050

Relative to 2006 levels

Relative to 2012 levels

by 2032

↑↑ Box 1: The District’s climate and energy targets

6
7
8
9

The District of Columbia, 2013, Sustainable DC Plan, http://www.sustainabledc.org/about/sustainable-dc-plan/.
C40 is a network of the world’s cities committed to addressing climate change.
Mayor Bowser Commits to Make Washington, DC Carbon-Neutral and Climate Resilient by 2050, Dec 4, 2017,
https://doee.dc.gov/release/mayor-bowser-commits-make-washington-dc-carbon-neutral-and-climate-resilient-2050
See Dec 4 2017 announcement.

INTRODUCTION

3



While Climate Ready DC shows how the District can adapt to such changes, Clean Energy DC
details the bold and innovative energy strategies that the District can adopt to sharply reduce
its GHG emissions. To use a sporting analogy, if Climate Ready DC is the District’s defense,
Clean Energy DC is its offense. These two documents represent a holistic effort by the District
Government as a leader in energy innovation and in fighting climate change, to ensure that
the District maintains itself as a desirable place to live and work.

1.1	FACILITATING A MARKET AND
ENERGY SYSTEM TRANSFORMATION
Cities around the world have started to implement a range of plans and strategies to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and combat the risks and threats associated with climate
change. The District is a leader in this effort, and has already begun to reduce GHG emissions
and prepare for climate impacts through its Sustainable DC, moveDC, and Climate Ready
DC Plans.10
Energy will prove central to the District’s efforts to reach its GHG reduction goals. Energy,
through extraction and consumption of fossil fuels, is the leading global source of GHG
emissions. In the District, fossil fuels provide energy for electricity, for building heating and
hot water through natural gas or fuel oils, and for motor vehicles. Because GHG emissions
associated with fossil fuel combustion can continue to warm the climate for several
hundred years after their release,11 phasing out fossil fuels from the District’s energy supply
(or “decarbonizing” the supply) will be essential to achieving its climate change goals. To
successfully mitigate the impacts of climate change, the District must assist in broadly changing
the way energy is produced, delivered, and used across the District.
This Plan provides a five-year roadmap that would put the District on a trajectory towards
decarbonizing its energy system, and presents a longer-term path towards the District’s
2032 targets. The Plan does not provide details on program design or specific policy
language for each action, although in several instances it offers design considerations and
recommendations. In developing this plan, the team embraced a market transformation
approach (Figure 1).
To transform the market, the District will work to:
1. Align climate- and energy-related targets.
2. Develop data and information systems to track the District’s progress toward its targets.
3. Establish strong regulations for energy production and consumption.
4. Incentivize behavior change.
5.	Increase market awareness, consumer demand, and skills development through effective
engagement and education programs.
Beyond these actions, the District needs structured and strategic approach to drive long-term
decarbonization efforts. The approach must support both the 2032 climate and energy targets
and the long-term carbon neutrality commitment.

10

11

4

 istrict of Columbia, 2012, Sustainable DC, http://sustainable.dc.gov//;
D
District of Columbia, 2014, moveDC, http://www.wemovedc.org//;
District of Columbia, 2016, Climate Ready DC, https://doee.dc.gov/climateready
Hansen J, Kharecha P, Sato M, Masson-Delmotte V, Ackerman F, Beerling DJ, et al. (2013) Assessing ‘Dangerous Climate Change’: Required Reduction of
Carbon Emissions to Protect Young People, Future Generations and Nature. PLoS ONE 8(12): e81648. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081648

CLEAN ENERGY DC



For this, the District must focus on energy system transformation.

Define Targets

Data & Reporting

Regulations

Incentives

Education & Training

↑↑ Figure 1: Components of a Market Transformation
The term energy system here refers to all dimensions of a city’s energy use, including all the
electricity, natural gas, gasoline, and other fuels consumed by buildings, in transportation,
and through energy transmission and distribution itself.12 If a city is to transform its energy
system, it must shift energy generation, distribution, and consumption away from fossil fuels
and inefficient, fossil fuel-dependent systems and technologies, and instead embrace highly
efficient use of renewable and zero-emission energy. Figure 2 outlines the energy-system
changes needed to eliminate GHG emissions from cities, including the District.
By focusing on a complete energy system transformation, Clean Energy DC aims to put
the District on the path toward long-term decarbonization, or deep decarbonization. This
objective is in line with the work of the Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project (DPPP), a
global collaboration of energy researchers sponsored in part by the United Nations.13 Deep
decarbonization pathways incorporate three imperatives: Increase energy efficiency and
conservation, reduce carbon content in electricity and fuels, and switch energy end-uses
to low-carbon (and then zero-carbon) energy carriers.14 (Box 2) This process is already well
underway in the District; renewable sources provide an increasing share of the energy used in
the district, and GHG intensity is decreasing.

1

2
Highly efficient end use
of energy in buildings,
transportation, and industry.
The energy intensity of GDP must
decline 70% by 2050, with final
energy use reduced by 20% despite
a forecast population increase of
40% and a 166% increase in GDP.

3
Nearly complete
decarbonization of
electricity, and reduced
carbon in other fuels.
The carbon intensity of
electricity must be reduced
by at least 97% or more by
2050.

Electrification where possible and
switching to lower-carbon fuels
otherwise.
The share of end-use energy coming
directly from electricity or fuels produced
from electricity must increase from less
than 20% in 2010 to over 50% in 2050,
displacing fossil fuel combustion.

↑↑ Box 2: Box 2 Three pillars of decarbonization with long-term targets for the United States.15
12
13
14
15

Note that the term “energy use” is used throughout the Plan to refer to energy consumption.
http://deepdecarbonization.org/about/
Williams, J.H., B. Haley, R. Jones (2015). Policy implications of deep decarbonization in the United States. A report of the Deep Decarbonization Pathways
Project of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network and the Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations. Nov 17, 2015.
Williams, J.H., B. Haley, R. Jones (2015). Policy implications of deep decarbonization in the United States. A report of the Deep Decarbonization Pathways
Project of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network and the Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations. Nov 17, 2015.

INTRODUCTION

5



The three pillars are consistent with the three targets of energy use reduction, GHG emissions
reduction, and renewable energy increases, as directed by Sustainable DC. The three targets of
Sustainable DC, in turn, complement each other and lay out an approach to decarbonization
that values resiliency, efficiency, innovation, and local action. Energy efficiency will ensure
that the District’s decarbonization efforts will be “right-sized,” and it will empower consumers to
focus on their consumption as well as fuel-switching for supply. In terms of renewable energy,
by focusing on both the bulk renewable energy and local renewable energy along with energy
storage and grid modernization, the District is signaling that it will seek to enhance energy
resiliency. The combined effects of these measures will provide a path to the District’s goal of
carbon neutrality.
Clean Energy DC seeks to achieve the District’s existing goals and targets, while enabling and
encouraging broader long-term system change. These enabling actions are critical, because
energy system change takes time. Buildings can last over a hundred years, while the systems that
drive them measure their lives in decades. The average passenger vehicle is on the road for 10
to 15 years. Even behavior change—another key component to decarbonization—takes many
years. As such, the Plan not only provides a roadmap of the strategies and actions to achieve
the 2032 targets, but lays the foundation for the deeper, longer-term change that carbon
neutrality requires.
BEFORE

AFTER

• Mostly fossil fuels

• 100% zero GHG and/

or renewable sources

• Mostly large central generators

• A mix of central and local

generators, energy storage, and
other distributed energy sources
Energy Generation

• One way energy delivery

• Multidirectional energy delivery

• A producer to consumer model

• Multidirectional “prosumer” model

• Monthly metering to

• Real-time metering to drive

energy management

determine costs
Energy Distribution
• Fossil fuel-based systems

• Zero GHG-ready systems

and technologies
• Design for conventional

efficiency

and technologies
• Design for much higher efficiency
• The everyday purchase and

use of zero emission assets

• The everyday purchase and use

of fossil fuel-dependent assets

Energy Use

• Inefficient energy use behaviors

• Highly efficient energy

↑↑ Figure 2: Energy System Transformation Overview.16
16

6

Originally developed for the Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance’s Energy System Transformation Playbook.

CLEAN ENERGY DC

use behaviors



A winning strategy must play to the District’s strengths. That’s why the Plan team mapped Clean
Energy DC’s proposed actions against the District’s sphere of influence. This helped clarify where
the District is best suited to affect change, and where it will need to partner. For example, the
District is well positioned to improve the energy efficiency of new buildings because it controls
its own building code. However, the District Government will have more difficulty accelerating
electric-vehicle adoption, because it is more difficult to impact consumer choices, and no auto
dealerships are located in the District.
Recognizing the limitations of the District Government’s sphere of influence does not mean
forgoing or reducing action on important items like electric vehicles. Rather, it helped shape the
selection and design of the actions to support successful implementation.

EB

Existing Buildings

NC

New Construction

GB

Government Buildings

GE

Grid Electricity Sources

LE

Local Electricity Supply

LT

Local Thermal Energy

GM

Grid Modernization

EV

Electric Vehicle Adoption

TV

Transit Vehicle Efficiency & Fuel Type

PV

Private Vehicle Efficiency

WC

Walking, Cycling & Transit Use

LC

Lifestyle Choices & Purchase Decisions

re of Interest
Sphe
e of Influen
ce
her
p
S

LC

LT

GE

TV

Sphere of
Control
GB

NC

PV
WC
EB

LE

GM

EV

SPHERE OF INTEREST: Where the District Government has neither control nor
direct influence over components of the urban system, but is interested in,
and possibly affected by, the outcome of decisions made by others.
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE: Where the District Government has no decision-making
authority, but has access to resources and forums that can be used to influence
decision-making by market actors or other levels of Government.
SPHERE OF CONTROL: Where the District Government has near-complete or full decisionmaking authority over components of the urban system or issue in question.

↑↑ Figure 3: The District Government’s sphere of influence over key energy system components.

INTRODUCTION

7



1.2

FOCUS ON GHG REDUCTIONS

While the actions outlined here will allow the District to achieve its GHG reduction target, they are
not sufficient to achieve Sustainable DC’s goals to reduce energy use 50% below 2012 levels and
increase renewable energy 50% by 2032. During the technical analysis undertaken for this Plan,
the consultant team concluded that achieving all three goals in unison will prove exceptionally
difficult, if not impossible. As a result, DOEE prioritized the GHG reduction target, one of the key
Sustainable DC energy and climate goals, and chose actions that can significantly reduce GHGs,
while reducing energy use and increasing renewable energy.
Prioritizing the GHG reduction target over the other energy goals also makes sense for
optimization and synergy: Reducing GHG through innovative measures necessarily will result in
both reducing energy use and increasing renewable energy. However, reducing energy use may
not result in an increase of renewable energy, and increasing renewable energy may not result in
reduction of energy use, as visualized in Figure 4.
By prioritizing GHG reductions, the Plan outlines the investments and resources necessary to
decarbonize the energy system and mitigate climate change. The energy use and renewable
energy targets remain priorities for the District, and the Plan includes actions focused both
on energy use reductions and renewable energy increases. The Plan projects that the
recommended actions will reduce energy use 20% below 2012 levels, and increase renewable
energy utilization (percent of total energy consumption) to approximately 30% by 2032. In
subsequent iterations of Clean Energy DC, the analytical framework of this Plan will be used to
develop the roadmaps for achieving those goals.
The Plan’s initial five-year outlook is a brief epoch in the span of an energy system that is rapidly
changing. The District Government must continue to engage with key stakeholders to ensure
the Plan remains relevant, that it embraces new technologies as they come available, and
that it responds to changing fuel prices and market conditions. DOEE team will actively monitor
the District’s energy system, to ensure policies and programs are taking advantage of new
opportunities and overcoming new challenges.

GHG priority:
Full optimization

Increase
Renewables

Reduce
GHGs

Reduce
Energy Use

Increase
Renewables

Energy Use priority:
Less focus on renewables

Reduce
Energy Use
Reduce
GHGs

↑↑ Figure 4: Benefits of prioritizing the reduction of GHG emissions.

8

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Increase
Renewables

Renewable
Energy priority:
Less focus on energy
efficiency
Reduce
Energy Use

Reduce
GHGs



1.3

HOW BEST TO MOVE FORWARD

This is the first time that a GHG emission reduction target has been explicitly incorporated
into a District energy plan. Although many in the District are eager to realize the ambitions of
Sustainable DC’s energy and climate goals, until now there has been no concrete framework to
begin that realization. The Plan offers the analytical framework and specific measures needed to
begin this work.
The Plan’s recommended actions are ambitious, and their collective impact will be significant.
DOEE staff and consultants selected actions by scoring them against the following criteria:
• Scale of action the District needs to take to achieve the District’s GHG reduction target
(as informed by modeling).
• Efficacy of policies and programs in other jurisdictions.
• Relationship of the actions within the energy-system transformation framework
(discussed above).
• Impact upon the fundamental drivers of the District’s energy and emissions performance (e.g.,
building codes, retrofits, electricity supply sources).
If pursued as recommended, this Plan’s actions will ensure the District meets its GHG target. While
the District can get going on some of the actions right away, others are more challenging and
complex, and will require additional analysis—including detailed technical feasibility work.
As there is no one-size-fits-all approach to technical feasibility work, DOEE intends to undertake it
while designing Clean Energy DC’s implementation.
The District Government understands that the ultimate success of this Plan hinges in large part
on the extent to which it addresses the concerns and priorities of those it will most impact. That is
why DOEE is engaging in robust and inclusive stakeholder consultation. The District Government
is committed to equitable development, and will engage with stakeholders in the community to
collaboratively shape the Plan’s next steps.
This Plan does not identify every action that could potentially reduce GHG emissions; DOEE
expects additional strategies will emerge through the collaborative engagement process.
The Plan identifies the high-level energy-consuming sectors—buildings, energy supply, and
transportation—and recommends actions within those sectors that could lead to significant
reductions. The list of actions can be used to convey to help stakeholders and residents to better
understand the scale of ambition needed to achieve the GHG target. These actions will serve
as a springboard, to allow stakeholders to plan how best to implement each action. There are
only so many things the District can do to secure really significant GHG reductions— and many of
them will face technical, political, and economic challenges during implementation. To achieve
its targets, the District must fully commit to the set of actions presented in this Plan.
While the Clean Energy DC team designed the recommendations so that they can be
implemented over the next five years, they will influence District Government policy, planning,
program design, and decision-making processes long into the future. The team developed each
action using a comprehensive process of consultation and engagement that included the
following activities:
• An initial engagement session with District Government representatives and stakeholders.
• A review of existing District climate and energy plans, actions, and priorities.

INTRODUCTION

9



• A review and analysis of District-wide energy and emissions data.
• A collaborative two-day workshop with District Government representatives.
• Ongoing engagement and discussions with District Government representatives
and consultants.
• A review of best practices in other leading jurisdictions.
• An engagement period with District stakeholders.
• Revisions based on comments from stakeholders.
To help evaluate the potential impact of different actions and determine an achievable path to
achieving the District’s GHG reduction target, the consultant team developed a citywide energy
and emissions model to simulate different policy scenarios.
The model accounts for all energy and GHG emissions in the District and focuses on representing
energy supply, buildings, and transportation (for additional detail on the model, see Chapter 2
and Appendix A1). The consultant team used the model to project future energy and emissions
and to quantify the potential impact of various policies and programs.
The consultant team established a baseline of current energy use and GHG emissions to
determine principal sources of District emissions by sector and by fuel type, then projected
out in a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario through 2032 (further described in Appendix A1). The
consultant team then simulated a range of policy scenarios and reviewed the results with District
Government representatives.
The consultant team then used these simulations to determine the scale of action needed in
the various sectors (e.g., existing buildings, transportation) to reach the District’s GHG reduction
target. As discussed in Appendix A1, the team did not attempt to quantify all recommended
actions because several do not directly reduce energy or emissions, but instead enable the
success of other actions. Rather, once the consultant team identified the scale of action needed
to achieve the District’s GHG target, the team developed a portfolio of energy, buildings, and
transportation actions to deliver on them. The consultant team then collaborated with DOEE staff
and other District Government agencies to review the modeling results and proposed actions,
and ensure that the proposed set of actions are not only strong enough to achieve the District’s
target, but can also be plausibly implemented.
The model is not intended to be a predictive tool and does not account for costs or externalities
other than GHG emissions. The Plan provides this roadmap through a package of policy and
program recommendations that have been reviewed by District Government representatives
and critiqued by stakeholders.

10

CLEAN ENERGY DC



1.4

INFORMED BY PUBLIC AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

The District Government is committed to a vision of a sustainable city that benefits all—a
commitment that extends to climate action. To achieve the GHG goals, the District Government
will need to listen to and consider the perspectives, opinions, concerns, experiences of all those
who live and work within its boundaries. Given the scale of action this Plan proposes, and its
broad and long-term implications, engaging community members and key local stakeholders
proved crucial. Beyond this, the Clean Energy DC team consulted with local and national equity
experts and advocates, to ensure its recommendations would not have unintended impacts on
communities. The process of public engagement is summarized below, and is discussed in greater
detail in Appendix A2.
The team began stakeholder engagement work with a preliminary visioning session in October
2015, followed by interactive workshops delivered the following March. The initial draft of the
Plan underwent an extensive peer review process in September 2016. Seventy-nine people,
representing 39 different organizations, participated. This resulted in 178 written and oral
comments, which were again incorporated into the draft. It was again edited before its
publishing date of October 2016.
In spring 2017, the Clean Energy DC team kicked off a fuller public engagement process with
residents and stakeholders, to ensure that the Plan represented and supported as broad a range
of voices and communities as possible. The team designed engagement opportunities to gather
feedback on each of the Plan’s key components, and refine its recommendations.
Robust engagement allowed us to verify that the Plan will be relevant and applicable to the
specific concerns and issues for communities in all life phases and at all socioeconomic levels,
cultures, and ethnicities. As a further benefit, the Clean Energy DC team hopes the public
engagement efforts also helped broaden and diversify the members of the District’s community
that see the Plan as something relevant to them.
DOEE hosted events at locations across the District, in all eight wards—from supermarkets to
Metrorail stations to community events. During these events, members of the Clean Energy DC
team distributed hundreds of leaflets with key information about the draft Plan, and conducted
more than 300 surveys to gauge awareness, attitudes, and behaviors on climate and energy. At
the same time, DOEE contracted for a statistically significant survey of over 800 District residents
across all eight wards, which contained several key energy-related questions to help the District
understand the views of citizens on energy efficiency and renewable energy.
In the fall of 2017, the Clean Energy DC team also hosted three highly interactive community
forums to discuss the draft in greater depth. They engaged community members on climate
and energy topics with a goal of gathering input on major concerns, and day to day challenges
relating to climate change and energy use. Discussions ranged from financing options for building
energy efficiency retrofits for low-income residents, to concerns about ensuring transit accessibility
for those who lack a smart phone or credit card. The citywide meetings were designed to
engage a wide array of community members, ranging from well-informed climate activists to
individuals with no prior knowledge of the District’s sustainability efforts. Energy-Palooza, the first
community meeting, was a family-friendly event with hands-on activities for attendees of all
ages, and was held at the Greater Washington Urban League. The second community meeting,
the Clean Energy Power Hour, was held in Navy Yard’s Blue Jacket Brewery, and the third, Clean
Energy Brown Bag, was held at DOEE’s offices; both involved larger presentations and small group
discussions. In total, approximately 100 people participated in these three events.

INTRODUCTION

11



Alongside the public engagement, DOEE hosted specific stakeholder meetings with a wide
range of stakeholder groups. Comments from the public engagement, public meetings, and
stakeholder meetings all went into the revision and finalization of the Plan. All told, DOEE received
hundreds of comments on 114 topically distinct issues. A summary of each comment, with a
response from DOEE detailing how the comment was addressed in the Plan, is included in a
separate supplement, published on DOEE’s website.
To further address how the plan impacted social equity, the Clean Energy DC team coordinated
a series of stakeholder interviews that focused on the intersection of energy, environment, and
social equity. The team invited local and national experts, leaders, and organizations focused on
local and national sustainability, social justice, policy advocacy, and community development
issues to review and critique the draft Plan’s recommended actions. Their recommendations
collaboratively develop specific adjustments to the actions and to finalize the Plan. Chapter 3
provides further details on energy and equity, details how each action was changed to better
address equity (Table 4. Amendments to Actions), and includes a new action that is targeted to
address some of the challenges that came up through engagement.
In the fall of 2017, DOEE also launched the process for developing the second version of the
overarching Sustainable DC plan, Sustainable DC 2.0. Feedback from the Climate, Energy, and
Built Environment Working Group for Sustainable DC was also incorporated in drafting the revision
of Clean Energy DC.

12

CLEAN ENERGY DC



1.5

A SET OF RECOMMENDATIONS

Many of the recommended actions require further costing, feasibility, prioritization, and
implementation work. Some of this work is underway (see section 1.8), and the DOEE team will
conduct the rest in coordination with District stakeholders. The resulting set of recommended
actions, having undergone this process of intensive public and stakeholder review, is broken into
the major components of the District’s energy system:
1.	
Buildings actions to target both new construction and retrofits of existing buildings, plus crosscutting actions (Chapter 3).
2.	
Energy Supply actions to increase the supply of clean and renewable energy, and
modernize the District’s energy system (Chapter 5).
3.

T ransportation actions chiefly to transition passenger and transit vehicles from conventional
petroleum drivetrains to zero-emission electric drivetrains (Chapter 6).

Each corresponding section of the Plan outlines the current status of that particular component
and presents a selection of recommendations that draw on existing District Government policy
and programming. Recommendations are cross-referenced between sections as appropriate
(e.g., where clean and renewable energy actions may depend on energy system modernization
actions). The Plan uses the acronyms below, along with an action number, to designate
recommendations from the different sections:
• EQ – Equity
• NC – New Construction (e.g., NC.1, NC.2).
• EB – Existing Buildings.
• CCB – Cross-Cutting Building Actions.
• CRE – Clean and Renewable Energy.
• ESM – Energy System Modernization.
• EV – Electric Vehicle Readiness and Adoption.
The Clean Energy DC team designed the Plan’s recommended actions to be implemented as
a unified package. Certain actions depend on others—such as the gathering of information
needed to develop and implement a particular strategy. Still other actions provide co-benefits
that unlock multiple achievements, such as the industry capacity building needed to understand
new technologies or approaches. The actions provided in the Plan should, therefore, be adopted
together to equip the District with the full roster of programs, policies, tools, data, information, and
capabilities necessary to achieve the targets. A coordinated and strategic implementation is
essential to success.

INTRODUCTION

13



1.6

IMPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES

A Plan is only as good as the rules that govern its implementation. In the context of a climate and
energy plan, governance must consider:
• Assigning roles and responsibilities, and maintaining accountability;
• Measuring and evaluating impacts at regular intervals, and correcting course as needed;
• Engaging with stakeholders to ensure they remain in the loop.
Specifically, the Clean Energy DC team recommends the following:
RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
The District Government should engage key enabling partners and stakeholders to track
progress on the Plan’s delivery. This group should track implementation, specifically the delivery
and management of each component of the action plan. There will be instances where
management and delivery might be under the oversight of different individuals or departments,
or external parties. In all cases, all parties should understand roles and responsibilities, and each
team member held accountable. DOEE should aggregate all actions to a centralized annual
progress report.
PROGRAM-WIDE REVIEW
To maximize impact and ensure effectiveness of delivery of the Plan, it is recommended that
DOEE staff commit to program-wide reviews at regular intervals throughout plan implementation.
The appropriate interval for review of the plan is every three years. A three-year review cycle
aligns with implementation periods for the various actions, and allows adequate time to
introduce new initiatives, build momentum, and calculate impacts.
For each component of the action plan, the review would assess the following:
• Was the program or policy implemented?
• Was it implemented on time, behind, or ahead of schedule?
• Was the update as predicted? (Where relevant)
• Is the impact of the action being assessed?
• Is the impact on target? Does it align with the energy and emissions model projections?
• Is the cost of implementation within projected budget?
• If the program or policy is below target, consider:
••

Is it adequately resourced?

••

What factors are influencing its low uptake, poor compliance, or low performance?

••

Does it need to be refined, ramped up, or cancelled?

••

Is further research needed?

• Are there external factors that have arisen during the three-year period that present
opportunities for increased impact? (e.g., fluctuating costs of fossil fuel energy; increasing cost
effectiveness of renewable energy)

14

CLEAN ENERGY DC



STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
The team engaged with stakeholders to create the Plan, and it should continue to engage with
them throughout implementation. The District Government should use existing tools and media
to provide regular progress updates as the plan rolls out. Where relevant, it is recommended to
actively solicit stakeholder input as a component of the Plan Review Cycle to understand areas
of opportunity to improve upon actions or particulars of implementation. Stakeholders may
include front line employees, third party delivery agents or partners, or District residents impacted
by a specific action. Special attention should be given to engaging with and supporting
increased capacity among social and racial justice community organizations to ensure proper
consideration of equity issues, as described in Chapter 3.
PRINCIPLES TO GUIDE FUTURE REVISIONS
When the Plan is refined or updated,
the Clean Energy DC team recommends future implementation teams commit to:
• Support long-term economic and social-equity objectives, as defined by DOEE and working
groups of community stakeholders.
• Use market-based, data-driven analysis and decision making
• Identify and test the best available policies, practices, and technologies, and support an
openness to new ideas when circumstances change
• Measure and monitor impact over time, and correct course when needed
• Ensuring comprehensive consultation that engages stakeholders, the general public, and
subject matter experts
• Develop informative and replicable models that will be shared with others

1.7

FINANCING THE TRANSFORMATION

If the District is to reduce and eventually eliminate its reliance on fossil fuels, it will need reliable
and consistent financial structures and funding sources. Specifically, the Plan requires a large,
stable, and accessible pool of funds to drive unprecedented levels of private investment in
renewable energy and energy efficiency. The Clean Energy DC team recommends two potential
approaches to funding the District’s energy transformation: A green bank and carbon pricing.
Of these two approaches, a Green Bank should be a top priority. The DOEE-commissioned District
of Columbia Green Bank Technical Report provides a comprehensive analysis of how a Green
Bank could finance renewable energy, energy efficiency, and related infrastructure projects.17
Action CCB.1 discusses key considerations. Although the team has included this in the Buildings
chapter, a DC Green Bank can support action on the Energy Supply System as well.
Carefully designed carbon pricing can offer an additional funding mechanism and can help
foster a market transformation by shifting consumer, business, and government decision-making
toward low- and zero-emission options. A well-designed carbon price would not only send a
strong economic signal to the market to reduce GHG emissions, but it could also generate
revenue to fund the transition. As DOEE is currently investigating its feasibility, the Clean Energy DC
team has not included it as an action in the Plan.

17

Prepared for DOEE by the Coalition for Green Capital, August 3, 2016.

INTRODUCTION

15



1.8

A LIVING DOCUMENT

Given the long time horizons involved, and the speed of change and innovation underway
in energy systems, the Clean Energy DC team recommends the District Government think of
the Plan as a living document. It should be continually revised to incorporate new insights and
information.
Alongside the Plan, the District Government commissioned several other studies to support
climate and energy policy and program development. These include studies focused on:
• Designing and implementing a green bank 18
• Designing and implementing effective deep-green retrofit financing 19
• The potential role of carbon pricing
• The potential role of neighborhood-scaled energy systems, including microgrids 20
• Improving the performance of single -family and small multifamily buildings 21
• Ensuring resilience to, and adapting to the impacts of, climate change 22
Plan authors reviewed drafts, and completed versions of some of the studies above to align
recommendations and avoid potential duplication. The team has already incorporated results
from the deep green retrofit financing study and the work on single-family and small multifamily
buildings. The District should take into consideration the specifics of these parallel studies to
develop a complete and detailed understanding of the policies, programs, and other actions
required to achieve its long-term climate and energy targets.
In addition to the topics covered by the studies listed above, the Plan does not address actions
related to reducing GHG emissions from waste, other social and ecological impacts, nor
responding to climate change impacts. Climate adaptation-focused actions can be found in the
Climate Ready DC Plan, and waste will be addressed as part of Zero Waste DC.

18
19
20
21
22

16

District of Columbia Green Bank Technical Report, prepared by the Coalition for Green Capital for DOEE, 2016.
Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations, commissioned by DOEE and
completed by Capital E, 2016.
Urban Ingenuity is leading the consultant team working on this report, and has provided GHG reduction estimates for two sites that have been included in
the model used to support the development of the Plan.
Green Residential Solutions – Recommendations from the Single Family Small Multifamily Green Building Working Group, June 2016.
Climate Ready DC Plan

CLEAN ENERGY DC



TRANSFORMING TO A
LOW CARBON DISTRICT



18

CLEAN ENERGY DC



2 TRANSFORMING TO A
LOW CARBON DISTRICT
2.1

THE DISTRICT’S ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

To identify the set of essential actions required for the decarbonization of the District’s energy
system, it is necessary to understand the District’s current energy and emissions profile.
Since the establishment of the 2006 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions baseline, accurate
energy use and GHG emissions data have been collected and calculated for seven
nonconsecutive years: 2006, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015. While there are gaps in the
data, the baselines provide a sufficient understanding of the key sources of energy use and
emissions in the District today. The primary sources of energy use and GHG emissions across the
District are categorized and explained by sector and fuel type below. These sources indicate
key elements that require the District’s attention to achieve the GHG reduction targets.

2.1.1

HISTORICAL ENERGY USE

Figure 5 summarizes the trend in energy used in the District between 2006 and 2015, presented
by fuel type. All energy consumption reported in the Plan uses site energy based on energy
data from DOEE. 23
To align with the District’s GHG inventories, GHG emissions reported in the Plan are based on
source GHG intensity factors that include losses from electricity generation, transmission, and
distribution, as well as fugitive emissions from natural gas pipeline leaks (see Appendix A1
for details).
In 2015, the District used approximately 91 billion kBtu of energy, below the 100 billion kBtu
used in 2006, but up from the 85 billion used in 2012. In that year, 96% of energy consumption
was concentrated in three sources: electricity (42%) mostly to power buildings, as well as the
Metrorail network; natural gas (31%) consumed mostly for building heating; and, gasoline (23%)
used primarily for passenger vehicles (Figure 6).
While gasoline is sourced from a variety of companies, the majority of electricity and natural
gas is supplied to the District by two utilities. Therefore, the electric utility Pepco and the
natural gas provider Washington Gas are important stakeholders in a strategy that successfully
achieves the District’s long-term climate and energy targets.

23

S ite energy use is the amount of heat and electricity consumed by a building as reflected in utility bills, whereas source energy accounts for the total
amount of raw fuel required to operate a building. Source energy incorporates all transmission, delivery, and production losses. Site energy was used in this
plan because it is within the boundary of the District Government, buisnesses, and residents to control. The impact of generation and distribution on source
energy is addressed through the lens of GHG emissions. See a fuller description from EPA at https://www.energystar.gov/buildings/facility-owners-and-managers/existing-buildings/use-portfolio-manager/understand-metrics/difference

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

19



100

Gasoline
Kerosene
Fuel Oil
Electricity
Natural Gas
Estimate

Energy Use (billion kBtu)

Diesel

80
60
40
20
0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

↑↑ Figure 5: Site energy use by fuel type, 2006-2015.
Note: Kerosene use is too small to show up on the graph, but reaches zero by 2012.
Source: District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Inventory, maintained by DOEE. Data was not available for 2007, 2008,
and 2014. This figure uses estimates based on linear annual changes between other years.

2%
23%

Diesel

Diesel

Gasoline

Gasoline
Kerosene
Fuel Oil

42%
2%

Electricity

Fuel Oil

Waste
Electricity
Natural Gas
Estimate

32%

Natural Gas

↑↑ Figure 6: Proportion of site energy use by fuel type, 2015.
Source: District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Inventory, summary tables maintained by DOEE.

20

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Residential Buildings

1%

Institutional and
Government Buildings
Commercial and
Industrial Buildings
Passenger Vehicles

Transit

<1%

Other Medium- and
Heavy-Duty Vehicles

24%

28%

28%

19%

Residential
Buildings

Passenger
Vehicles

Transit
Other Medium- and
Heavy-Duty Vehicles

Institutional &
Government
Buildings

Commercial
& Industrial
Buildings

↑↑ Figure 7: Estimated proportion of site energy use by sector, 2015.
Source: Modeled energy use for the model used to develop this Plan. See Appendix A1 for more details on the model.

Developing the Clean Energy DC model
allowed the District to more accurately
estimate energy use by subsector for 2015
(Figure 7).24 It is clear that most energy
is consumed by buildings (75%), with
approximately equal portions consumed
by residential (28%) and commercial and
industrial (28%) buildings, with a bit less
consumed by institutional and government
buildings (18%). The remainder is attributable
to transportation (25%), with the vast majority
of energy consumed by passenger vehicles
(24%), and much lower consumption for transit
(1%) and other medium- and heavy-duty
vehicles (<1%).

24

 reviously, residential and commercial building energy consumption figures were categorized based on electricity rate categories. Because some
P
multifamily residential buildings use commercial electricity rates, the District was not able to separate residential from commercial buildings.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

21



2.1.2

HISTORICAL GHG EMISSIONS

Figure 8 summarize GHG emissions trends by source. In 2015, electricity consumption, almost
entirely in buildings, represented 55% of GHG emissions, after factoring in transmission and
distribution losses (Figure 9). The District can reduce these emissions by reducing electricity
consumption and by shifting to low- and zero-emission electricity sources. Natural gas, the
other primary building fuel, accounts for 19% of the District’s GHG emissions; these can only be
lowered by reducing consumption and meeting building and transportation needs with other,
lower carbon fuels.
Transportation fuels emitted comparatively fewer GHG emissions, with gasoline and diesel
accounting for approximately 21% of the District’s total.25 This imbalance between emissions
from buildings and transportation does not indicate the inefficiency of the District’s buildings,
but rather a transportation sector that generates far lower carbon emissions than the national
average. This is in turn the result of a combination of high levels of public transit use and highly
walkable and cyclist-friendly neighborhoods.
Solid waste contributes the remaining 3% of the District’s emissions. Though this Plan does
not address these emissions, the District should continue to target them for GHG reductions.
Reducing waste and the resulting emissions is a focus of the District’s Zero Waste DC initiative.26

10

Diesel

Kerosene
Fuel Oil
Electricity
Natural Gas
Waste
Transmission Losses
Fugitive Emissions
Estimate

GHG Emissions (million tCO2e)

Gasoline
8

6

4

2

0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

↑↑ Figure 8: GHG emissions by source, 2006 to 2015.
Note: GHG emissions from kerosene are too small to show up on the graph, but reach zero by 2012.
Source: District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Inventory, summary tables maintained by DOEE. Data was not tracked for
2007, 2008, and 2014. This figure uses estimates based on linear annual changes between other years.

25
26

22

Based on all vehicle miles traveled in the District, regardless of origin or destination. Data supplied by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.
https://zerowaste.dc.gov/

CLEAN ENERGY DC



1%

Diesel

Diesel

Gasoline

3%

Waste

20%

Kerosene

52%

Gasoline

Fuel Oil

Electricity

2%

Electricity

Fuel Oil

Natural Gas

0.5%

Waste

Fugitive Emissions

Transmission Losses

19%

Fugitive Emissions

Natural Gas

3%

Transmission Losses

↑↑ Figure 9: Proportion of GHG emissions by source, 2015.
Source: District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Inventory, summary tables maintained by DOEE.

1%
2%

Other Medium- &
Heavy-Duty Vehicles

Transit
Residential Buildings
Institutional and
Government Buildings

3%

Waste

24%

19%

Residential
Buildings

Passenger
Vehicles

Commercial and
Industrial Buildings
Passenger Vehicles
Transit
Other Medium- and
Heavy-Duty Vehicles

19%

32%

Institutional &
Government
Buildings

Commercial
& Industrial
Buildings

Waste

↑↑ Figure 10: Modeled proportion of GHG emissions by sector, 2015.
Source: Modeled GHG Emissions from the model used to develop this Plan. See Appendix A1 for more details on
the model.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

23



The Clean Energy DC energy and emissions model also allowed the District to more accurately
estimate GHG emissions by subsector (Figure 10).
As with energy, most GHG emissions can be traced to buildings (74%), with most emissions
coming from commercial and industrial buildings (31%), followed by residential buildings (23%)
then institutional and government buildings (19%), including transmission and distribution losses,
and fugitive emissions. The remainder is attributable to transportation (23%) and waste (3%).
Within transportation, the vast majority of GHG emissions comes from passenger vehicles (20%),
with smaller shares traced to transit (2%) and other medium- and heavy-duty vehicles (1%).
To achieve its 2032 GHG target, the District will clearly need to shift away from fossil fuels for
buildings (natural gas and fuel oil) and transportation (gasoline and diesel) while simultaneously
decarbonizing its electricity supply. For buildings, this will mean shifting to non-fossil fuel sources
for heat and hot water. In transportation, the District will need to make transit, walking, and
cycling more appealing and cost effective to residents than private vehicles, and transition
those vehicles that remain to zero-emission drivetrains.
From 2006 to 2015, the District’s total emissions declined 24% between 2006 and 2015. Most
of this decline has been attributed to the decreasing GHG intensity of the electric grid, with
increases in renewable energy, and as coal power plants are retired and replaced with
efficient natural gas plants and renewable energy sources.27 This progressive “cleaning” of
the grid is largely beyond the District’s control; however, the District’s Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS), in combination with the RPS requirements of neighboring states, has also had
some impact. A small portion of the decline can also be attributed to an adjustment in the
calculation of diesel consumption, which resulted in a significant decline in the total estimated
diesel consumption between 2011 and 2012.28 Meanwhile, GHG emissions from natural gas
have remained relatively constant, with annual variations driven by weather and associated
temperatures (e.g., colder versus milder winters).
The PJM Interconnection Region (PJM) supplies electricity to the District. While PJM covers
a large swath of the country from New Jersey to Chicago, the majority of the electricity
consumed in the District originates in Maryland, Delaware, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
These four states, along with the District of Columbia (which has no substantial power
generation), comprise the ReliabilityFirst Corporation-East (RFC-East) sub-region within the
United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Emissions & Generation Resource
Integrated Database (eGRID). EPA uses utility data and modeling to determine where most of
a region’s electricity comes from, and then calculates the GHGs from all power plants in that
region.29 This calculation of GHG intensity is what is used by almost all cities to calculate the
GHG emissions that result from their electricity use. As shown in Figure 11, the grid mix in RFCEast has steadily shifted over the past decade away from coal (and a small amount of oil) and
to natural gas. This has reduced the GHG intensity of the District’s electricity, thereby reducing
GHG emissions attributed to the District.
That said, as of 2014, fossil fuels still comprise over 55% of the grid mix. Furthermore, natural gas is
a major source of methane emissions, which increase global warming much more significantly
than carbon dioxide, potentially accelerating the onset of major climate change impacts.
Nuclear fission, an emissions-free electricity source, supplied 45% of the grid mix in 2014, with
small amounts of wind, solar, biomass, and hydroelectricity rounding out the picture.

27
28
29

24

GHG Summary table maintained by DOEE.
Sourced from note in DOEE’s GHG Summary Table file.
https://www.epa.gov/energy/emissions-generation-resource-integrated-database-egrid-questions-and-answers

CLEAN ENERGY DC



100%

Unknown
Solar

90%

Biomass
Hydro
Nuclear
Other
Fossil Fuels
Natural Gas
Oil
Coal

Proportion of Regional Electricity Mix (RFCe)

Wind

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

2004

2005

2007

2009

2010

2012

2014

2016

↑↑ Figure 11: Regional electricity mix (RFC-East), years available between 2004 and 2016 at the
time of publication. 30

Note: GHG projections in Clean Energy DC are based on the RFC-East 2014 grid mix, as the 2016 data was not yet
available when the GHG modeling was conducted.

30

Data sourced from EPA eGRID.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

25



2.2

MODELED IMPACTS OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

With a baseline of the District’s energy use and emissions in hand, it is possible to project the
reductions in GHG emissions, decreases in energy use, and increases in renewable energy
needed to reach its targets.
As noted in Chapter 1, the consultant team developed a citywide energy and emissions model
to assess the relative decarbonization impact of various actions. The team used the model to
explore a variety of potential policy scenarios, consider the trade-offs of prioritizing any one of
the three 2032 climate and energy goals, inform discussions regarding appropriate timelines
and assumptions, and simulate the impact of potential federal policy changes.
Through this process, the Clean Energy DC team developed the final scenario. The sections
below summarize this main scenario and the simulated energy and emissions impacts each
group of actions has relative to a business-as-usual scenario. It should be noted that the
model is not intended to predict the District’s actual emissions to 2032. Rather, it is designed
to determine the scale of action required to achieve the targets, and inform the selection
and prioritization of different action options. DOEE staff can revisit and update the scenario as
conditions change in the years ahead.

2.2.1 MODEL DATA AND ASSUMPTIONS
The consultant team used District-specific datasets wherever possible, and gathered additional
material from sources across the northeast or, where necessary, using national figures. The
model is comprised of three interrelated sectors: Buildings, Transportation, and Energy Supply.
(For more information on the model and assumptions, see Appendix A1.)

2.2.1.1

BUILDINGS

In the building sector, the consulting team based energy and emissions projections on square
footage; energy use intensities (EUI, or energy use per square foot of heated floor area per
year); fuel mix (electricity, natural gas, fuel oil); projected construction and demolition rates;
and, policy assumptions related to energy use reductions, new code and retrofit adoption
rates, and years of implementation. The team grounded building-sector projections in Districtspecific EUIs by building category, which were primarily based on data from the District’s
Energy Benchmarking and Disclosure Program and the Energy Information Administration’s 2012
Commercial Building Energy Consumption Survey. 31
From these data points, the team captured two groups of actions:
New Construction Actions: The model assumes that the District Government will follow a phased
approach to net-zero energy code adoption. Residential buildings that are less than 10,000
square feet are assumed to meet a net-zero code in 2020. All other residential and commercial
buildings are assumed to meet a net-zero code in 2026. This assumes that new codes will
impact the energy performance of new buildings three years after code adoption to account
for design, permitting, and construction time. The actions recommended in Sections 4.1.2
support the District’s transition to these codes.

31

26

http://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/data/2012/

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Existing Building Actions: The Clean Energy DC
team’s model assumes continued growth in
the number and impact of actions targeting
energy and emissions in existing buildings. In
addition to expanding the set of buildings
that have taken steps to reduce energy
use, this involves increasing the number of
interventions that achieve deeper, lasting
energy use reductions (e.g., deep energy
retrofits, fuel switching).
With more flexibility and funding available to
the DCSEU and the addition of a Green Bank,
and building on the growing success of the
DCSEU over the past few years, the District
will be well-positioned to continue pushing
the envelope on the energy performance of
existing buildings. This is important, because
the reductions modeled here require about
20% of privately-owned buildings to reduce
energy use by about 40% on top of achieving
the targets in the DCSEU’s current five-year
contract.32 This equates to a 0.75-1% decrease
in total energy used by buildings across the
District each year.
The District Government aims to lead the way
for private building owners by targeting deep
reductions in its own buildings. Under the
modeled scenario, the District Government
implements deep energy retrofits on
District Government buildings representing
approximately 9% of building floor area before
2025, while preparing for and implementing
net-zero retrofits on 12.5% of buildings by floor
area between 2025 and 2032.
Taken together, the primary Clean Energy DC
scenario assumes around one in five buildings
in the District will undergo some sort of energy
performance improvement by 2032. (See
Section 4.2.2.2 for details on conventional
retrofits and deep energy retrofits. The actions
recommended in Sections 4.2.3 and 4.3.1 are
designed to support the District achieving this
level of reductions.)

32
33
34
35

2.2.1.2 ENERGY SUPPLY
The Clean Energy DC team based its
energy supply sector recommendations on
assumptions about policy-driven changes
that shift the electricity supply to renewable
sources and increase thermal (heat) and
electrical energy that would be supplied
from new neighborhood energy systems. As
noted in Section 2.1.2, the District observed
a 23% reduction in GHG emissions between
2006 and 2012, more than half of which is due
to the decommissioning of coal-fired power
plants and other grid cleaning efforts.33 Under
the modeled scenario, energy supply policies
are responsible for 46% of cumulative GHG
reductions achieved by 2032. These stem from
four modeled actions.
The modeled actions do not include the
EPA’s Clean Power Plan (CPP). Although the
CPP, if implemented, would likely result in a
continuation of the grid cleaning mentioned
above, it does not apply directly to the District
because there are no fossil-fuel power plants
in the District—and, in any event, is not being
implemented by EPA at this time.34 While the
District may benefit from the actions taken
by other states under the CPP, its own RPS
will also drive GHG emissions reductions,
potentially further than what would be
achieved through the CPP.
Here are the four key energy supply policies
modeled in the Plan:
Renewable Portfolio Standard: The model
simulates the District’s Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS), which requires renewable
sources to deliver 50% of the electricity
supplied to the District by 2032, including 5%
from local solar systems.35 The RPS will continue
to play a vital role in achieving the District’s
2032 GHG reduction target, both through
direct reductions and by enabling additional
reductions in buildings and vehicles that
switch from fossil fuels to electricity.

T hese numbers are include to provide a reference for the scale of action required on existing buildings. In implementation, retrofits will achieve varying levels
of energy use reductions across a to-be-determined proportion of the existing building stock.
GHG Summary Table maintained by DOEE.
FACT SHEET: Clean Power Plan Framework, https://www.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/fact-sheet-clean-power-plan-framework
Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016. 2015 Quarterly State of the Market Report for PJM: January through March, p.248, http://
www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_Market/2015/2015q1-som-pjm-sec8.pdf

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

27



Excluding the local solar requirements,
under the modeled scenario the RPS is
responsible for delivering approximately 20%
of cumulative GHG reductions by 2032. The
specific level of reductions will depend in part
on how electricity suppliers comply with the
RPS. As discussed in further detail in Chapter
5, the District’s RPS allows electricity suppliers
to comply by (1) using renewable energy
certificates (RECs) sourced from within the
PJM Interconnection Region (PJM) or a state
adjacent to PJM,36,37 or (2) making alternative
compliance payments (ACPs) to the District
based on the portion of the RPS requirement
that cannot be satisfied with RECs.
Although funding from any ACPs is used to
support the District’s Solar for All program,
these payments cannot be attributed with
direct GHG reductions. While RECs can be
attributed with GHG reductions, not all RECs
under the RPS are eligible for GHG reductions
under ICLEI’s U.S. Community Protocol for
Accounting and Reporting Greenhouse
Gas Emissions, the industry-standard GHG
accounting protocol used by the District.38
The ICLEI Protocol requires a city to calculate
GHG emissions based on the best information
it has about the source of the electricity it
consumes. For this, the District uses the GHG
intensity of its regional grid: the EPA eGRID
factor for the RFC-East sub-region.39 Because
the RPS allows suppliers to comply using RECs
from outside the EPA’s RFC-East eGRID subregion, not all RECs used to comply with the
RPS will lead to GHG emissions that the District
can account for in future GHG inventories.
The model (and Figure 12 in section 2.2.2.1)
assumes that 57% of the RPS leads to GHG
reductions that can be attributed to the
District’s GHG inventory under the ICLEI

36
37

38
39
40

41

28

Protocol requirements.40 The actual GHG
impact of the RPS will depend on how it
is designed and managed as renewable
energy requirements increase, as discussed in
Action CRE.1.
Renewable Portfolio Standard Local Solar
Requirement: The current RPS requires that
locally-produced solar supply 5% of electricity
consumed within the District in 2032. Whereas
the rest of the RPS allows RECs sourced from
outside PJM, the local solar requirement must
be complied with using solar RECs (SRECs)
from solar systems located within the District
or connected to distribution line directly
connected to the District. Furthermore, all
funding from ACPs is used to support local
solar installations. For these reasons, the
modeled scenario attributes 100% of GHG
reductions stemming from the RPS’s local
solar requirement to the District. Under the
modeled scenario, this equates to 4% of
cumulative emissions reductions by 2032.
Power Purchase Agreement for Standard
Offer Service: The model assumes that
the current Standard Offer Service (SOS)
will use a mix of short-term and long- term
energy supply contracts, including a power
purchase agreement (PPA), with one or more
energy suppliers to provide renewable for
70% of the SOS beginning in 2019. The SOS
is the electricity purchased for those District
ratepayers who do not choose a competitive
supplier for their electricity. The SOS currently
provides approximately 24% of the District’s
electricity.41 To be conservative, the model
assumes 10% of customers choose to opt-out
of the new SOS, which then supplies 21.6% of
the District’s electricity consumption (Action
CRE.2). The new, renewable energy-driven

Clean and Affordable Energy Act of 2008, http://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/CAEA_of_2008_B17-0492.pdf
The RPS further rules clarify that states within the PJM Interconnection Region currently include Delaware, the District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky,
Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia and West Virginia, and states adjacent to the PJM Interconnection
Region include Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Iowa, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, South Carolina, and Wisconsin. Public Service Commission of the District of
Columbia, Report on the Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard for Compliance Year 2015, May 2, 2016, http://www.dcpsc.org/getmedia/901b3c18-4859435d-ae1a-ca296584c26b/aharris_542016_831_1_FC_-_945_-_2016_-_E_-_REPORT.aspx.
ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability is the leading global network of more than 1,500 cities, towns and regions committed to building a sustainable
future. ICLEI’s U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions, http://www.ghgprotocol.org/city-accounting
The U.S Environmental Protection Agency’s eGRID factor for RFC-East subregion for 2014 (accessed January 20, 2016). http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-07/documents/emission-factors_2014.pdf
This assumption is based on discussions with DOEE representatives and the finding that 57% of all non-hydroelectric renewable energy capacity built in the
United States since 2000 is being used to comply with RPS requirements. This does not apply to the local solar requirement. Finding soured from: Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) and National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 2016. “A Retrospective Analysis of the Benefits and Impacts of U.S.
Renewable Portfolio Standards.” https://emp.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbnl-1003961.pdf; Barbose, Galen. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, April 2016. “U.S.
Renewables Portfolio Standards: 2016 Annual Status Report.” https://emp.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbnl-1005057.pdf
Correspondence with DOEE staff on Aug 1, 2016.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



SOS procurement should be phased in over
three years, affecting an additional third of
the SOS in each year. By 2032, the PPA for SOS
provides approximately 20% of cumulative
emissions reductions by 2032.
Neighborhood-Scale Energy: The model
assumes that five neighborhood-scale thermal
energy systems are installed between 2020
and 2028.42 Wastewater thermal resources
identified by DC Water would supply these
systems to the tune of 37 MW. The model also
includes GHG reductions estimated from the
development of two microgrids at Walter
Reed Army Medical Center and St. Elizabeth’s
Campus.43 Actions CRE.7 and CRE.8 aim to
support the development of these systems.

2.2.1.3 TRANSPORTATION
Finally, energy and emissions in the
transportation sector are determined using
estimates of vehicle miles traveled;44 vehicle
fuel efficiencies; fuel GHG intensities; a
breakdown of use by mode of transportation;
and rates of electric vehicle uptake. The
consultant team included four primary sets of
actions relevant to the transportation sector in
the model:
Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
Standard: The CAFE standard is a federal
fuel efficiency and GHG emissions standard
applied to light duty (i.e., passenger) vehicles.
While this regulation is beyond the District
Government’s control, it has a significant
impact on GHG emissions from transportation
and will likely play a key role in achieving
the District’s energy use and GHG reduction
targets. Because it is a federal regulation
already in place, the CAFE Standard will
achieve GHG reductions regardless of actions
taken by the District, with its impact varying
based on the District’s success with modeshare change. However, the CAFE Standard
is one of several federal climate and energy
policies considered at risk of being weakened

42
43
44

or rescinded, potentially impacting the
District’s ability to achieve its targets.
The Clean Energy DC team thus included
it in the GHG and energy use reduction
figures to make its impact explicit
to readers.
Mode Share Change: The model assumes the
District will achieve its 2032 mode share target
of 50% transit, 25% walking and biking, and
25% driving, as set out in the Sustainable DC
plan. The actions required to achieve these
reductions are beyond the Plan’s scope. (The
moveDC Plan addresses mode share.)
Electric Vehicle Adoption: The District will not
achieve its 2050 carbon neutral commitment
without widespread vehicle electrification.
However, due to the length of time required
to transition the existing, largely gasolinepowered fleet to zero emission electric
vehicles, the team recommends the District
prioritize this action in the near-term. The
modeled scenario assumes that 30% of new
vehicles sold in 2030 will be electric, up from
less than 1% in 2015. Because vehicles are
typically on the road for more than a decade,
the GHG reduction achieved in 2032 depends
on the proportion of electric to conventional
(i.e., gasoline internal combustion engine)
vehicles sold from now on, with their
importance growing each year.
Transit Bus Fleet Electrification: This Plan
and moveDC both seek a significant shift
away from passenger vehicles and towards
public transit, among other commuting
options. Although a significantly smaller
source of GHGs than personal vehicles,
electrifying a growing portion of DDOT’s and
WMATA’s transit fleet can make an important
contribution to mitigating climate change,
particularly as transit use increases. Since
they emit no pollutants, electric buses do not
contribute to local air pollution. The positive
impacts of electric buses on local air pollution
were also modeled; those results can be
found in Appendix A1.

Neighborhood-scale energy systems are also commonly referred to as district energy systems.
The District is currently investigating and is actively engaged in maximizing the utilization of cost-effective microgrid opportunities. Once more information is
available, the next iteration of the Plan can incorporate the potential impact of these opportunities.
This includes all vehicle miles traveled in the District, regardless of origin or destination.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

29



2.2.2

ACHIEVING THE DISTRICT’S 2032 TARGETS

The model demonstrates that, when implemented together, the actions recommended
in Chapters 3 to 6 can meet and exceed the District’s 2032 GHG reduction target. These
actions will not, however, achieve the District’s 2032 energy use reduction or renewable
energy utilization targets. During the energy and emissions modeling process, the consultant
team discovered the relative difficulty of achieving the District’s energy-use-reduction
and renewable-energy-utilization targets, and particularly of achieving all three targets
simultaneously. This is because that GHG emissions reductions can be achieved both through
improving energy performance and decarbonizing energy sources. Conversely, energy use is
generally unaffected by actions focused on decarbonizing energy sources.45
The consultant team presented this finding to representatives of DOEE during a collaborative
engagement session, along with the assumptions underlying the model, and the group
collectively decided to prioritize the GHG reduction target over the other targets in this Plan. In
doing so, the District can focus its limited resources on the target with that offers the greatest
opportunity to avoid significant climate impacts.

2.2.2.1 ACHIEVABLE GHG EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS
The model demonstrates that when implemented together, the actions recommended in
the Plan achieve an estimated 56% reduction in GHG emissions relative to 2006. Figure 12
and Figure 13 present projected GHG reductions achieved by actions targeting buildings,
transportation, and the energy supply. Notice that GHG emissions have declined since
2006. This is due primarily to coal plant closures that reduced the GHG intensity of electricity
consumed in the District. Notice also that, absent federal efforts to improve vehicle efficiency
(the top line of the CAFE Standard wedge in Figure 12), GHG emissions are projected to
increase between now and 2032, due to population and economic growth in the District.46
Accounting for the decline in GHGs since 2006 and their projected future increases, the District
must take enough action to avoid approximately 40% of the GHG emissions projected in the
year 2032 to reduce them 50% relative to 2006. As noted above, the actions recommended in
this Plan can exceed that. Table 1 summarizes the total GHG emissions avoided in 2032 relative
to the business as usual scenario and attributes these reductions to actions in different sectors.

45

46

30

 nergy use reductions can in some cases be achieved through decarbonizing energy sources. For example, if using source instead of site energy, energy
E
consumptions may be reduced by decarbonization actions that shift electricity generation from centralized fossil fuel generators far outside the District to
renewable energy sources closer to the District.
As discussed in section 2.2.1.2, external forces will likely result in the GHG intensity of the grid declining, such as through the implementation of the federal
Clean Power Plan, the EPA’s mercury regulations, and declining renewable energy costs. To avoid overestimating GHG reductions, these forces are not
included in the BAU projection. These forces will drive the same type of grid cleaning that the District’s RPS will, so including both without a good understanding of interaction effects would results in double counting emissions reductions.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



11
Baseline GHG Emissions, 2006
10
9

GHG Emissions (million tCO2e)

8
7
6
5
4

Targeted GHG Emissions

3
2
1

20
06
20
0
20 7
08
20
09
20
1
20 0
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
2
20 0
21
20
2
20 2
23
20
2
20 4
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
3
20 1
32

0

Federal CAFE standard

Neighbourhood-Scale Energy

Mode Share Change

PPA for Standard Offer Service

Electric Vehicle Adoption

Renewable Portfolio Standard

New Construction Actions

RPS Local Solar Requirement

Existing Building Actions

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

District Government Buildings

Remaining GHG Emissions

↑↑ Figure 12: Wedge diagram showing projected GHG reduction path from
Clean Energy DC actions

Note: All figures use GHG intensity factors that account for losses from generation and transmission. See section A1.2.2.1
in Appendix A1 for more detail. CAFE Standard = Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard; PPA = power purchase
agreement; RPS = Renewable Portfolio Standard.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

31



11
10

GHG Emissions (million tCO2e)

9
8
7
6
5
4

Targeted GHG Emissions

3
2
1

Hi
Ba
st
or
se
ic
lin
al
e
De
in
cr
20
e
06
as
BA
et
U
o
In
20
cr
Fe
15
e
de
as
e
ra
N
to
lC
ew
20
A
FE
32
C
on
St
an
st
ru
Ex
da
ct
ist
rd
io
Di
in
n
g
st
P
ric
Bu
ol
tG
ic
ild
ie
in
ov
Re
s
g
er
ne
P
n
o
w
m
lic
ab
en
ie
l
e
s
RP
tB
Po
S
ui
Lo
ld
rtf
in
ol
ca
gs
i
PP
o
l
So
A
St
a
fo
la
nd
rS
r&
ar
ta
So
d
nd
N
l
a
ei
a
r
gh
rd
fo
bo
rA
O
ffe
rh
ll
rS
oo
er
dvi
sc
ce
M
al
od
e
En
El
e
ec
er
Sh
gy
tri
ar
Tr
c
e
an
Ve
Po
sit
hi
lic
Bu
cl
ie
e
s
s
Fl
A
e
d
M
et
o
od
pt
El
io
ec
el
n
ed
tri
fic
Es
at
tim
io
at
n
e
in
20
32

0

CAFE Standard

Neighborhood-Scale Energy

Mode Share Change

PPA for Standard Offer Service

Electric Vehicle Adoption

Renewable Portfolio Standard

New Construction Actions

RPS Local Solar Requirement

Existing Building Actions

Baseline 2006

District Government Buildings

Historical decrease in 2015

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

Modeled Estimate 2032

BAU Increase to 2032

↑↑ Figure 13: Waterfall diagram showing each action area’s contribution to projected
reductions in 2032

Note: All figures use GHG intensity factors that account for losses from generation and transmission. CAFE Standard =
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard; PPA = power purchase agreement; RPS = Renewable Portfolio Standard.

32

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Modeled GHG Reduction Actions

GHGs Reduced from 2032
BAU (tCO2e)

Percent GHGs Reduced
from Total 2032 BAU*

Federal CAFE Standard

626,000

7.10%

New Construction Policies

408,000

4.60%

Existing Building Policies

797,000

9.00%

District Government Buildings

45,000

0.50%

Renewable Portfolio Standard

841,000**

9.5%**

RPS Local Solar Requirement

164,000

1.90%

PPA for Standard Offer Service

584,000

6.60%

Neighborhood-Scale Energy

49,000

0.60%

Mode Share Change

320,000

3.60%

Electric Vehicle Adoption

76,000

0.90%

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

230,000***

2.60%***

Total GHGs Avoided vs. 2032 BAU

4,140,000

47.00%

Historical GHGs Avoided 2006-2015
vs. 2006 Baseline

2,509,000

23.8%

BAU Increase in GHG emissions
2016 to 2032

784,000

N/A

Total GHGs Avoided vs. 2006 Baseline

5,870,000

55.70%

↑↑ Table 1: Clean Energy DC Relative contributions of Clean Energy DC’s
emissions-reducing actions.

Note: All figures based on site energy use, and use GHG intensity factors that account for losses from electricity
generation, transmission, and distribution, as well as fugitive emissions from natural gas distribution. See Appendix A1 for
more detail
*This column measures the percentage reduction in total GHG emissions from the 2032 level under the business as
usual scenario. For example, New Construction actions decrease total District-wide 2032 GHG emissions by 4.6%. Due
to GHG declines between 2006 and 2015, as well as projected GHG increases between 2015 and 2032, the District
must avoid 40% of projected GHGs in 2032 to decrease GHG emissions 50% relative to 2006.
**The RPS savings assum that the District captures 57% of the total potential GHG reductions possible under the RPS
from generation outside the District borders. See section 2.2.1.2.
*** Savings from transit bus fleet electrification also reflect increased use of busses due to mode share change.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

33



2.2.2.2 ACHIEVABLE ENERGY USE REDUCTIONS
In addition to a decrease in GHG emissions, the model simulation also indicates an anticipated
decline in energy use of 20% relative to the District’s 2012 energy baseline (or 32% below 2006,
the GHG target baseline year). If considering projected population growth, this reduction
translates to a 42% decline in energy use per capita relative to 2012 (57% decline from 2006).
Considering buildings, the average energy use intensity of buildings in the District declines 13.5%
relative to 2012 (26.7% relative to 2006).47
Figure 14 presents projected energy use reductions according to different action areas, while
Table 2 summarizes the total energy use that will be avoided in 2032 and a measure of the
energy use avoided compared to the business-as-usual scenario in 2032. Note that the energy
supply wedges from Table 1 do not appear in Table 2, as they do not reduce site energy use,
but instead decarbonize parts of the District’s energy supply.
Decreases in gasoline and diesel consumption account for the majority of energy-use
reductions in the District. This primarily stems from the significant shift away from passenger
vehicles in favor of walking, cycling, and public transit, with additional support from the
federal CAFE standard, electric vehicle adoption, and electrifying transit buses. The District
sees less substantial reductions in natural gas and electricity. Through actions focused on
new construction, existing buildings, and transit buses, natural gas declines by approximately
15% from 2015. Electricity declines only 3.6% over the same period, as reductions in the
aforementioned areas are tempered by the increase in demand driven by the electrification of
passenger vehicles, transit buses, and building heating systems.

47

34

Energy use intensity (EUI) is equal to the amount of energy consumed in a building, per square foot, per year.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



100

90

Energy Use Reduction Wedges (billion kBtu)

80

70
60

50
40
Targeted Energy Use Reductions
30

20

10

20
06
20
0
20 7
08
20
0
20 9
1
20 0
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
1
20 7
1
20 8
19
20
20
20
21
20
2
20 2
23
20
2
20 4
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
3
20 0
3
20 1
32

0

*

Federal CAFE Standard

Existing Building Policies

Mode Share Policies

District Government Buildings

Electric Vehicle Adoption

New Construction Policies

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

Remaining GHG Emissions

↑↑ Figure 14: Projected site energy use reductions from recommended actions.
Note: All figures based on site energy use. Historical data is the same as that presented in section 2.1. CAFE Standard =
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard.

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

35



Site Energy Use
Reduced from 2032 BAU
(million kBtu)

Percent Site Energy
Use Reduced from Total
2032 BAU*

Federal CAFE Standard

8,458

8.60%

New Construction Policies

4,911

5.00%

Existing Building Policies

8,764

8.90%

District Government Buildings

4,818

1.70%

Mode Share Policies

3,956

4.00%

Electric Vehicle Adoption

1,350

1.40%

Transit Bus Fleet Electrification

2,214**

2.20%**

Total Energy Use Avoided vs. 2032 BAU

30,134

30.60%

Total Energy Use Reduced vs.
2012 Baseline

16,732

19.7%

↑↑ Table 2: Relative contributions of Clean Energy DC’s energy-reducing actions.
Note: All figures use site energy numbers. As explained elsewhere, all reported energy figures use site energy, while GHG
emissions use source GHG intensity factors that account for losses from generation, transmission, and distribution. See
section A1.2.2.1 in Appendix A1 for more detail.
*This column measures the percentage reduction in total energy consumption that a single action area drives relative
to the total BAU energy use in 2032. As with GHG emissions, projected growth in energy consumption between 2012 and
2032 dictates what the District must accomplish to achieve its 2032 energy use reduction target. Based on growth in
energy consumption since 2012 (the baseline year), as well as continued growth in projected energy consumption, the
District must avoid 57% of its BAU energy consumption in 2032 to reduce energy consumption by 50% relative to 2012.
***Savings from transit bus fleet electrification also reflect increased use of busses due to mode share change.

2.2.2.3 ACHIEVABLE INCREASES IN RENEWABLE ENERGY
The model also estimates the proportion of renewable energy that will comprise the District’s
total energy supply in 2032. Unlike the District’s GHG reduction and energy use reduction
targets, the renewable energy target will shift according to the total quantity of energy used.
As the District achieves deeper energy use reductions, the total quantity of renewable energy
required to meet the target will decrease. Figure 15 presents the proportion of renewable
energy that will contribute to the District’s total energy use, while the renewable energy
generation required to achieve these targets is summarized in Table 3.
The model shows that by adopting the recommended actions, 30% of the District’s total
energy use in 2032 will come from renewable sources. While the actions do not fully achieve
the 50% renewable energy target, they would significantly increase the amount of renewable
electricity consumed.

36

CLEAN ENERGY DC



100

90

Site Energy Consumption (billion kBtu)

80

70

60
Targeted Renewable Energy
50

40

30

20

10

20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21

0

Neighbourhood-Scale Energy

RPS Local Solar Requirement

PPA for Standard Offer Service

Total Non-Renewable Energy Use

Renewable Portfolio Standard

↑↑ Figure 15: Projected utilization of renewable energy as a result of recommended actions.
Note: RPS = Renewable Portfolio Standard; PPA = Power Purchase Agreement

THE DISTRICTS ENERGY USE AND EMISSIONS PROFILE

37



Renewable energy
utilized in 2032

Estimated generation
capacity required in 2032
(MW)*

million kBtu

percent of total
energy use

Renewable Portfolio Standard

13,773

20.20%

1,002–2,574

RPS Local Solar Requirement

1,530

2.20%

379

PPA for Standard Offer Service

5,452

8.00%

397–1,019

Neighborhood-Scale Energy

157**

0.20%

37**

Total Renewable Energy

20,912

30.60%

1,813 –4,009

↑↑ Table 3: Projected renewable energy consumption and supply requirements.
Note: Based on site energy use. As explained elsewhere, all reported energy figures use site energy, while GHG emissions
use source GHG intensity factors that account for losses from generation, transmission, and distribution. See section
A1.2.2.1 in Appendix A1 for more detail.
*Required generation capacities are based on assumptions about capacity factors: 47.4% for neighborhood energy
wastewater thermal (based on DC ENERGIZED), a low of 17.9% (utility-scale solar photovoltaic) to a high of 46.0% (offshore
wind) for RPS outside the District, and 13.0% for solar rooftop photovoltaic within the District (based on GDS Associates for
the District Department of the Environment, Renewable Energy Technologies Potential for the District of Columbia, 2013).
**This does not include the Walter Reed or St. Elizabeths neighborhood-scale energy systems because they are not fully
renewable energy.

38

CLEAN ENERGY DC



AN EQUITABLE
TRANSFORMATION



40

CLEAN ENERGY DC



3 AN EQUITABLE
TRANSFORMATION
In the context of climate and energy planning, social equity is
a relatively new area of study. Governments are beginning to
formally consider equity in such plans out of a recognition and
acknowledgement that extreme climate events such as floods, fires,
and severe storms disproportionately impact some communities
more than others.48 Though climate change is a global and societal
challenge, some groups of people shoulder its burden more heavily
than others.
Advocates use the term “climate justice” to characterize the climate-change conversation as
viewed through a human rights lens. Equitable climate action is a tenet of climate justice, and
focuses on providing support to those disproportionately affected, and ensuring equal access
to social benefits and opportunities. The Government Alliance for Race and Equity defines
(racial) equity on outcome-based terms: “the achievement of racial equity is when race can
no longer be used to predict life outcomes, and outcomes for all groups are improved.” 49
Climate equity echoes a similar sentiment. By integrating equity into climate-action planning,
the District hopes to ensure that racial and ethnic grouping and socioeconomic status are not
predictors of relative vulnerability to climate impacts. In the context of Clean Energy DC, equity
will refer to this working definition.
DOEE recently convened an “Equity and People” Working Group to review the Sustainable
DC plan.50 This group is collaboratively developing a more refined and precise definition of
equity specific and relevant to the citizens of the District. Once that definition is finalized, it will
supersede the current working definition used in this Plan.
The following sections delve deeper into the importance of planning for equity, the causes of
inequity in relation to climate change impacts, and the process undertaken in the review of
Clean Energy DC to identify and reframe any actions included in the plan that could present
inequitable outcomes.

48
49
50

 SDN. Guide to Equitable, Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning. May 2017
U
Racial Equity Alliance. Racial Equity Action Plans: A How-To Manual. http://www.racialequityalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/GARE-Racial-Equity-Action-Plans.pdf
www.sustainabledc.org

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

41



3.1

WHY EQUITY?

It is important to plan for equity for many reasons. It is now clear that climate change affects
all population groups and communities, but affects some more than others. On a global scale,
the bulk of the GHG emissions that drive climate change are created by wealthier nations,
while the impacts are largely shouldered by poorer nations. Cities serve as a microcosm of
this imbalance, even in wealthy nations such as the United States. Wealthier people and
large companies generate a disproportionate amount of emissions, while poorer populations
are often ill-positioned to respond to the impacts, or benefit from mitigation and adaptation
measures. At-risk populations are more exposed to climate hazards, have less capacity to
adapt to climate hazards, and have increased sensitivity to those hazards.51 Studies show lowincome populations, people of color, immigrants and refugees, are most at-risk to be affected
by climate change impacts.52 These vulnerable populations, or “frontline communities,”
are often disadvantaged because of a lack of resources, reduced access to benefits or
information, or due to structural and reinforced racism.
In 2015, the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina offered a textbook example of this increased
climate impact sensitivity in communities of color. When the storm hit New Orleans, that city’s
communities of color were underprepared and under-resourced—a situation that had been
exacerbated by disinvestment in public infrastructure and vulnerable living standards.53
Diligent, deliberate planning efforts can help prevent a repeat of the tragedies that occurred
in Louisiana, while creating a fair community for everyone.
Historically, the inequities seen in American society today are to a large degree the result
of past government decisions nationwide.54 For example, “redlining” is the racist practice
of excluding people of color from accessing public services by directly removing them,
selectively raising housing prices, or selectively providing financial aid. The Home Owner’s Loan
Corporation (est. 1933) and the Federal Housing Administration (est. 1934), two political bodies,
historically withheld mortgage loans from communities of color, a practice that contributed
greatly to residential racial segregation, impacts that continue to this day.55
These truths underscore the imperative for governments to account for climate equity when
drafting climate and energy policies, and plans such as this one. For example, in planning
for improved energy efficiency, risks exist that the costs of retrofit compliance codes may
place added pressure on rents. Similarly, financing may be inaccessible to communities that
traditional financial institutions have historically designated as lower class and higher risk. Race
and ethnicity are the most powerful signifying factors of communities facing financial hardship.
In the District, Black and Latino households negatively bear the impacts of redlining, visible even
at the middle- to upper-middle income levels. This institutional racism has created extreme
wealth and income gaps between White and non-White households in the District.56
Policy has an immense capacity to shape society, and acknowledging this responsibility in
Clean Energy DC is the first step toward creating an equitable energy-system transformation.
In recognizing these inequities, the District should create actions to directly support to at-risk
communities including low-to-middle income (LMI) populations and populations of color.

51
52
53
54
55
56

42

USDN. Guide to Equitable, Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning. May 2017
OHCHR. Understanding Human Rights and Climate Change. http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/ClimateChange/COP21.pdf
Zoraster, RM. Vulnerable populations: Hurricane Katrina as a case study. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20405467
EPI. The racial wealth gap: How African-Americans have been shortchanged out of the materials to build wealth. http://www.epi.org/blog/the-racialwealth-gap-how-african-americans-have-been-shortchanged-out-of-the-materials-to-build-wealth/
NCRC. HOLC “Redlining” Maps: The persistent structure of segregation and economic inequality. https://ncrc.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2018/02/NCRC-Research-HOLC-10.pdf
EPI. Racial gaps in wages, wealth, and more: a quick recap. http://www.epi.org/blog/racial-gaps-in-wages-wealth-and-more-a-quick-recap/

CLEAN ENERGY DC



It is important to note the differences
between equity and equality.

Equality

does not equal

Equity

“Equality” refers to the practice of ensuring
equal provision of services to all. For example,
financial institutions create and sustain inequality
by withholding mortgage loans to Black
communities.
Meanwhile, “equity” refers to the practice of
providing equal access to opportunity and
services, or equal possession of basic needs.
For example, an online-only job board creates
inequity between those with access to regular
internet service, and those without. Note:
Inequality can breed inequity. Inequity can be
created over time, as unequal service provision
favors one group over another.

↑↑ Box 3: Language matters: The difference between equality and equity.

3.2

EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE DISTRICT

In the District, income inequality is visibly evident in the District, with an East-West divide that
runs north to south—historically, the dividing line was approximately 16th Street NW, though this
is changing, and some neighborhoods, like Capitol Hill, are exceptions. In 2016, the national
median household income was $59,039, whereas the Metro region of the District
has a household median income of $72,935.57 The following map shows that neighborhoods
west of the 16th Street divide have, by and large, much higher incomes than the national
average, whereas neighborhoods to the east have household incomes much lower than the
national average.
Racial segregation in the District corresponds closely to the east-west income equality divide.
Caucasians and African Americans constitute most of the District’s population, making
up 44.6% and 47.7% of the total population respectively,58 with the majority of Caucasians
living west of the divide, and most African Americans living east of the divide. This divide is
heightened by uneven job distribution in the District. The citywide unemployment rate Wards
1-6, west of the Anacostia River, was 4.9%, and the rate in Wards 7 & 8, east of the Anacostia
River, was 11.6%.59
Racial segregation has long been ingrained into the District’s neighborhoods,60 from the postCivil War segregation era to the present day. The following map depicts this striking division.

57
58
59
60

https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/DC
US Census Bureau. “District of Columbia.” 2016
“Unemployment Data for DC Wards” Department of Employment Services, Government of the District of Columbia,
https://does.dc.gov/page/unemployment-data-dc-wards
Pritchett, Wendell. “A National Issue: Segregation in the District of Columbia and the Civil Rights Movement at Mid-Century.” 2005

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

43



INCOME EQUALITY IN
WASHINGTON, DC

Median Household income, 2012
Census Block Groups
US median: $50,157

More than $82,000

$24,001 - $39,000

$68,001 - $82,000

$24,000 or less

$53,001 - $68,000

No households

$39,001 - $53,000
↑↑ F igure 16: Income inequality in the District (ESRI 2017).61

61

44

ESRI. “Income Inequality in Washington, D.C.” July 2017

CLEAN ENERGY DC



WASHINGTON, DC
RACIAL FIGURE GROUND
Building footprints of
Washington, Arlington,
and Alexandria colored
by predominant race
by block:

White
Black
Hispanic
Asian

↑↑ Figure 17: Racial Segregation in the District (Kenton Ngo 2015)62
The University of Virginia has created an interactive, though less recent, geographic information
system (GIS) map of racial segregation in the United States.63
The income disparity and racial segregation seen today are the product of years of structural
inequality. Marginalized groups have faced, and continue to face, barriers that become
positive reinforcing loops that solidify and amplify social inequity. These groups face unequal
opportunity and low access to financial support, education, and/or information that might
promote movement up the social ladder or lead to a higher income. When drafting the Plan,
the team worked with local and national experts to identify and address any ways in which
its recommendations could create or further reinforce structural inequalities. These specific
changes are discussed further below.
62
63

Ngo, Kenton. “The Figure-Ground of Race in Washington, DC.” 2015
https://demographics.virginia.edu/DotMap/index.html

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

45



3.3

EQUITY AND CLIMATE ACTION

3.3.1

CENTERING EQUITY IN PLANNING PROCESSES

As previously stated, the practice of including equity in climate change action plans is
relatively new, but many cities are now accounting for climate change inequities when
planning to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and energy use, and increase renewable
energy production.
The City of Portland, the City of Seattle, and the City of Cleveland are all leaders in this field.
When planning for climate action and sustainability, these cities have also incorporated
planning for equity into their processes. Notably, they have included and engaged with at-risk
communities that may disproportionately bear the burden of climate change impacts, and
that may be negatively impacted by mitigation actions. Such robust stakeholder engagement
is essential. The partnership and capacity-building work recommended in Action EQ.1 builds on
these examples.

3.3.2 JOB CREATION
Clean energy and energy efficiency jobs are growing at a much faster pace than the rest of
the economy, and the same is true in the District. According to the U.S. Department of Energy,
there are 12,000 people employed in energy efficiency in the District of Columbia; the majority
of those jobs are in construction and installation. Another 1,700 employed in renewable energy,
primarily in solar energy; one-third are employed in direct installation.64,65 The majority of these
people are employed in these industries in the District are employed by small businesses that 10
or less permanent employees apiece.66
These sorts of green jobs can be a tangible, direct benefit of clean energy policies to LMI
communities. However, for that to happen, the District Government will need to take concrete
action to ensure there adequate job training, partnerships, and pathways to the middleclass. Best practices in green jobs training for LMI communities include: strong cross-sector
partnerships with local, trusted community organizations; adequate funding; a well-structured,
comprehensive curriculum; targeted recruitment; and wrap-around support services.67 These
are critical elements of this plan’s job training recommendations, including Action CCB.13.
They were also considered in the development of the District’s solar jobs training program, Solar
Works DC, and will be considered with other DOEE jobs programs going forward.68

64
65
66
67
68

46

“
 U.S. Energy and Employment Report,” U.S. Department of Energy. 2017. Accessed January 24, 2018. https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/01/f34/2017%20
US%20Energy%20and%20Jobs%20Report%20State%20Charts%202_0.pdf
“District of Columbia Solar Jobs Census 2016,” The Solar Foundation. 2017. Accessed January 24, 2018. https://www.thesolarfoundation.org/factsheet-2016-dc/
“Energy Efficiency Jobs in America” E2, 2016. https://www.e2.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/EnergyEfficiencyJobsInAmerica_FINAL.pdf
“Making Green Work: Best Practices in Green-Collar Job Training,” Ella Baker Center for Human Rights. http://www.ellabakercenter.org/sites/default/files/downloads/making-green-work.pdf
https://gridalternatives.org/regions/midatlantic/solar-works-dc

CLEAN ENERGY DC



3.4

ADDRESSING EQUITY IN CLEAN ENERGY DC

3.4.1

INCORPORATING EQUITY INTO ALL ACTIONS

As detailed in Section 1.2, the consultant team discovered during the modeling process that
placing an emphasis on GHG reductions as this plan does will prioritize actions that both reduce
energy use and increase renewable energy production. This data-driven decision-making tool
allows the District to focus its time and energy on actions that will deliver the greatest impact,
and supports efficient resource allocation.
To produce this plan, the Clean Energy DC team evaluated the risks that the technical, datadriven recommended actions present to equity, followed by amendments to the proposed
actions. This approach unifies a technical modelling tool that can identify actions with the
greatest impact with the careful equity risk assessment, and incorporates a layer of stakeholder
and expert input. The road to equity in Clean Energy DC begins with strategizing the exact
steps required to efficiently reduce GHG emissions, then analyzing and creating amendments
to ensure an equitable outcome for all residents of the District.
The Clean Energy DC team undertook a thorough equity analysis of each action, and
developed a framework to classify the types of risks to equity found in climate action planning.
The framework is structured around three major risks to equity identified in a thorough analysis
of Clean Energy DC’s recommended actions. The team analyzed each actions for risks or
nuances that would exacerbate existing inequity or create new inequity. The following are the
three major risks to equity:
Increased financial burden is a potential barrier resulting from a strategy
that leads to increased costs that are disproportionately carried by
a District residents in the low-to-middle income (LMI) community. It is
important to note that a policy may, over the long term, ultimately create
a social equity benefit to marginalized groups. For example, given higher
proportionate spending on utility bills for LMI families, a net-zero-energy
building will reduce monthly expenses in both the short and long term.
Inaccessibility refers to barriers that arise from strategies that overlook
ease of use, relevance, and ability to exploit program and action benefits,
for low-income households and marginalized groups. For example, the
accessibility of an online platform to promote retrofit incentives may be
inaccessible to a family without access to internet or knowledge of the
platform’s existence. Additionally, an incentive program that targets only
property owners or developers would be inaccessible to renters, including
tenants of social housing developments.
Reinforcement of structural inequality refers to barriers from strategies that,
if not carefully executed, could increase social equity gaps in the District
(see Box 3. ), or ignore historical redlining policies that still marginalize
populations in the District today. If policies are not thoughtfully designed,
risk exists that these structural inequalities may persist. On the other hand,
these strategies also pose opportunities to create intentional policies
that increase social equity in the District. For example, building-code
compliance policies can be designed to be neighborhood-specific with
targeted financing schemes for low-income households.

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

47



This framework focuses on risks to equity, and supports an inquiry to each action that drives the
cause of the problem. This allows the consultant team and a carefully selected roundtable of
local and national energy-equity experts to identify actionable solutions to each risk.
Table 4 identifies risks to equity that correspond with a proposed action, followed by the
amended action with a solution. The amended actions are included in Clean Energy DC
as the final proposed actions in the following sections. Specific additional actions targeting
equity follow.
It is important to note that all proposed actions in Clean Energy DC are subject to continued
revision and change as continued conversation with the District’s communities take place,
and as lessons are learned through program implementation. Table 4. Amendments to Actions
is an overview of the amendments to proposed actions that posed a risk to equity. These
amendments are a result of a collaboration between the roundtable of energy equity experts,
local stakeholder and public engagement (Section 1.4), and the Clean Energy DC team. This is
followed by a new recommended action, EQ.1.

↓↓ Table 4: Amendments to Actions to Address Equity.
Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

NEW CONSTRUCTION
NC.1 Establish a path to the phased adoption of net-zero codes between 2021 and 2026
Amend building codes to dictate post-occupancy
requirements that reflect differing unit specifications,
such as each unit’s utility costs, size of unit, and type
of unit.
Prioritize new construction for low-income multifamily
housing developments through financial incentives or
subsidies.
Consider funding new construction developments for
net-zero energy affordable housing. This can be phased
in, beginning with smaller projects before looking at the
financial feasibility of
larger projects.

NC.2 Provide a net-zero energy incentive package
These incentive packages will prioritize developers of LMI
or social housing projects.

48

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

EXISTING BUILDINGS
EB.2 Increase DCSEU flexibility
Pay special attention to include LMI communities by
engaging with relevant community organizations.
Track the performance and results of this targeted LMI
community outreach.

EB.3 Provide the incentives necessary to operate a District-wide deep energy retrofit program
Provide LMI communities with sustainable and equitable
loans, as well as energy literacy training and energy
management coaching.

Develop and implement a specialized engagement
strategy to educate and inform LMI, social, and
affordable housing communities on building energy
performance data.

EB.5 Implement a Building Energy Performance Standard
Ensure owners of affordable housing developments can
apply for a short-term waiver to the BEPS. In exchange for
a grace period, the owners will submit a long-term plan
detailing a compliance path.
Consider offering financial incentives to building owners
to support compliance, with advanced funding given to
owners of affordable housing developments.

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

49



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

CROSS CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.1 Establish a Green Bank and increase other funding for energy efficiency and renewable
energy projects in new and existing buildings
Explore options to include the affordable housing
community in providing input to decisions made by the
Green Bank, and on establishing other funding initiatives.

CCB.2 Enhance the District’s Property Assessed Clean Energy financing program
The residential program will include options for unsecured
financing and provide financial incentives at point of
sale. Tenants of residential buildings will also have the
option to finance energy-efficiency upgrades in smaller
installations, rather than financing a large upgrade with
multiple energy efficiency improvements.
CCB.3 Ensure code compliance in all buildings through increased investment in robust
code enforcement
Help ensure impartial verification of performance
standards via third-party quality assurance for code
compliance. To support low-income and affordable
housing developments, the District should provide
design support incentives.

CCB.4 Incentivize and require submetering
This action can be particularly sensitive – and important
– for affordable housing. As buildings increase in their
efficiency toward net-zero energy levels of performance,
developers of affordable housing must be able to
provide a reduced utility allowance and proportionally
increase the rent. However, the District should ensure
that the net level of affordability for the tenant remains
the same.

50

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

CROSS CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.6 Maintain an ongoing outreach program to foster and expand awareness, education,
and opportunities for collaborating around high-performance buildings
Include education and engagement on the various
options for alternative energy. An important point of education is the differentiation between electricity needs
and heating energy needs, the associated costs, and
options for each.

CCB.12 Implement a high-performance energy media, outreach, and communications strategy
When telling this story, partner with trusted community
organizations (i.e., social justice advocacy groups).

CCB.13 Create a coordinated green jobs and workforce development platform
Reach out to LMI communities in partnership with local,
trusted community organizations. Promote “green job”
opportunities to LMI communities.

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

51



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY
CRE.2 Provide the Standard Offer Service through aggregated power purchase agreements
The District’s Standard Offer Service will provide the most
competitive retail price on electricity when it is enacted,
but as the price of electricity fluctuates, it may prove to
be the more expensive option over time.
The District should explore options to design electricity
rates for low-income customers. Low-income customers
currently are exempt from paying the distribution cost
included in the regular rate, approximately 25% of the
average utility bill.
CRE.4 Develop a centralized solar information and commerce platform
Reach out to LMI communities in partnership with local,
trusted community organizations, to help disseminate
information and reach all neighborhoods
and communities.

CRE.5 Continue to refine and implement the targeted solar proliferation strategy that has been
launched under the Solar for All program
Include tenant advocacy groups in the design and
development of the strategy. Conduct a study to
determine the value proposition for tenants and
property owners under different housing scenarios, and
tailor outreach accordingly. Consider implementing a
“Solar Coach” program that would reach rental and
low income communities, to increase awareness and
education on solar.

52

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
ESM.1 Define a vision of the future grid and characterize the stages of grid modernization
Continue reaching out to stakeholders and interested
citizens to increase engagement at MEDSIS town hall
meetings. Expand outreach to LMI communities and
tenant advocacy groups.

ESM.4 Intervene in Public Service Commission proceedings related to grid modernization
Reach out to LMI communities in partnership with local,
trusted community organizations, to help disseminate
information and reach all neighborhoods
and communities.

ESM.11 Pursue pilot projects related to key modernization capabilities and technologies
Include tenant advocacy groups in the design and
development of the strategy. Conduct a study to
determine the value proposition for tenants and
property owners under different housing scenarios, and
tailor outreach accordingly. Consider implementing a
“Solar Coach” program that would reach rental and
low income communities, to increase awareness and
education on solar.

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

53



Possible Risks to Equity

Amended Action

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION
EV.1 Adopt an EV-ready building code
Emphasize the installation of EV charging equipment
on multifamily properties can help promote EVs in highdensity neighborhoods.

EV.3 Implement an EV bulk buy program
Provide income-based EV subsidies to account for LMI
communities.

As Section 3.1 discussed, past government decisions have contributed to inequality. Thus, it is
of utmost importance that Clean Energy DC addresses equity head on, and strive for equity
throughout implementation and future iterations of revisions. In addition to these amendments
to actions, the first action proposed in Clean Energy DC is an overarching strategy that will help
inform the implementation process of all other actions in the subsequent chapters. This action
aims to help ensure that each strategy will be undertaken in a manner that strives to support
populations disproportionately affected by climate and energy issues, and to create equal
access to the social benefits and opportunities posited in each action.

54

CLEAN ENERGY DC



3.4.2

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

In addition to adjusting other actions, there is a need for action specifically aimed at improving
equity in energy planning and programs going forward. This work requires both that the District
change its own approaches to engagement, and that it support community groups and
residents in building capacity to engage on these issues.

EQ.1

Build capacity to plan for equity in all energy actions and programs

Action: Support capacity-building efforts to enhance the ability of local groups to engage on
energy issues, and help ensure that energy planning and programs have an ongoing focus
on equity.
Relevance: Historically, energy planning in the District has often not involved all populations and
groups within the community. The highly technical nature of much energy and climate work
often leaves certain communities out of the process. However, energy issues affect everyone
in the District. Moreover, many socially and financially vulnerable groups will especially feel
the resulting impacts— positive or negative—on energy prices and climate vulnerability. While
DOEE has sought to identify and address equity concerns with this plan, and to engage and
involve local groups and residents, this is just the start of this work. Through these conversations
DOEE have learned that additional training and capacity building is often needed for residents
to have in-depth conversations about energy planning. This work is sufficiently important to
justify its own action in the plan.
Details: DOEE has begun several innovative efforts to start building capacity with local groups in
the District, supported by grant funding.
As a place-based pilot project, the District has established an Equity Advisory Group (EAG) of
ten community residents from the neighborhoods around the Watts Branch stream, to guide
planning and implementation of the Clean Energy DC and Climate Ready DC plans. The
District formed the first EAG in a specific neighborhood impacted by environmental issues.
While energy is a District-wide issue, working with a place-based group can result in deeper,
more meaningful conversations and relationships.
Through community interviews, DOEE has learned that residents are more inclined to own these
efforts if there are some early success demonstrated in their communities. This directly aligned
with other efforts to leverage climate resiliency initiatives and the associated funding, such as a
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers flood-risk study that will provide the sort of building-level detail not
usually available for neighborhood-based planning. Grant funding has increased the capacity
of the EAG members by addressing barriers to convene community meetings to include food,
transportation, and childcare and providing training and technical support to both residents
and government staff. The EAG will guide the development of community-driven climateresilience and clean energy strategies that combine climate mitigation and adaptation with
express considerations of equity through power sharing and co-equal development with the
project team and government partners.
Additionally, DOEE is working with a set of community partners to begin determining if or
how the District can get 100% of its electricity from renewable sources by 2050, and how to
ensure that benefits are shared equally amongst all populations in the District, and that atrisk populations do not carry the burden disproportionately. The District has grant funding
to begin the planning process. The first year of the project will focus on understanding what

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

55



an equitable, renewable District looks like to yet to be determined neighborhoods. Over
the summer of 2018, two largescale community meetings will be held in different District
neighborhoods to enable community members to share their views on equity and renewable
energy. This information will be used as the foundation for a future planning process. DOEE also
plans to partner with the Office of Peoples’ Counsel (OPC) to aid in public engagement and
capacity building efforts focused on energy issues specifically.
In engaging with the community on energy policy and building capacity, several key elements
of communication must be considered. The following key points emerged directly out of the
community engagement done by DOEE and the Clean Energy DC team in 2017, along with the
results of local focus groups conducted for Sustainable DC 2.0.
• Diversity in language and culture within organizations is important, as well as representation
or engagement from all communities – multicultural and multilingual materials need to be
created and circulated by the DOEE. The District should go beyond what is required by the
Language Access Act to proactively expand the set of materials and resources translated,
the language mix of translations, the physical representation of people, and the connection
to hyperlocal areas of the District that may be more relevant than the Wards or ANCs.
Engagement should be rooted in communities, be linked to impact specific needs, and be
sensitive to cultural practices.
• Place and personal connections matter – where engagement activities are conducted is
always an important consideration, but simply checking a box by going to a location is not
sufficient; DOEE should invest in building and maintaining long-term relationships. The District
should intentionally prioritize communities that have had a disproportional impact by the lack
of education and awareness spread to them.
• While electronic communications may seem easy and cheap, the “digital divide” remains a
major impediment to accessing information in some communities and populations, so other
communication methods must always be used as well.
• Find a way to relate each action to other issues. The District Government and its partners must
ensure that they communicate and discuss how do these actions align with and connect to
other major challenges and initiatives in the District. Issues need to be kept relevant to ensure
buy-in, and there needs to be a process to ensure that these communities are kept in the
conversation as plans and programs are updated or changed.
• As part of agency community engagement, DOEE should consider a sustainability public
education and marketing campaign to educate and inform local businesses and residents of
the city’s sustainability priorities, activities, and resources, as well as the impact and value to
the business community and residents.

56

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

In 2018, create a guide on how to launch and
administer equity advisory groups during agency
plan development and implementation. This guide
should be co-created with the community in the
Watts Branch pilot project and clear guidance on
how to replicate the advisory group in the future.

2

In 2018, hold two neighborhood meetings on 100%
renewable energy planning and equity to allow
the community to help define success from the
beginning of the project. These meetings should be
held in vulnerable communities particularly impacted
by energy planning but who have traditionally been
underrepresented in the planning process.

3

Apply the experience and lessons learned from the
two projects above to current and future planning
efforts such as Sustainable DC 2.0 and the next
update of the Clean Energy DC plan.

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

57



58

CLEAN ENERGY DC



BUILDINGS

iv

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

BUILDINGS

59



60

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4 BUILDINGS
In this chapter, recommendations are provided in three interrelated
sections: New Construction (section 4.1), Existing Buildings (section
4.2), and Cross-Cutting Building Actions (section 4.3) that apply to
both new and existing buildings. At the end of the chapter, each set of
recommendations is summarized by an individual roadmap that can be
used by the District to guide their implementation of the first five years of
Clean Energy DC, as well as future actions through 2032.

4.1

NEW CONSTRUCTION

4.1.1

POLICY AND TARGETS OVERVIEW

Rapid reductions in carbon emissions are both necessary and feasible in the District’s new
construction sector. New designs and technologies can deliver superior occupant services
while using substantially less energy than a building built to typical North American building
codes.69 The construction of these high-performance buildings will be critical to ensuring highperformance of homes, workplaces, and other buildings, for the duration of their useful life,
which can extend several decades.
This section presents several recommendations to promote, construct, and support highperformance buildings across the District. These actions are targeted to single family homes,
large and small multifamily buildings, offices, government buildings, and most other building
types in the District.
While the number of high-performance buildings in the District is currently small, awareness
of their benefits is spreading. Developers are increasingly aware of, and drawn to, energy
efficiency, renewable energy, improved thermal comfort and daylighting, higher worker
productivity, and more resilient performance during power outages. However, in the absence
of regulatory requirements, these things tend to remain on the “nice to have” list.70,71
By upgrading building codes, providing financial support, and offering educational and training
opportunities for the design and construction industries, the District Government can transform
its built environment for low-carbon resilience.

69
70
71

Throughout this document, “codes” refers to “energy, building, and construction codes.”
Judith Heervagen, Impact of Workplace Daylight Exposure on Sleep, Physical Activity, and Quality of Life,
Alex Wilson, Resilient Design: Smarter Building for a Turbulent Future, Environmental Building News, March 2012.

BUILDINGS

61



4.1.1.1

HIGH-PERFORMANCE BUILDINGS CHARACTERISTICS

Across the United States, the number of high-performance buildings is growing. Nationwide,
39 buildings have achieved the International Living Future Institute’s (ILFI) Net-Zero Energy
Building certification—including a six-story Class A office building and a production townhome
community. Another 350 buildings are seeking the same level of performance and are now in
various stages of development.72 The New Buildings Institute’s (NBI) Getting to Zero database
includes approximately 140 net-zero or net-zero ready commercial and multifamily buildings,
while the Net-zero Energy Coalition has documented several thousand potential, and 21
verified, net-zero energy homes.73,74
These high-performance buildings share a consistent set of design and technological
characteristics,75 including:
• High-quality building envelopes with average insulation values twice those typically required
by North American building codes, as well as detailed performance-tested air barriers.
• High-performance windows that reduce cooling demand in the summer and minimize heat
loss in the winter.
• Partially passive heating and ventilation systems that reduce the need to use energy-intensive
mechanicals systems.
• Heat pump-based heating and cooling systems that offer energy-efficient alternatives to
conventional heating and cooling systems.
• Hydronic distribution systems for heating and cooling.
• Heat recovery systems that minimize heat loss through ventilation.
• Daylighting strategies that reduce the need for electric lighting.
• Energy efficient LED lighting.
• Variable speed drives and pumps that vary ventilation and heating/cooling distribution speeds
to provide optimal levels of heating, cooling and ventilation.
• Active monitoring and engagement with user loads.
• Easily accessible, transparent energy use data.
• Active attention to actual building energy usage on the part of building managers.
While these technologies and designs are generally not the norm in new construction, they are
well tested and understood. What is most innovative about high-performance buildings is that
they consolidate and integrated the full array of technologies and strategies under one roof.

72
73
74
75

62

ILFI website, data obtained May 25, 2016.
http://newbuildings.org/resource/getting-to-zero-database/
http://netzeroenergycoalition.com/zero-energy-case-studies/
Liljequist, B., 2016, The Power of Zero, Learning from the World’s Leading Net-zero Energy Buildings.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.1.1.2

MARKET DEVELOPMENT AND ADOPTION

While the number of these high-performance buildings is growing, several barriers to their
widespread adoption still exist, both within the District and elsewhere in the U.S. It is often
assumed that cost is the primary driver towards market acceptance of technology change
within the built environment. However, the reality is that many factors influence the adoption of
new, innovative models of building design and construction. Some of these factors include the
following.
Market uptake of new, but proven, technology: Many high-performance building technologies
have moved beyond the prototype stage and have been certified by the relevant federal
Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory.
Technologies and systems such as those listed above are widely available in the marketplace.
However, they have not yet become a standard part of the building and construction industry
in many cities.
Technical know-how by building specialists: Another reason for low uptake rates is the lack
of familiarity with newer building technologies among engineers and architects. As with other
major cities working to improve building energy performance, there are a handful of firms and
contractors in the District with direct experience in these advanced buildings, which enables
their construction locally. However, many firms have little experience with high-performance
building technologies.
Knowledge and understanding: As in the case of building specialists, there is a dearth of
knowledge about high-performance buildings among building industry members, such as
property managers, building owners, and developers. As such, while developers may be
interested in pursuing high-performance projects, a lack of understanding of, or comfort with,
the options available may hinder uptake.
Delays in the spread of innovation: The delay between the introduction of an innovative
technology and its widespread adoption by the mass market typically lasts several years. This
is the classic innovation diffusion pattern, in which a small number of early adopters accept
an innovation long before it becomes popular. However, an innovation can more quickly
move into the mainstream with effective communication channels. Effective marketing
can strengthen demand for high-performance buildings. This demand can, in turn, create a
competitive environment, further accelerating innovation and reducing costs.
Demonstration buildings: The ability to see and experience a local, successful example of a
high-performance building greatly accelerates the spread of building innovations and drives
acceptance. Of the hundreds of examples of high-performance buildings that can be found
across the country, a few are in the District. For example, Dunbar High School boasts a solar
array, the District’s largest ground-source heat pump, and the highest score achieved in the
U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) for SchoolsNC certification program to date.76 The construction of similar buildings will help increase the
visibility and uptake of high-performance buildings.
Collaboration: The history of innovation is filled with communities of people evolving innovation
together. The District currently has an assortment of high-performance building leaders, but
bringing them together in a more cohesive way would greatly accelerate the uptake of highperformance building technologies.

76

U.S. Green Building Council, 2015, http://www.usgbc.org/articles/reaching-new-heights-dunbar-highest-scoring-leed-schools-nc-project-date

BUILDINGS

63



Cost: At the end of the day, costs matter. The construction cost premium of a highperformance building can pencil out 3% to 10% above that of a conventional building built to
the minimum energy efficiency standards of code.77 A small study conducted within the District
has indicated that the cost premium for highly energy efficient buildings is approximately 1%
to 12%, depending on building type, with a return on investment ranging from 5% to 12%.78
Achieving net-zero energy performance increases the estimated cost premium to 5% to 19%,
with a return on investment of up to nearly 38%, depending on the use of available tax and
renewable energy certificates.
However, these cost differentials are largely the product of a pricing system based on
customized, non-standard fabrication and design. As North American and European
governments at all levels increasingly shift toward requiring net-zero ready and Passive House
levels of performance, the materials needed for high-performance buildings are growing more
common, and costs will decline accordingly. Meanwhile, as industry experience increases, the
cost premium associated with design and construction also declines.

4.1.1.3

DISTRICT ACTION

The recommendations offered below seek to address the limitations identified above. The
District has already made several moves to improve the energy performance of its buildings
through various changes to its laws and building codes.
The history of green-building policy in the District began with the DC Green Building Act of
2006, which requires LEED certification of all new and major renovations of commercial private
buildings 50,000 square feet and larger, and all public or publically financed commercial
projects and multifamily buildings larger than 10,000 square feet. In 2014, the District adopted
one of the country’s greenest building codes by approving the 2013 DC Green Construction
Code, based on the 2012 edition of the International Green Construction Code, and the
2013 DC Energy Conservation Code, based on the 2012 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code. DCRA reviews all projects for energy code compliance. The DC Green
Construction Code requirements apply to all commercial new construction and renovation
projects 10,000 square feet and larger, and all residential projects 10,000 square feet and
larger and four stories or higher, that do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Green Building Act.
However, much remains to be done to improve the energy efficiency of new buildings, and
transition the District’s buildings to high-performance, low-carbon standards.

77
78

64

The Power of Zero: Cost Study, 2014, http://www.integralgroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Power-of-Zero.pdf
Net-zero and Living Building Challenge Financial Study: A Cost Comparison Report for Buildings in the District of Columbia, 2013, http://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/
files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/attachments/20140411_Net%20%20Zero%20and%20Living%20Building%20Challenge%20Study_FINAL.pdf

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.1.2

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

4.1.2.1

UPDATE BUILDING AND ENERGY CODES

NC.1	Establish a path to the phased adoption of net-zero codes between
2021 and 2026
Action: Use the 2018 and 2021 code updates to establish a pathway toward net-zero energy
performance in all residential and commercial buildings over the next 10 years, starting in 2021
with the construction of new single-family and small multifamily buildings.
Relevance: Building codes are the single most powerful tool that cities have at their disposal to
require higher levels of building performance. In general, codes tend to increase in stringency
using small percentage improvements that occur at regular intervals. For example, several
cities and states across the country have adopted ASHRAE’s 90.1 building standard as a basis
for their energy codes, and it is updated every three years. ASHRAE also recently created
the ASHRAE Standard 189.1-2014, which supplements 90.1 with a higher performance green
building standard. Provisions in this code offer an excellent resource for more aggressive energy
improvements.
If the District is to achieve its emission-reduction targets, it will need to make immediately and
more aggressively update its building code. It will need to push requirements toward net-zero
energy performance to meet its energy and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions targets and
maintain its position on the leading edge of green building code development.
Code authorities regularly release updates, and the District has a history of heavily amending
and strengthening national model codes in creating its own building code. The next update
of the latest code cycle is expected to occur in 2018, with the proposed new code scheduled
to be released for public comment in early 2018. Another code amendment is in the works for
2021. These amendments offer key near-term opportunities for the District to move building
requirements toward net-zero levels of performance.
Building code updates also afford the District an opportunity to improve building resilience to
climate change (in support of Climate Ready DC) and support grid modernization (as discussed
in Section 5.2). Net-zero building strategies can also overlap with the push for more resilient
buildings, such as on-site electricity generation to serve all building energy needs. This helps
shelter building occupants from grid outages and lower daily energy requirements, allowing
on-site energy generation and storage to serve more occupant needs (e.g., space heating,
water heating, refrigeration) over a longer period.
Details: It may be premature for the District to implement net-zero energy levels of performance
for all building types with the 2018 code, but the District Government should plan to build a
foundation for and pathway toward a complete set of net-zero building codes by 2026, at the
latest.
As discussed in the previous section, net-zero ready buildings currently carry higher upfront
cost than standard code-compliant buildings, but reduce annual energy, and sometimes
maintenance, costs. A 2013 study on the District identified cost premiums associated with netzero to be between 1% to 6% for office buildings, and 2% to 7% for multifamily buildings,79

79

N
 et Zero and Living Building Challenge Financial Study: A Cost Comparison Report for Buildings in the District of Columbia, 2013, http://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/
files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/attachments/20140411_Net%20%20Zero%20and%20Living%20Building%20Challenge%20Study_FINAL.pdf

BUILDINGS

65



while a 2015 study from Vermont found a 12% increase in the cost of single family dwellings.80
A 2017 study that analyzed net-zero ready buildings in the same climate zone as the District’s
found that net-zero ready office, retail, and larger multifamily (high-rise and low-rise) buildings
can currently all be constructed with a cost premium under 3%, while premiums for smaller
multifamily buildings can range from 3 to 6%, depending on the building style.81 The same study
found that premiums for single family dwellings were found to range from 3% to 4% for medium
and large-sized homes, and up to 14% for small homes.
Governments and other organizations will continue to conduct these analyses, but the cost
premiums are expected to continue to decline, for the reasons discussed in the previous
section. In pursuing a path to net-zero ready building codes, the District should continue
to review these kinds of cost analysis to inform the design and execution of any supporting
initiatives, such as the provision of education materials and events, training seminars, best
practice guides, incentives, and prescriptive requirements.
While the District Government has not yet fully determined how to qualify a building as net zero,
the development of Appendix Z is a first step towards codifying such buildings in the future.
Appendix Z is the first voluntary, performance-based code compliance pathway for buildings in
North America, and has been included into the 2018 code. It defines a net-zero energy building
as a highly energy efficient building that produces on-site or procures, through the construction
of new renewable energy generation, enough energy to meet or exceed the annual energy
consumption of its operations.
The Appendix establishes minimum building performance requirements for overall energy use
intensity, thermal energy performance, and airtightness. To achieve net zero, a building must
be made as energy efficient as possible before specifying renewable energy equipment that
would supply it. It also outlines requirements concerning appropriate type of renewable energy
generation, as well as specific stipulations for energy metering and building commissioning.
Recommendations for the 2018 Update: For the current code update, the District should
implement an increase in energy code requirements typical of a three-year cycle. However,
these should be joined by tactical requirements that take advantage of current incentives and
support more significant changes as early as 2020. Specific areas the District should consider
adopting:
• A requirement for continuous exterior insulation. This requirement should be coupled with
advanced fresh-air ventilation requirements to ensure good indoor air quality.
• A requirement for windows with U values equivalent to the top 25% in class, based on an
exploration of the selection of windows currently available in the DC marketplace.
• An alternate compliance path for high-performance buildings, such as net-zero, Passive
House, or the Living Building Challenge. Such a code should also be used as a basis for
awarding financial and permitting incentives. This is accomplished through the inclusion
of Appendix Z (discussed above), which was included in the proposed 2018 code update
developed during the development of this Plan. A similar path for single-family net-zero energy
green homes should also be developed.

80
81

66

Efficiency Vermont. “Net Zero Energy Feasibility Study Full Report.” January 2015
British Columbia Energy Step Code: 2017 Metrics Research, https://www.bchousing.org/research-centre/library/residential-design-construction/energy-stepcode-2017-full-report

CLEAN ENERGY DC



The District Government should also explore specific requirements for commercial and
residential buildings. For commercial buildings, it should:
• Adopt ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2013 and chapter seven of ASHRAE 189.1-2014
• Adopt a commercial air leakage performance testing requirement, like the requirement for
residential buildings in the 2013 code update.
• Sub-metering of major systems, including plug loads (pending feasibility and value analysis).
• Sub-metering of tenant spaces.
The District Government should consider clarifying zoning regulations pertaining to the use
of solar panels, including classifying solar panels differently than other rooftop mechanical
equipment to allow for reduced setbacks and thus more coverage.
For residential buildings, the District Government should:
• Adopt a requirement for the use of mini-split ductless heat pumps as the primary heating
source in residential buildings using electric resistance heating above 2 kW of installed
capacity, as has been required by the State of Washington.
• Create a Green Construction Code for single-family and small multifamily buildings (under four
stories tall, or 10,000 square feet) that include measures like those included in the other existing
District green codes.
• Offer alternative compliance paths for third-party standard pathways, such as LEED for Homes,
Enterprise Green Communities, Passive House, and Living Building Challenge.82 and,
• Continue to mandate air performance sealing, and add any supplemental requirements
determined appropriate based on experience implementing the 2012 code.
Recommendations for the 2021 Update: For the next code cycle, the District Government
should push a much stronger update that drives all buildings toward net-zero energy
performance by 2026 at the very latest.
For the DC Residential Energy Code (single-family and small multifamily residential buildings
(<10,000 square feet)), the District Government should adopt a net-zero energy code for
new construction in 2021, and require all substantial renovations to be net-zero by 2026 at
the very latest.83
For commercial and large multifamily buildings, the 2021 code update should mandate a series
of prescriptive measures that begin to shift the sector toward net-zero energy performance and
net-zero energy codes for all buildings. While this can be adopted as late as 2026, the District
Government should investigate the feasibility of moving to a net-zero code even earlier. The
2021 code update should include (but not be limited to) the following prescriptive measures:
• Minimum Insulation: R-40 walls, R-60 roof
• Minimum Windows: U=0.22
• Minimum air leakage rate: 1.0 ACH @ 50 Pascals
• Ventilation: rate and locations per ASHRAE using heat recovery and dedicated outdoor air
systems, solar electric pre-heat

82
83

Based on recommendations from DOEE’s Single Family and Small Multifamily Working Group.
Based on recommendations from DOEE’s Single Family and Small Multifamily Working Group.

BUILDINGS

67



• Heating and cooling: reverse cycle chillers, high-performance air source heat pumps, with VRF
or hydronic distribution, with carbon dioxide (CO2) mandated as compression gas
• Lighting density: 0.3 W/ft2
• A minimum level of daylighting for all occupied spaces
• Occupant and operator energy monitoring system and reduction strategy
• Minimum appliance standard: best in class ENERGY STAR®
• Solar panels throughout all flat roof areas, except those needed for skylights, vents, HVAC
equipment, and other sustainable improvements such as green roofs 84
• Hot water: heat pump-based system
In addition to these performance requirements, the District should also include minimum
requirements for post-occupancy performance, including minimum energy use intensity
(EUI) performance requirements appropriate for a given building and unit type and size.
This will allow the District Government to regulate the occupancy phase and ensure all
loads are addressed while enabling the separation of responsibility between developer and
occupant/operator. The District may wish to use the ILFI’s Living Building Challenge (LBC) or
Net-zero Energy Building (NZEB) certification, which requires a third-party auditor to certify
net-zero energy performance. This will help protect tenants in multifamily buildings from
disproportionately bearing cost premiums associated with new building codes.
New construction for low-income multifamily housing developments should be prioritized
through financial incentives or subsidies and requirements for tax credit award. This can be
phased in, beginning with smaller projects before looking at the feasibility of funding larger
projects.
Finally, depending on the stringency of the 2021 code requirements, the District should adjust
its code update cycle to pause code updates for five years following the adoption of netzero code requirements, waiting until 2026 for the next code update. This will improve industry
palatability as it will reduce the disruption associated with shorter code cycles.
Next Steps

1

Fully adopt and codify the new 2018 energy code in 2018.

2

In 2018, analyze the feasibility of moving toward net-zero single-family and small
multifamily residential codes during the next code update.

3

In 2018 and 2019, engage with stakeholders and determine a pathway to net-zero
codes across all buildings by 2026 at the very latest, with an objective to adopt net-zero
codes earlier.

4

In 2019, the Construction Code Coordinating Board should begin work on developing
the 2021 energy and green construction codes.

84

68

HVAC is heating, ventilation, and air conditioning.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.1.2.2 UPDATE BUILDING AND ENERGY CODES
NC.2	Provide a net-zero energy incentive package
Action: Offer a major incentive package that drives a steady market shift toward the
construction of net-zero energy buildings.85
Relevance: Increasing the proportion of high efficiency, net-zero energy buildings will be critical
to achieving deep GHG and energy-use reductions in the buildings sector. To shift the market in
this way, the District Government must provide an attractive package of incentives that drive
different choices and behaviors. If effectively designed and implemented, these incentives
can drive a steady shift over the next few years toward the types of buildings the District
Government will soon need to require. By promoting high-performance buildings through
incentives in the short term, the District will provide an aspirational symbol for developers,
building owners, designers, and contractors.
Details: If it is to capture the attention of mainstream developers, the District Government will
need to offer substantial incentives—especially during periods of fast-paced construction. An
effective incentive package will comprise the components listed below.86 Consider rolling out
these programs and incentives for single-family and multifamily buildings first, in line with the
phasing-in of net-zero energy building codes. Also, when assembling these incentive packages,
the District Government should look for opportunities to prioritize developers of low-to-middle
income and social housing projects.
Property Tax Abatements: First and most importantly, the District Government should create
a pilot program to provide property-tax abatements for buildings that meet net-zero energy
standards. A tax abatement occurs when a government reduces a property’s tax rate in return
for meeting certain criteria. These tax abatements should be based on the actual building
energy performance, rather than the performance it was initially designed to achieve. Tax
abatements should cover up to 75% of any cost premium associated with a building operating
at the prescribed net-zero energy performance, not including the cost of renewables (which
are already heavily incentivized).
To create an initial cadre of net-zero energy -buildings, the District Government should initially
limit the program to 20 projects. After this initial phase, the District Government should evaluate
the effectiveness of the program and adjust the level of incentives provided accordingly.
This program’s cost will depend on the types and sizes of buildings included, as well as their
performance (e.g., net-zero energy, net-zero water, Living Building Challenge).
With 75% abatement, a single-family dwelling would cost the District Government $400 to $800
per year in lost property tax revenues, small and large multifamily buildings would cost $8,000
to $150,000 per year, and small to large commercial buildings would cost between $15,000 and
$105,000.87 Assuming a variety of building types and performance levels, a preliminary estimate
suggests the program could cost the District Government around $15 million in foregone
taxes. After the tax abatements expire, however, tax revenue to the District will increase. The
increased property, deed transfer, and recordation tax revenue also pencil out around $15
million (assuming a 3% discount rate), effectively making the program cost-neutral to the District
Government over time.

85
86
87

 reening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations, commissioned by DOEE and completed
G
by Capital E, 2016.
ibid
Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations

BUILDINGS

69



Accelerated Permitting: The District Government should also provide an accelerated permitting
pathway for net-zero energy projects. This pathway should simplify the permitting process and
reduce DOEE and DCRA permitting time. The Office of Zoning should also grant net-zero energy
projects a streamlined hearing process and reduced/eliminated fees from the Office of Zoning.
This program will require support from upper-level leadership and dedicated staff. The District
Government should consider a front-of-queue system to ensure accountable and verifiable
expedited processing. The cost of staffing this incentive and serving 20 buildings over 4 years is
estimated to be under $60,000.88
Reduced permit fees: To encourage early adopters of net-zero buildings the District
Government should reduce or waive permit fees for net-zero energy projects. The permit
fees should be discounted or waived by DCRA once the green plans reviewer has verified
the design meets a code official approved net-zero energy standard. The Permit Schedule of
Fees (12 DCMR Schedule K) specifies the cost of permits; New construction and alterations are
charged differently based on size.89
Floor Area Ratio Increases: The District Government should grant floor area ratio (FAR) increases
for buildings that target net-zero energy standards. FAR is the ratio of a building’s total floor area
(gross floor area) to the size of the piece of land upon which it is built, so zoning limits on FAR are
in effect limits on building height and massing. Many jurisdictions across the country grant FAR
bonuses in return for green features. However, thanks to the Federal Height Act, many District
buildings are already maxed out on floor area ratio and unable to go higher. Accordingly, this
incentive will have limited applicability. In many parts of the District, the zoning code limits FAR
and building height to levels far below the Height Act limits; in these areas, a FAR incentive
could be very helpful. This is expected to cost very little financially, but the District Government
would need to consider the opportunity cost of implementing this incentive, specifically
whether it limits the ability to pursue other energy and/or sustainability-focused zoning policies.
Green Area Ratio Increases: Fourth, the District Government should utilize the Green Area Ratio
(GAR) program to incentivize on-site renewable energy needed for net-zero energy buildings.
GAR is an innovative environmental sustainability zoning regulation that sets standards for
landscape and site design to help reduce stormwater runoff, improve air quality, and keep
the District cooler.90 The District should consider increasing the (GAR) multiplier for solar panels
to incentivize an increase in solar panel installations, as well as considering an increase in the
overall GAR requirement in all zones.
PACE and Green Bank Financing: As discussed in the Cross-Cutting Buildings section, the District
should continue to promote the Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing program for
commercial and multifamily buildings to help finance net-zero energy improvements for new
construction projects (See Action EB.5 for more). As part of adjusting and expanding PACE,
the program should amend project underwriting criteria to provide accelerated approval for
building improvements essential to achieving net-zero energy performance levels. This should
be independent of near-term financial payback calculations, so long as they advance this
broader public purpose. This underwriting incentive would provide project developers with a
valuable program enhancement by offering guaranteed access to upfront capital to finance
any additional marginal costs associated with these upgrades. If the District creates a Green
Bank (as recommended in Action CCB.1), the Green Bank should explore other incentives for
NZE buildings.

88
89
90

70

Ibid.
https://dcra.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/dcra/publication/attachments/BldgPermit_Feesupdate_0.pdf
http://doee.dc.gov/GAR

CLEAN ENERGY DC



While the incentives above may apply more specifically to commercial and large multifamily
buildings, the District Government can offer similar incentives to single-family and small
multifamily buildings under 10,000 square feet. These should include expedited permitting and
waived fees for buildings that meet designated performance requirements or certifications
(e.g., a net-zero energy certification).91

Next Steps

1

In 2018, design the structural and regulatory incentives, such as accelerated permitting
pathways, and floor area ratio and green area ratio bonuses, and implement them in
conjunction with the updated construction and zoning codes. Begin with single family
and small multifamily buildings.

2

Develop policy initiatives to allow tax abatements or other financial incentives for deep
green retrofit projects beginning once the updated codes are in place.

3

Starting in 2020, explore financial incentives and funding for net-zero energy affordable
housing developments.

4.1.2.3 LEADERSHIP AND CATALYZING CHANGE
NC.3	Issue a net-zero energy innovation request to the federal government
and regional governments
Action: Lobby the federal government and other regional governments to adopt the same
level of building energy performance as the District Government.
Relevance: The District Government has no jurisdiction over federal government buildings in
the District, making it impossible to require them to achieve any specific level of performance.
However, the District has a unique opportunity to influence the federal government because of
both their co-location and the special relationship between the two jurisdictions. While District
Government legislation is subject to Congressional approval, the relationship can be twoway, allowing ideas and inspiration to move from the District to the federal government and
vice-versa. Moreover, alignment between the District and other regional governments on high
performance building will benefit the entire region and reduce costs.
Furthermore, Executive Orders have put the federal government on track to require netzero levels of performance in all newly constructed buildings, where feasible, during the next
decade.92,93 The United States Department of Energy (DOE) has also taken a leadership role by
supporting the development of high-performance buildings. As such, there is an opportunity
for the District to encourage the federal government to construct new buildings that meet a
net-zero energy level of performance. Especially where they are particularly prominent, these
high-performance buildings will help to accelerate similar development within the District while
providing examples for the rest of the country.
91
92
93

Based on recommendations from DOEE’s Single Family and Small Multifamily Working Group.
Executive Order 13693 -- Planning for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade, 2015, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/19/executive-order-planning-federal-sustainability-next-decade
Executive Order 13514 -- Focused on Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance, 2009,
https://www.fedcenter.gov/programs/eo13514

BUILDINGS

71



Details: To encourage the federal government to achieve the same level of energy
performance required by the District Government, the Council of the District of Columbia
should issue a request by resolution that would challenge both Federal and District government
agencies to build to higher standards. Testimony to Congressional committees will help
educate and raise awareness among the industry and broader public, and can help to push
the discourse forward. In all of these efforts, the District Government should focus on the
potential to the drive a healthy, innovative economy, while creating well-paying, middle-class
green collar jobs. The District Government should meet the same or higher standards as it is
challenging others to meet. A detailed discussion of how the District Government can lead by
example in building energy efficiency is found in Actions EB.9 and EB.10.
Next Steps
In 2018, adopt a resolution to challenge the federal government and other regional
governments to adopt the highest performance standards for government buildings,
and to meet those standards for District Government buildings as well.

NEW CONSTRUCTION ROADMAP

NEW CONSTRUCTION
NC.1 Establish a path to the
phased adoption of net-zero
codes between 2021 and 2026
NC.2 Provide a net-zero energy
incentive package
NC.3 Issue a net-zero energy
innovation request to the federal
government

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

72

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2025

4.1.3

2024

1



4.2

EXISTING BUILDINGS

4.2.1

POLICY AND TARGETS OVERVIEW

Existing buildings consume more energy in the United States than any other sector,
accounting for approximately 40 quadrillion BTUs of energy, or over 41% of all the energy
used in the country.94
The District’s dense urban makeup means that buildings account for an even higher portion of
energy use and emissions. In 2014, District buildings consumed approximately 15 million MMBtu
of on-site energy, 70% of which was electricity use.95 Approximately 74% of GHG emissions in the
District result from the operation of these buildings, the majority of which are non-residential.96
The District will only meet its energy and emissions climate targets if it pursues actions and
programs that target existing buildings—especially commercial buildings.97 However, reductions
in energy use and emissions from residential buildings are also integral to reaching the District’s
energy and emissions targets, and the private and public sectors will have to work together to
make gains.
The District has already taken significant steps to improve building energy performance. It
has taken action on residential and commercial buildings through the District of Columbia
Sustainable Energy Utility, an arms-length organization. Concurrently, the Department of
General Services and District of Columbia Housing Authority have focused on government
building performance.

4.2.1.1

IMPROVING THE PERFORMANCE OF PRIVATELY-OWNED BUILDINGS

The District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility (the DCSEU) is the District Government’s
third-party demand side management (DSM) program administrator, overseeing a wide variety
of energy efficiency programs and incentives. Established in 2012, it is currently operated by
Vermont Energy Investment Corporation (VEIC) under contract to DOEE.
The DCSEU helps residents, institutions, and businesses reduce energy costs through
approximately two dozen programs that are largely funded by a fee levied on ratepayers. It
separates its services into residential buildings, low-income multifamily buildings, commercial
and institutional buildings, and renewable energy generation. The wide range of services
include discounts on energy efficient products (e.g., LED lighting, ENERGY STAR appliances) and
financing solar PV system installations.
The contract with the DCSEU establishes a set of annual minimum and maximum targets.
The targets focus on reducing electricity consumption, peak electricity demand, natural gas
consumption, and energy costs; increasing local renewable energy capacity; and, creating
green jobs, among others. In addition to these overarching targets, the DCSEU is mandated to
focus 20% of its resources on low-income communities. In the Fiscal Year 2017, it invested $8.3
million in affordable housing projects, foodbanks, shelters, and other buildings serving lowincome communities.

94
95
96
97

T his is based on source energy use numbers from the U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.
cfm?id=86&t=1.
The final benchmarking dataset incorporate herein refers to the NYU CUSP dataset of 2014 “cleansed” data.
Green Building Report for the District of Columbia, 2012, http://doee.DCgov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/20140113_Green%20
Building%20Report%202012_FINAL.pdf, p.9.
Sustainable DC Plan, 2012

BUILDINGS

73



Since Fiscal Year 2014, each year the DCSEU has continued to meet or exceed the minimum
benchmark savings in energy use and cost.98 It introduced maximum benchmarks to the
contract for 2016, and in 2017 it hit all minimum benchmarks99 and most maximum benchmarks.
The majority of savings originated in the commercial sector (80-90%), with savings in the
residential sector more difficult to achieve due to the existing building interventions being less
cost-effective than in the commercial sector.100
The continued performance improvement—coupled with this Plan’s recommended additional
flexibility and funding—suggest the District is well positioned to achieve the existing building
energy and emissions reductions necessary to hit its 2032 targets.

4.2.1.2 PUBLIC SECTOR LEADERSHIP
Two District agencies will be important in maintaining and furthering its leadership on climate
and energy through Clean Energy DC. The District’s Department of General Services (DGS),
which manages the District’s real estate portfolio, actively works to lower energy use and
GHG emissions. DGS already tracks and publishes 15-minute interval data for all government
buildings via the BuildSmartDC program.101 This demonstrates transparency and accountability
for government building performance and underscores both the importance and value of
managing building performance in real-time.102 DGS will need to continue leading by example
through earlier and farther-reaching action to shift towards a portfolio of buildings that better
support a low-carbon future.
The District of Columbia Housing Authority (DCHA) will prove another Clean Energy DC catalyst.
It provides quality affordable housing to extremely-low through moderate-income households,
fosters sustainable communities, and cultivates opportunities for residents to improve their
lives.103 Similar to DGS, early and ongoing support by DCHA to advance Clean Energy DC’s
building actions will send important signals to the local market and ensure that affordable
housing benefits from advances in building design and materials that reduce monthly energy
costs and improve comfort and resilience. DCHA serves more than 20,000 households across
the District, including its public housing. DCHA also partners with landlords to provide housing
options to individuals and families through the housing choice voucher and project-based
voucher programs. DCHA will play an essential role in ensuring local equity issues and priorities
are considered in the final design and implementation of recommended policies and
programs. DCHA should be considered a key stakeholder.
While the District has continually pushed building energy performance, and both DGS and
DCHA have taken on leadership roles and organizational mandates in the pursuit of efficient
low carbon buildings, more needs to be done to improve the performance of existing buildings.
This section provides recommendations to help the reduce energy consumption and improve
energy efficiency across the built environment.

98
99
100
101
102
103

74

DCSEU Annual Reports from FY 2012 to FY 2016, https://www.dcseu.com/about
DCSEU. Annual Report Fiscal Year 2017
Discussion with DCSEU leadership on Dec 8, 2017.
BuildSmartDC, http://www.buildsmartDC.com/
With respect to District buildings, DGS should report annual energy consumption, energy savings, carbon emissions and progress against goals publicly in a standard
format year-over-year for increased visibility and accountability.
District of Columbia Housing Authority, Mission and Vision, http://www.dchousing.org/topic.aspx?topid=21

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.2.2

BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING IN THE DISTRICT

The District took a significant step to reduce energy use and emissions from the existing building
sector with its 2008 approval of the Clean and Affordable Energy Act (CAEA). The CAEA
requires owners of large privately-owned commercial and multifamily buildings, and all publiclyowned buildings, to report their energy consumption in a process called energy benchmarking.
Building owners enter building performance information into the EPA’s ENERGY STAR® program
to compare building energy use across multiple building types and multiple states.
For key building types, a score from 1-100 can be issued to demonstrate a given building’s
performance relative to others in its class (e.g., office, retail, hospital, etc.). Because the score
adjusts for the building’s actual use, a building with very intensive uses and thus high energy
intensity (e.g., data centers or buildings with 24-hour operations) can still receive a relatively
high score. Buildings that achieve a minimum score of 75 are recognized for their highperformance via the ENERGY STAR certification program.
Beyond simply reporting their benchmarking data, the Act also requires public disclosure of
benchmarking results. In 2010, public buildings larger than 10,000 square feet were required
to benchmark and report their data, followed by private buildings over 100,000 square feet in
2013, and buildings over 50,000 square feet by 2014.104 The benchmarking data is available for
download or viewing on a interactive map at www.EnergyBenchmarkingDC.org
Not all buildings are required to benchmark their performance, as the ordinance exempts
certain categories. These include buildings that share a tax lot but do not share energy
consumption (separately metered), and special cases where the owner has requested an
exemption. It also exempts single-family residential spaces; however, DOEE facilitated a Single
Family and Small Multifamily Working Group to explore alternative ways of engaging this sector.
Finally, federal government buildings, foreign embassies and international inter-governmental
organizations (IGO) are not covered.
However, federal facilities are required to benchmark and disclose energy performance
under the Federal Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA 2007). Executive Order
13693 additionally requires federal buildings to “[conform], where feasible, to city energy
performance benchmarking and reporting requirements.” It is also worth noting that more than
70 embassies in the District have signed a sustainability pledge with the District to share energy
performance data with DOEE. However, to date very few have done so.105,106 As such, an
update to the District’s ordinance to include federal buildings could be effective in compelling
federal government to report.107,108,109
This dataset has a broad potential. Analyses can be conducted for both portfolios of buildings
across the District as well as individual buildings. Comparisons across buildings of different size,
type, age, or zip code allow us to identity of broad trends in energy usage. Trends can also
be identified using factors such as market type, parking area, and fuel source to understand
typical building characteristics within the District and how they come to affect energy
consumption. To help improve the accuracy and thus usefulness of the dataset even further,
104 D
 istrict of Columbia Department of Energy and Environment, 2011, Clean and Affordable Energy Act of 2008,
http://doee.DC.gov/publication/clean-and-affordable-energy-act-2008. D.C. Official Code 6-1451.03(c); 20 DCRMR 3513.
105 U.S. Government Printing Office, Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007,http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-110hr6enr/pdf/BILLS-110hr6enr.pdf.
106 Diplomatic Mission and International Institutions Environmental Performance, Climate and Sustainability Pledge, www.sustainableDC.org/diplomatic-mission-and-international-institutions-environmental-performance-climate-and-sustainability-pledge
107 U.S. Government Printing Office, Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-110hr6enr/pdf/BILLS-110hr6enr.pdf.
108 Diplomatic Mission and International Institutions Environmental Performance, Climate and Sustainability Pledge,
www.sustainableDC.org/diplomatic-mission-and-international-institutions-environmental-performance-climate-and-sustainability-pledge
109 E
 xecutive Order 13693 – Planning for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade. March 19, 2015. Section(3)(a)(i)(G).
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/19/executive-order-planning-federal-sustainability-next-decade

BUILDINGS

75



DOEE offered a grant to New York University’s Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP).
CUSP’s research resulted in a preliminary strategy for data cleaning that merges disparate
datasets, removes duplicate entries, identifies and removes significant outliers, and removes
entries that lack critical pieces of data.110 The CUSP team also developed an algorithm for
evaluating relative quality of the data.111
The Clean Energy DC team used the resulting datasets to guide the recommendations and
analysis in this chapter, along with the model results discussed in chapter in Chapter 2 and
Appendix A1. Indeed, this plan is perhaps the first energy plan in the country to draw on
localized benchmarking data to inform its modeling and recommendations.

4.2.2.1 SAVINGS POTENTIAL IN THE DISTRICT’S EXISTING BUILDING STOCK
The District’s benchmarking dataset shows that, in many ways the District is doing
comparatively well in terms of building energy use. To begin, the average ENERGY STAR score
for District Office buildings of 74 as of 2016 sits well above the national average of 63.112 The
Washington, DC metropolitan region has been ranked as first in the nation for the number of
ENERGY STAR certified buildings in 2015, 2016, and 2017, and has been among the top five
cities since EPA started the “Top Cities” ranking in 2009.113 However, as buildings are only eligible
for ENERY STAR certification once they hit a score of 75, there is still room to improve energy
performance even in the District’s relatively advanced commercial building stock.
Further, several other sectors have ENERGY STAR scores lower than the national average. For
example, the District’s average score for the hotel sector is 44, while the median score for
multifamily buildings is 62.114
Insights such as these will continue to be important tools for understanding how best to allocate
funding for energy efficiency outreach and programming, and target policy efforts toward
the most efficient outcomes. Additional details on the recommended uses of this and other
datasets, as well as other policy and programming options, are presented below. Multiple
studies in various jurisdictions do indicate that the transparency created by benchmarking does
drive real-world energy-use reductions.115,116,117 No such research has yet been undertaken in
the District.
Because of the uncertainty in this very new area of research, the danger of double-counting,
and the fact that the District’s benchmarking law predates this plan, these savings potentials
have not been incorporated into the model at this time. Nonetheless, the value of these
policies should not be underestimated.

110 K
 ontokosta, C. et. al. Benchmarking and Data Quality Analysis of Energy Disclosure Data for Washington, DC New York University Center for Urban Science and
Progress. October 28, 2015. Internal copy provided by DOEE.
111 Kontokosta, Contantine, Bartosz Bonczak, and Marshall Duer-Balkind. 2016. “DataIQ – A Machine Learning Approach to Anomaly Detection for Energy Performance
Data Quality and Reliability.” Proceedings of the 2016 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings in Asilomar, CA. Washington, DC: American Council for
an Energy Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2016/data/papers/12_1139.pdf
112 Energy Use in Offices, part of EPA’s Data Trends Series, http://www.energystar.gov/sites/default/files/tools/DataTrends_Office_20150129.pdf
113 U.S. EPA. ENERGY STAR Top Cities, 2016 and Past Rankings. https://www.energystar.gov/buildings/top_cities_past_rankings
114 DOEE Benchmarking dataset.
115 Palmer, Karen, and Margaret Walls. 2015. “Can Benchmarking and Disclosure Laws Provide Incentives for Energy Efficiency Improvements in Buildings?” Resources for
the Future. Washington, DC. http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/RFF-DP-15-09.pdf
116 Meng, Ting, David Hsu, and Albert Han. 2016. “Measuring Energy Savings from Benchmarking Policies in New York City.” Proceedings of the 2016 ACEEE Summer
Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings in Asilomar, CA. Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2016/data/papers/9_988.pdf
117 Bannister, Paul, Lane Burt, and Adam Hunge. 2016. “Under the Hood of Energy Star and NABERS: Comparison of Commercial Buildings Benchmarking Programs
and the Implications for Policy Makers.” Proceedings of the 2016 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings in Asilomar, CA. Washington, DC: American
Council for an Energy Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2016/data/papers/9_480.pdf

76

CLEAN ENERGY DC



It should also be noted that additional actions relevant to existing buildings can be
found in section 4.3, which includes actions targeting the entire building sector. Several
recommendations from DOEE’s Single Family and Small Multifamily Working Group have been
included below, while others can be found in the Group’s report.118 The District Government
should review and consider these recommendations in addition to those below.

4.2.2.2 EXISTING BUILDING RETROFITS
A building energy retrofit involves the improvement of an existing building’s energy
performance through upgrades of lighting, HVAC systems, building envelope, or a variety of
other interventions, including larger interventions involving extensive upgrades, such as fuel
switching to eliminate fossil fuel dependency from heating needs. Figure 18 places a sampling
of retrofit components (bottom) along a continuum characterized by their general energy use
reduction potential (left). Retrofitting a building is an excellent way to reduce energy use and
emissions from the existing building stock, and complements building energy benchmarking.
There are best practices associated with different types of retrofits that demonstrate which
approaches offer the biggest return on investment in terms of energy savings. The following
is an overview of the best industry practices from conventional and simple retrofits to deep
energy retrofits.

Energy Use Reduction Potential (%)

80
70
60
50
Deep Energy Retrofits

40
30
20
10

Conventional Retrofits

0
Commissioning

Lighting
Upgrades

Controls
& Sensors

Efficient
Plumbing
Fixtures

Improving
Upgrading Envelope
Air Tightness Mechanical Upgrades
Plant

↑↑ Figure 18: Sampling of retrofit components against general energy use reduction potential

118 D
 epartment of Energy and Environment, GREEN RESIDENTIAL SOLUTIONS – Recommendations from the Single Family Small Multifamily Green Buildings Working
Group, July 2016.

BUILDINGS

77



CONVENTIONAL ENERGY RETROFITS
Conventional building retrofits are typically energy efficiency improvements to buildings that
do not require major time and money investments, yet they can generate savings for both
building owners and operators. The measures taken to reduce energy use intensity through
conventional energy retrofits can lead to savings up to 30 or 40%. Prior to undertaking any
building retrofit upgrades, the District Government should undertake a whole building analysis
to identify worthwhile investments and areas of improvement with the highest return on
investment. This should include an energy audit, to determine if current systems are performing
optimally. Generally, conventional building retrofits cost less than deep energy retrofits, but will
create considerable savings to energy and costs. A conventional retrofit might combine one or
more of the following examples of upgrades:
• Lighting: Reducing energy use in lighting needs includes the incorporation of energy efficient
lighting systems, daylighting, and motion sensors in appropriate locations. An oft-heard quick
fix to energy use reduction is to switch to LED lightbulbs, an example of an easily implemented
conventional energy retrofit.
• System Controls: To reduce energy use when the building is unoccupied, or to adjust to end
user needs, system controls can be upgraded to allow for greater adjustment sensitivities.
Motion and occupancy sensors are examples of easy to install and low-cost retrofits.
• HVAC: HVAC systems account for as much as 40% of a commercial building’s energy
use 119, and easy adjustments to a building’s HVAC system can help greatly reduce
energy inefficiencies. This might be as simple as an annual tune-up of HVAC equipment,
retrocommissioning, or installing a programmable thermostat to reduce energy use when the
building is unoccupied.
• Envelope: Opportunities to improve airtightness will help lower heating needs, and is a highly
cost-effective retrofit tool. Air sealing windows and doors with weather strips, or sealing gaps
around wiring with caulking are examples of simple retrofits.
• Equipment efficiencies: Though replacing equipment is often costly and may require larger
or whole system upgrades, a simple calculation to determine current annual energy use of
an appliance may reveal that an upgrade to a higher efficient model may produce a quick
return on investment. For example, ENERGY STAR rated washers and washer-dryer combos can
save an average of $45 a year on utility bills compared to a standard model 120.
DEEP ENERGY RETROFIT
As described in section EB.3, a deep energy retrofit is a building-specific, whole-building analysis
designed to identify points in the building lifecycle where investments in energy efficiency can
achieve the highest return. They involve bigger measures, such as replacing all windows to
reduce heating and cooling loads—which in turn can allow a switch to building equipment
that requires less energy. A deep energy retrofit may occur over a few years, and will require a
more significant financial commitment than conventional energy retrofits. The energy savings
created with a deep energy retrofit are generally greater than 40%.
These principles allow those wishing to undertake a deep energy building retrofit to maximize
returns and invest in the longevity and value of the building. Deep retrofits look beyond the
immediate return on investment. For example, a deep lighting retrofit may attempt to reduce

119 https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/index.cfm?page=us_energy_commercial
120 https://www.energystar.gov/products/appliances/clothes_washers

78

CLEAN ENERGY DC



loads through adding strategic windows to provide natural daylight. The Rocky Mountain
Institute has an extensive guide to Deep Energy Retrofits, and cites 10 process oriented
principles to follow (see Box 4).121

Rocky Mountain Institute’s Deep Energy Retrofit Report (2012) outlines 10 design steps to
help attain the greatest energy reductions and integrate whole building retrofits.

1

Define specific end-user needs

6

Select appropriate and
efficient HVAC systems

2

Assess the existing building
structure and systems

7

Find synergies between systems
and measures

3

Specify the scope and costs of
planned or needed renovations

8

Optimize controls

4

Reduce loads

9

Realize the intended design

5

Determine how loads can
be met passively

10

Celebrate success

↑↑ Box 4: Key Design Steps to Achieving Deep Energy Retrofits 122
The following are some major examples of a few different areas of focus for deep retrofits:
LIGHTING
• Daylighting: Explore opportunities to reduce load through daylighting, whether through
major reconfiguration of the building envelope (including new windows, strategically placing
windows, exterior shading devices) or reconfiguration of interior space to redirect light.
• Efficient electric lighting: Address lighting needs individually to provide illumination only where
and when it is needed. For example, ambient lighting in an office place is usually very high to
light up desks as well as hallways, when separate and more directed task lights can be used
and allow for lower ambient lighting in spaces not requiring high concentration or wakefulness.
• Lighting controls: Install controls to minimizing lighting when the building is unoccupied, or
when daylighting is sufficient.
PLUG AND MISCELLANEOUS LOADS
• Reduce loads: Assess building equipment necessity, efficiency, and relevance, and replace
where appropriate. Building operators may reason that equipment should be used to the
end of its useful life, but it is important to assess energy cost savings, and make an informed
decision to replace obsolete equipment.
• Controls: Consider an energy management system that will shut off unused devices.

121 R
 ocky Mountain Institute. Identifying Design Opportunities for Deep Energy Retrofits. https://d231jw5ce53gcq.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Pathways-to-Zero_ID-Opps-for-Deep-Retrofits_Report_2012.pdf
122 Rocky Mountain Institute. Identifying Design Opportunities for Deep Energy Retrofits. https://d231jw5ce53gcq.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Pathways-to-Zero_ID-Opps-for-Deep-Retrofits_Report_2012.pdf

BUILDINGS

79



• Education: Educate occupants on strategies to reduce energy use, and consult them on
upgrades to ensure they will meet their needs. This helps reduce plug and miscellaneous loads,
caused by occupants plugging in their own solutions.
BUILDING ENVELOPE
• Roof and Walls: Seal cracks in a building’s exterior walls to reduce unwanted passing of
heated air or water. Insulation is the next concern, as energy used to warm a building is often
as much as 25% of a commercial building’s energy use123, and goes up to approximately
50% of a single-family building’s energy use124. In terms of unwanted heat gain, shading and
reflection of light are two approaches to keep the building cool.
• Doors/Windows: Other than proper weather-sealing for windows and doors, a deep energy
retrofit is an ideal time to assess whether doors and windows could be replaced for higher
efficiency units, or reinstalled due to poor installation the first time around.
HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC)
• A deep energy retrofit offers a suitable opportunity to replace an HVAC system, and there
are many factors to consider when specifying a new setup. These include planning and
accounting for the climate, occupancy, natural ventilation, the zoning of the building, and
comfort requirements for the space.
• Other possible considerations in HVAC retrofits include heat or energy recovery from exhaust
air, optimizing HVAC controls through direct digital systems to minimize energy use (e.g., during
unoccupied periods), and replacement of pumping systems.
• More efficient HVAC systems often require more regular maintenance and more careful
installation, so that should be planned for as well.
FUEL-SWITCHING
• Reducing energy use will help reduce a building’s total greenhouse gas emissions, but
fuel switching is required to reduce the greenhouse gas intensity (or carbon intensity) of a
building’s energy. This is often a large undertaking.
• Prior to choosing an appropriate fuel to switch to, a building manager should calculate the
emissions of each of the building’s energy uses, such as electricity, fuel, and chilled/hot water
consumption, and refrigerant use.
• Natural gas and other carbon-intensive heating furnaces can be switched to a low-carbon
energy source such as a high-efficiency electricity-based heat pump.
• These switches are sometimes combined with the sub-metering of a building’s electricity use.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
It is important to note that retrofits will vary for different types of buildings suited to different
end-user needs. For example, certain commercial and institutional buildings may require service
water heating for end uses such as dishwashing, swimming pools, or laundry facilities, and this
would be a major point of focus for an energy retrofit. In addition, commercial and institutional
buildings often have much larger plug loads to service large numbers of electronics, and as the
base building systems become more efficient, these plug loads become a bigger challenge;
plug loads often accounting for as much as 40-60% of all electricity consumed in highly energy
efficient office buildings.124

123
124
125

80

EIA. Energy use in commercial buildings.
EIA. Heating and cooling no longer majority of US home energy use.
New Building Institute. Managing Your Office Equipment Plug Load. https://newbuildings.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/PlugLoadBestPracticesGuide1.pdf

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.2.3

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

4.2.3.1 ENERGY EFFICIENCY INCENTIVES AND MANAGEMENT
EB.1	Increase access to building energy performance data for energy
efficiency programs
Action: Improve the access of the District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility (the DCSEU),
DC PACE, and any future DC Green Bank to building energy information to target buildings with
the highest energy-savings potential.
Relevance: Like most DSM programs across the nation, the DCSEU offers services on a largely
first-come, first-served basis, with little effort to target specific customers. However, the DCSEU
could vastly improve its effectiveness by targeting those buildings with the greatest potential for
energy efficiency improvements. To do so, the DCSEU would need to access existing building
energy-consumption data, combined into a single user-friendly platform with information
accessible in an actionable format.
Understanding the characteristics and performance of the building stock will allow the DCSEU
to target programs effectively and engage building owners and managers directly. As a part
of this effort the District should provide the DCSEU with the most current and accurate
information available on building stock and its energy performance on a regular basis. It
should share this information with the DC PACE program and any DC Green Bank, to facilitate
streamlined operations across the District’s rebate, financing, public education, and technicalassistance programs.
Details: Several sources of data would assist the DCSEU in improving the effectiveness of its
programs and services, and better leverage existing District financing programs.
Benchmarking data: DOEE publishes summary data on every building that reports
benchmarking data, beginning with the second year of data for each building. However,
DOEE also provides more detailed benchmarking data to the DCSEU and the DC PACE
programs, which provides a snapshot of the annual energy performance and different
characteristics of the District’s built stock, along with contact information for building owners
and managers. DOEE should continue to share the full set of benchmarking data with DCSEU
and DC PACE under appropriate confidentiality agreements, while moving to make summary
benchmarking data on each building available to the public more rapidly. While the annual
benchmarking data is useful, monthly energy usage data would allow further insight into
building energy consumption under different climatic conditions, system loads, and operating
characteristics. It would also allow the isolation of the building base-load from its seasonal
heating and cooling load, indicating their potential for lighting or other building upgrades.
To collect monthly data from Portfolio Manager®, District Government staff should continue
to work with their counterparts from other cities to help program staff at the EPA to overcome
any technical hurdles associated with the transfer of monthly, rather than annual, energy
consumption data.126

126 A
 n alternate path forward would be using the EPA Portfolio Manager Web Services option rather than changing the granularity of information sent through the
Reporting Template. Using Web Services would require a regulatory change to the District’s rulemaking, which includes provisions that ordinance-subject building
owners must submit District Benchmark Results and Compliance Report to the District, via the District Benchmark Reporting Template.

BUILDINGS

81



Utility Meter Information: As an independent organization, the DCSEU cannot access individual
meter-level or building-level energy consumption data directly from District utilities, nor can
it access the metering configuration of District buildings. This makes it highly unusual in the
national context; most DSM programs access utility data either by default (if operated by
the electric or gas utility) or under data sharing agreements (if operated by a third party).
This information would provide important insight into both the quantity of energy consumed
by different buildings, as well as the way in which this energy is divided among individual
customers (e.g., master-metered vs. tenant-metered). If the District Government required
Pepco and Washington Gas to share such data directly with the DCSEU, it would improve
the organization’s overall effectiveness by allowing it to target the highest-potential energy
savings projects.
In addition, the District Government should find a way for the DCSEU to access real-time utility
data. Efficiency Vermont, that state’s DSM provider, has already established a similar program.
There, account managers are given access to smart meter information for homes and
businesses.127 The managers use this information to conduct aggregate analyses, identify trends,
customize savings recommendations, and improve outreach practices. Similarly, access to such
data would help the DCSEU verify actual energy savings following an energy-saving action or
retrofit—increasing the accuracy of annual metrics. Access to smart meter data will also allow
the DCSEU to dramatically increase the sophistication of its analysis and targeting.
Grid Information: The DCSEU could further enhance its effectiveness if Pepco were to offer
notifications on when and where the grid is experiencing stress at the feeder level. Targeting
buildings on these feeder lines for energy efficiency improvements would help stabilize
the grid, maximize the value of energy efficiency, and create room for on-site renewable
energy capacity.
Supplemental data: Under the current benchmarking ordinance, the District collects general
building information (i.e., street address, year built, size, occupancy), property use data (i.e.,
gross floor area and operating characteristics), and energy and water performance data.
However, more detailed building system and construction data would allow the DCSEU to
better target buildings with high energy savings potential.
New York City’s Retrofit Accelerator program serves as an example of this approach. It offers
building owners and operators free, independent, and building-specific technical assistance
and advice on energy and water efficiency. The program targets buildings with high savings
potential, via a combination of public and non-public datasets collected under Local Law
84 (for energy and water benchmarking) and Local Law 87 (for energy audits and retrocommissioning).
By combining these datasets, Accelerator staff can identify high-priority buildings,
and connect decision makers with resources to help with efficiency planning and upgrades.
The Retrofit Accelerator is collecting audit and retrocommissioning data that is not currently
available to the District Government. However, if the District Government chooses to adopt
a Building Energy Performance Standard (BEPS) program (see Action EB.5), it will generate
detailed audit information for the lowest-performing buildings. Similarly, citywide virtual energy
audits will generate estimated but still highly useful audit data (see Action EB.8). This data
should also be shared, under strict confidentiality protections, with DCSEU and the District’s
green finance programs.

127 Efficiency Vermont’s Privacy Policy, https://www.efficiencyvermont.com/about/privacy-policy#What

82

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Green Building Act data: Finally, the District Government should merge the Department
of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs’ (DCRA) Green Building Act dataset with energy
benchmarking data, and subsequently shared it with the DCSEU. The DCRA dataset includes
ENERGY STAR Target Finder scores based on the modeled energy performance of new
construction and major renovations of large publicly- and privately-owned buildings.
Combining this dataset with benchmarking data would allow the District Government to link
modeled energy performance with actual energy performance over the course of building
operations. However, the District Government would need to develop building-specific
identification numbers, to be required across agencies, to map them together. To date, DOEE
has faced difficulties in matching its benchmarking datasets with any datasets maintained by
DCRA due to varying building identification numbers.

Next Steps

1

In 2018-2019, the District Government should standardize building identification
numbers, to consolidate building-specific information into a single resource. One
promising option is using the DOE and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory’s
new Unique Building Identifier (UBID) specification. Once established, the District
Government should link this UBID to existing datasets and share across agencies for use
in efficiency program development, using nondisclosure agreements where necessary.

2

In 2018, grant the DCSEU and DC PACE programs access to applicable datasets that
are controlled by DC agencies, and direct the DCSEU to consolidate those datasets
into one streamlined CRM program—including the SEED Platform and available
contractor software systems. Share access, as appropriate, with District Government
agencies that work in the existing-building space. Consider case, workflow evaluation,
and security implications when sharing data between agencies.

3

Continue working with the EPA to access monthly as well as annual energy data, and
begin collecting this data if/once that agency makes it available.

4

Continue to work with the Public Services Commission (PSC), the Office of People’s
Counsel (OPC), the DCSEU, and the utilities to investigate the best path to granting
access to real-time, granular interval energy consumption information of utility
customers to the DCSEU, under strong non-disclosure requirements, in addition to
information regarding congested or highly-burdened feeder lines.

BUILDINGS

83



EB.2

Increase DCSEU flexibility

Action: Increase the ability of the DCSEU to target expanded target saving areas.
Relevance: To help the District achieve its emissions targets, the DCSEU will need to target new
opportunities to save energy. This will require an increase in the DCSEU’s flexibility and in the
type of offerings that it can provide.
Details: Provide the DCSEU with access to any potential tool that helps it achieve its targets at
the lowest practical cost. Recommendations for the development and use of specific tools are
listed below.
Projects with potential savings of over a year: Demand side management programs in
states such as New York, Oregon, Vermont and New Jersey recognize the potential return on
investment in energy efficiency is greatest before and during building design.128 To allow the
DCSEU to address long-term projects with time lines greater than a single year, the DCSEU needs
to be able to operate over more than one year. The District took a critical step in this direction
during the 2016 request for proposal (RFP) process by extending the base contract period
from one to five years, and by offering a five-year renewal option.129 VEIC, which oversees
the contract, is now in the second year of its new five-year term. This has already had a
positive impact on the depth, complexity, and savings of DCSEU projects. However, additional
improvements may be needed to properly incentivize the DCSEU to seek deeper, longer-term
energy savings.
To this end, the District Government should credit the DCSEU for work and energy saving
achieved through the life of its programs. This should include a direction to work with building
owners and contractors from the very beginning of the new construction process by helping
them to set goals, develop an RFP, and select a design team. The DCSEU should then work with
design and construction teams from conceptual design through building delivery to maximize
energy savings.
Such changes will encourage the DCSEU to undertake projects that produce savings
over several years, or projects that only produce savings beyond the first year of program
implementation (e.g., new construction). This will increase the number, type and costeffectiveness of projects that the DCSEU can undertake. Special care should be given to credit
savings in the final years of the contract, prior to the option period, to ensure that these benefits
of the multi-year contract are not lost due to the limited time remaining.
Operational energy management: Operational improvements to building performance include
changes to building operational hours, adjustments to equipment settings, maintenance of
systems and technologies, installation of sensors for lighting and thermostats, and real-time
energy management. They can also involve behavior-based programs. Since no organization
has yet produced a verifiable standard for measuring the quantity and persistence of savings
from these activities, the DCSEU does not currently incentivize operational energy.
The DCSEU should investigate the market for these and other kinds of operational improvements
with an aim of understanding the current and potential market size. Similar investigations have
led to operational energy management programs in other jurisdictions, including California,
Minnesota, Chicago, Massachusetts, Maryland and New York. If market conditions are
similar, the District should consider adopting an appropriate methodology for estimating the
128
129

84

For example, see new construction programs in New York (www.nyserda.ny.gov/All-Programs/Programs/New-Construction-Program) and Oregon (https://energytrust.org/commercial/construction-renovation-improvements/).
RFP No. DOEE-2016-R-0002 For District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility Contractor, February 19, 2016, http://doee.DC.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/
publication/attachments/DCSEU%20RFP_DOEE-2016-R-0002_FINAL.pdf

CLEAN ENERGY DC



persistence of savings from operational energy management in commercial and residential
buildings, and incorporate that methodology into the evaluation, measurement and
verification (EM&V) of the DCSEU’s savings and incentive structure.
Coordination with other agencies, instrumentalities and service providers: To improve the
efficiency of its programs and services, the DCSEU should coordinate and work with other
entities that share its goals. These include District Government agencies, instrumentalities, and
administrators such as DC PACE, as well as any potential Green Bank (see section 1.6). The
DCSEU should be incentivized to cooperate, not compete with these agencies and service
providers. An easy and efficient way to do so would be to credit the DCSEU with all or a portion
of the energy savings, renewable energy capacity increase, and green jobs attributable to DC
PACE and any future DC Green Bank projects so long as DCSEU was involved in the project—
even if that involvement came from technical assistance rather than direct incentives.
Equity and affordability are, again, other important considerations. The DCSEU already targets
20% of its funding to low-income developments, with a requirement that 5 to 10% of the
savings come from projects serving low-income populations. As the DCSEU’s work grows and
expands, and as the District Government introduces new entities such as a Green Bank to
support building energy and emissions reductions, the DCSEU should engage with LMI-focused
community organizations to identify any equity opportunities and risks associated with potential
changes, and incorporate them in program design and implementation.
Integration between the DCSEU and the District’s green finance programs: As the District’s green
financing programs mature there are strong opportunities for collaboration that will help all
parties. The District should recommend the establishment of a joint marketing and outreach
program between the DCSEU, the DC PACE program and the potential DC Green Bank (as
discussed in Action CCB.1). The DCSEU can offer technical assistance services to customers
that encourage residential and commercial building owners to implement deeper retrofits,
with costs reduced both through available and expanded DCSEU incentives, so that financing
from the DC Green Bank can cover the remaining capital costs of the project. By providing a
mechanism for property owners to access deeper savings with no up-front cost barrier, such
a marketing program will help to avoid instances where organizations focus solely on the
lowest hanging fruit or implement only those measures with dedicated rebates. Additionally, to
support this effort, the DCSEU should have a clear mandate to provide technical assistance to
customers by offering energy audits or other building-level or project reviews that are tailored
to the underwriting requirements of capital providers, in particular, the DC Green Bank and
its partners. By coordinating project origination efforts with the DC Green Bank and handing
off data that is directly applicable to future financing, the DCSEU will streamline project
development and lower transaction costs for property owners and encourage increased
uptake of these programs. The DCSEU should be able to receive credit for the energy use and
carbon reductions for any DC PACE or Green Bank projects supported were also by DCSEU
analysis or incentives.
Code compliance: The DCSEU should assist DOEE, DCRA, the Green Building Advisory Council
and the Construction Code Coordinating Board to develop and implement building-code
improvements. The DCSEU should also design outreach and incentive programs for building
owners, designers, and contractors with an eye to laying the foundation for future building
code improvements.

BUILDINGS

85



To incentivize such investments, the DCSEU should be credited for a portion of any energy
savings attributable to the adoption of energy-saving building code improvements, as is
the case in Arizona utilities.130,131 To maximize the energy savings realized from building code
improvements, the DCSEU should invest resources in training, outreach, technical assistance,
design assistance, marketing, explanatory materials, and other efforts to increase compliance
with building codes. As codes become more ambitious, the DCSEU should receive credit for
bringing poor performing buildings up to code. As the District has little history of crediting a
demand-side management administrator for code-related energy savings (except in cases
where the building is making improvements prior to the end of the life of the equipment
being replaced, and outside of a renovation project), this would need to be resolved through
an evaluation, measurement, and verification review and the subsequent development of
appropriate guidelines.
Tracking GHG reductions: The DCSEU has five performance benchmarks under its new contract:
Reduce energy consumption, increase renewable energy generation capacity, target lowincome communities, create green jobs, and leverage external funds. It is also expected to
track and report semiannually on its progress on reducing peak demand and addressing the
District’s largest energy users.
Given the Plan’s strong focus on GHG emissions, the District Government should also track
and report out on the DCSEU’s progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Given that
natural gas is currently less GHG intensive than the electricity grid, but that the electricity
grid is decarbonizing while natural gas cannot be decarbonized, it may not be appropriate
to establish GHG savings as a performance benchmark. Without explicit recognition of the
ultimate importance of long-term and permanent GHG reductions, using GHG savings as a
benchmark could unintentionally incentivize fuel switching away from electricity and towards
natural gas, which would be contrary to the long-term carbon reduction goals of the District.
However, it is important that DOEE and the DCSEU are aware of the GHG impacts of each
DCSEU project and the DCSEU portfolio so the District should take steps to incorporate GHG
savings into the data tracked by the DCSEU.
Consider fuel-agnostic energy savings: The District Government designed the DCSEU to be a
nimble, flexible institution that would seek the greatest energy and GHG emissions savings for
ratepayers with as few limitations as possible, and without regard to fuel source. As such, the
original CAEA did not require the DCSEU to track electric and natural gas savings separately;
these requirements were later added during the drafting of the DCSEU RFP—and indeed, are
common in the industry.
However, eliminating these requirements would remove an impediment to whole system
strategies (e.g., passive solar design) for which costs and savings must be arbitrarily allocated
between electric and gas. This would also free the DCSEU to pursue strategies aligned with the
District’s 2050 carbon neutrality commitment. To achieve this level of savings, the District will
need to seize all opportunities to minimize fossil fuel consumption, while keeping the long-term
trend of decarbonization in mind.
For example, large-scale switching of electric systems to natural gas might yield short-term
savings, but would be counter to long-term carbon reduction targets. As a first step, DOEE
and DCSEU should properly credit and incentivize the DCSEU to invest in projects that switch
buildings from fuel-oil heat to electricity or natural gas heating.
130 A
 ttributing Building Energy Code Savings to Energy Efficiency Programs, developed by the Northeast Energy Efficiency Partnerships (NEEP) Evaluation, Measurement
and Verification (EM&V) Forum; the Institute for Market Transformation (IMT); and IEE, an institute of the Edison Foundation, February 27, 2013, http://www.imt.org/
news/the-current/leveraging-building-energy-codes-to-maximize-energy-savings
131 Other jurisdictions, such as California, also provide utilities attribution for energy code adoption, but the Arizona model is most appropriate for a small jurisdiction like
the District.

86

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Minimize impediments to market responsiveness: As noted above, the DCSEU was intended
to be entrepreneurial, flexible, and responsive to the market in ways that have generally
proven difficult for government agencies and traditional utilities. The target was, and remains,
to establish an innovative body that can experiment and make calculated bets by trying
new approaches and maximizing energy savings and benefits to ratepayers and residents
at the lowest practical cost. To achieve this target, the utility should minimize paperwork and
impediments. Some examples include the following:
• The DCSEU is currently subject to a performance contract for SETF-funded work. If DOEE
provides additional funds to the DCSEU’s budget, those funds should also be subject to
performance requirements, while the DCSEU should handle any aspects of program design.
Certainty in the size and timing of any additional funding will improve their impact, as will
the flexibility to incorporate them into longer-term planning. Any adjustment to the DCSEU’s
performance goals should account for this significant impact as well as for the existing funding
shortfall relative to peer jurisdictions (see Action CCB.1).
• The District Government should empower the DCSEU to pursue a portfolio of strategies that
it deems most likely to deliver on its mandated goals, and make quick course corrections in
response to market conditions and feedback.
• The DCSEU should also be subject to a streamlined EM&V process, comparable with those
in other jurisdictions. This streamlining should include a random sampling of professional
installations rather than inspection and review of 100% of installations.
• To minimize the costs for building owners to participate in its programs, the DCSEU should
minimize paperwork and inspection to a level below that in Maryland and to the level of
national best practices.
• In short, the DCSEU and the District should work to streamline processes, eliminate bureaucracy
and paperwork, and allow the DCSEU to operate as the truly flexible and nimble organization
intended in the original CAEA.
Market transformation: Finally, the District should structure the DCSEU contract to encourage
the utility to continue to engage in a full range of market transformation activities, including
green leasing and training for brokers, appraisers, and other real estate professionals.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, direct the DCSEU to investigate the market penetration of operational energy
management. If findings indicate a cost-effective opportunity to further incentivize
operational energy management, direct the DCSEU to conduct a best practice review
of other jurisdictions’ approaches to estimating the persistence of savings, and any
standard EM&V methods that the District can deploy.

2

Add a requirement that the DCSEU track and report to DOEE quarterly the impact of its
programs on reducing GHG emissions attributable to the District.

3

As the District adopts more ambitious energy and green codes, revise the DCSEU
incentive and performance structure to allow credit for their participation in code
compliance activities. (This may require a legislative update.)

BUILDINGS

87



Next Steps

4

Ensure future DCSEU contracts can:
• Pursue goals are aligned with the District’s decarbonization targets
• Avoid the need for prior approval for programs or course corrections
• ast a minimum of five years without interruption across fiscal periods

5

Subject the DCSEU to a streamlined EM&V regime to minimize paperwork and
bureaucracy and leverage the benefits of smart meters with M&V 2.0 practices. Use
random sampling in place of 100% inspection and review processes and allow the
DCSEU to use census tract data for income verification where appropriate. Implement
these changes under the current DCSEU contract.

6

When revisiting existing programs, engage with LMI-focused organizations to fully
consider specific risks and opportunities specific to those communities.

EB.3	Provide the incentives necessary to operate a District-wide deep
energy retrofit program
Action: Improve the uptake of deep building energy retrofits by providing resources, training,
and incentives. 132
Relevance: A deep energy retrofit is a building-specific, whole-building analysis designed to
identify points in the building lifecycle where investments in energy efficiency can achieve the
highest return. Please refer to Section 4.2.2.2 for further details on deep energy retrofits. These
are often multi-year or ongoing efforts that require both operating and capital investments and
that can achieve more than 40% reduction in energy consumption over time.133
While deep retrofits can generate significant cost savings for building owners and operators,
they also represent a considerable investment of time, money, and other resources that can
make them unattractive. To overcome these barriers and drive the scale of retrofits necessary
to achieve the District’s GHG reduction targets, the District must invest in a set of incentives
that make these added efforts worthwhile. These programs require financial investments by the
District Government itself. However, a cost-benefit analysis has indicated that both the direct
and indirect benefits of incentivizing net-zero and/or net-positive energy buildings outweigh the
costs over a 10-year period.134
Details: To improve the uptake of deep energy retrofits, the District should use pay-forperformance incentives, in which incentives are contingent on the actual measured
performance of the building. Experiences in the District, as well as several other states, indicate
that shifting to this form of energy efficiency programs can make retrofit programs both less
expensive to operate and more effective in driving reductions.135

132
133
134
135

88

Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations
Rocky Mountain Institute. “The Path to a Deep Energy Retrofit”. https://rmi.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/2015-02_Path_to_DR_using_ESPC.pdf
Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations.
Ibid.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



These incentives should also be set up in such a way that incentives are non-linear, in
that greater energy savings are rewarded with greater financial incentives. In this way, a
building that achieves a 50% reduction in energy consumption can receive a significantly
larger package of incentives than a building that achieves only a 25% reduction in energy
consumption. This non-linear approach aligns with existing retrofit cost estimates, where deep
energy retrofits can cost around twice as much per square foot as conventional retrofits,
depending on the scale and scope of the retrofit (e.g., the building components affected). 136
As with net-zero ready construction, governments and other organizations are increasingly
investigating retrofit costs as part of learning how to stimulate them. Should the District
Government decide to examine potential retrofit costs, for example, to determine incentives,
it should focus on the local context to generate insights more appropriate to local builders,
building owners, and policymakers. This includes factors such as the characteristics of
the District’s existing building stock (e.g., existing office building heating systems, building
component replacement timelines), the solutions (building components) appropriate for
the local climate zone, and the capacity of the local workforce to cost-effectively procure
necessary components and cost-effectively conduct the retrofits.
The District Government should offer incentives for residential, commercial, and institutional
buildings, and transparently implement them. Where appropriate, retrofits and incentives should
promote one size fits all solutions, such as attic insulation, air sealing, modulating boilers, water
heaters, and LED lighting retrofits.137
Pay-for-performance incentives are not, however, appropriate for all District residents,
and risk excluding low-to-middle income residents and communities from accessing the
available incentives. Instead of incentives, low-to-middle income communities will more likely
benefit from sustainable and equitable loans, as well as on-bill financing, energy-literacy
training, and energy-management coaching. The District should ensure low-to-middle income
citizens, and social and affordable housing communities, are aware of the building energy
performance actions.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, design the specific incentives identified above.

2

Work with the DCSEU and the EM&V contractor to introduce a pay-for-performance
program in 2018.

3

Investigate options to provide financial incentives for energy retrofits and energy
literacy training to LMI communities.

4

Work with the DCSEU and a potential Green Bank to implement a package of
incentives targeting deeper energy use reductions by 2020.

136 B
 ased on a review of available estimates: Kok, N., Miller, N., Morris, P. “The Economics of Green Retrofits.” December 2011; Energy Efficient Buildings Hub. “Deep
energy Retrofit Modeling and Cost Effectiveness Study: A Technical Policy Brief.” January 2013; Leinartas, H.A., Stephens, B. “Optimizing Whole House Deep Energy
Retrofit Packages: A Case Study of Existing Chicago-Area Homes.” May 2015.
137 LED stands for light emitting diode.

BUILDINGS

89



EB.4

Coordinate and centrally track District efficiency and finance programs

Action: Coordinate existing demand-side management (DSM) incentive and financing
programs and other economic development programs to ensure that incentives and benefits
are tracked together and aligned.
Relevance: To streamline and consolidate the District’s energy efficiency-related programs,
align benefits and incentives offered by disparate programs.
Details: The DCSEU should closely coordinate with and support a new Green Bank (Action
CCB.1), expanded PACE financing (see Action CCB.2), as well as all other DSM incentive and
financing programs (such as those discussed in Action EB.3). In addition, these entities should
coordinate with the finance and economic development programs offered by the District
Government and District Instrumentalities, including but not limited to the District of Columbia
Housing Finance Agency (DCHFA), the Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD), DCRA, and the revenue bond program. Additionally, DOEE should explore ways to
align its energy programs with the green infrastructure and stormwater programs. The DCSEU
should also receive a credit for a portion of the energy savings, green jobs and other benefits
that these various programs generate when coordinating program delivery and/or funding
with the DCSEU to functionally align the separate initiatives’ incentives. Finally, the District
Government should consider a unified brand, so that residents perceive them as a cohesive
package, and provide a simpler and more comprehensive energy concierge service to guide
customers through the process.

Next Steps

1

Evaluate strategies for consolidating
DSM incentive and financing
programs to either bring all incentive
and benefit programs under one
umbrella, or ensure they work
together.

2

Undertake department-wide review
of opportunities to coordinate and
leverage joint financing between
energy programs and air quality
and stormwater programs.

90

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.2.3.2 POLICY AND PROGRAM RECOMMENDATIONS
EB.5	Implement a Building Energy Performance Standard
Action: Enact a Building Energy Performance Standard that requires improvements in lower
performing buildings over a continuously implemented, iterative five-year cycle.
Relevance: While the District’s benchmarking policy has provided useful access to information
on the building stock, next-generation policies require building owners to act, either by
contracting an auditor to review building systems and operations against a certain standard or
by requiring system upgrades.
Details: Building Energy Performance Standards (BEPS) establish mandatory building energy
audits and/or retro-commissioning that either require and/or motivate building owners (and,
in certain cases, tenants) to invest in the energy efficiency of their buildings. Such a policy
would both reduce built environment emissions and provide the District with a more detailed
understanding of building system characteristics. A task force initially outlined the BEPS concept
for the District in 2014 as part of the Sustainable DC138 implementation process; DOEE then
further researched and analyzed it for Clean Energy DC. Similar requirements have grown in
popularity over the last few years, with programs of varying types established in Seattle,139 New
York,140 and Los Angeles,141 to name a few.
Additionally, an increasing number of jurisdictions are expanding their benchmarking programs
to cover buildings smaller than 50,000 gross square feet. Seattle and other cities have
experienced challenges expanding their benchmarking to buildings smaller than 20,000 gross
square feet, because of the limited capacity of small building owners. However, thresholds of
25,000 or 35,000 square feet are increasingly common. The District should examine the benefits
of expanding the threshold below 50,000 square feet, and the staffing requirements needed to
support it.
The BEPS program should apply to all buildings covered under the District’s building energy
benchmarking program, phased in over two to three years—starting with the largest buildings
first. As with Seattle’s Building Tune-Up Program, the District may wish to develop an accelerator
program for smaller buildings.142 The accelerator would provide an incentive to cover the costs
of energy conservation actions for a small number of buildings, and refine the program design
based on the experience.
With a five-year cycle, 20% of covered buildings would be eligible for BEPS each year, and
all buildings would be evaluated every five years. This arrangement balances the number of
efficiency projects that need to be completed in compliance with BEPS, creating a steadier
flow of projects for local efficiency contractors. This also establishes a persistent requirement for
existing buildings to ensure highly efficient performance.
As its primary indicator, the District should use ENERGY STAR score to determine whether
a building must comply with BEPS. Buildings would be considered in compliance if they
achieved a certain energy performance, and no additional action would be necessary.
ENERGY STAR score is an appropriate metric for several reasons: First, the data is already
collected in the District’s benchmarking program. Second, ENERGY STAR scores are based on

138 S ustainable DC Mayor’s Order, Building Energy Performance Standards Task Force, December 10, 2014,
http://www.sustainableDC.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/10-Building-Energy-Performance-Standards.pdf
139 Seattle Building Tune-Ups, https://www.seattle.gov/environment/buildings-and-energy/seattle-building-tune-ups
140 New York City Mayor’s Office of Sustainability, Local Law 88, http://www.nyc.gov/html/gbee/html/plan/ll88.shtml.
141 Los Angeles Existing Buildings Stakeholder Group. Final Workshop, July 28, 2015, https://laexistingbuildings.files.wordpress.com/2015/01/150728_final-workshop.pdf
142 Building Tune-Up Accelerator Program, https://www.seattle.gov/environment/buildings-and-energy/seattle-building-tune-ups/accelerator

BUILDINGS

91



statistically-significant surveys of the country’s commercial building stock, and normalize for key
considerations like occupancy, weather, and building use, thereby providing a fair comparison
across peer groups. Finally, the performance required to achieve a given ENERGY STAR
score will steadily be pushed higher as the U.S. Energy Information Association (EIA) conducts
updated national building energy surveys approximately every four years. EPA is expected to
release the next update to ENERGY STAR scores in 2018, based on the 2012 DOE Commercial
Building Energy Survey (CBECS).
After examining the benchmarking data, the Clean Energy DC team recommends that an
appropriate threshold for the District’s highly efficient office sector should be a minimum
ENERGY STAR certification of 75. For all other building types subject to the ENERGY STAR scoring
system, the threshold should initially be set to a minimum of 50—the national median. Setting
a threshold of 50 ensures that government and industry will focus on the lowest-performing
buildings in the early years. Building types without a means of scoring in ENERGY STAR should
either be exempt or use the national median for the property type in question.
Buildings should be offered the opportunity to apply for an exemption under certain conditions.
Beyond having a high enough ENERGY STAR score, buildings could be exempted if they hold
certain certifications or have recently equivalent action to improve energy performance.
Under Seattle’s Building Tune-Up Program, exemplary performance options include LEED Gold
or Platinum O+M and Living Building, Petal, or Net Zero Energy Certifications, among others,
while equivalent action options include Active Monitoring and Continuous Commissioning,
ASHRAE Level II Audit Recommendations, and Substantial Alteration or New Construction,
among others.143
Owners of affordable housing developments should also be eligible to apply for a short-term
waiver to be exempt from BEPS. In exchange for a grace period, the owners would need
to submit a long-term plan detailing a compliance path, or follow a similar requirement. For
affordable housing developments required to take compliance actions, the District should also
consider offering financial incentives to owners of affordable housing developments.
To ensure the BEPS is applied fairly and consistently, the District should also introduce a
requirement for verification of the benchmarking data by a licensed professional once every
three years. Similar requirements exist in Chicago, IL, and Montgomery County, MD, and have
increased data quality and reliability beyond what DOEE has been able to achieve with
existing in-house enforcement resources.
Buildings that do not meet the minimum performance and do not qualify for an exemption
would be required to take one of two compliance pathways: The Improvement Path, or the
Prescriptive Path.
The District Government should use energy use intensity (EUI) to define compliance
requirements for the Improvement Path. EUI is a more appropriate metric than ENERGY
STAR score for tracking progress in this manner, because building owners and industry can
more predictably estimate the impact of certain energy conservation actions on EUI. An
ENERGY STAR score, on the other hand, depends on multiple factors beyond the building
owners’ control, thus making it more difficult to accurately manage. Buildings opting for the
Improvement Path reduce EUI at least 15% below the average EUI of the two years leading up
to BEPS compliance, within two years of triggering BEPS compliance. For example, a building
triggering BEPS in 2021 based on its performance in 2020 would, by 2023, need to reduce its
EUI at least 15% below its average EUI for 2019 and 2020. A properly licensed third party should
verify this EUI reduction.
143

92

Seattle Building Tune-Ups, How to Comply, https://www.seattle.gov/environment/buildings-and-energy/seattle-building-tune-ups/comply

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Alternatively, building owners choosing the Prescriptive Path would be required to take one
or multiple pre-determined actions to improve their energy performance. These actions
should focus on more cost-effective energy conservation measures and actions that improve
the knowledge and capabilities of building managers, to support ongoing performance
improvements. Alternate compliance paths can include one or more of the following:144
One-time lighting upgrade: Lighting remains one of the most cost-effective energy upgrades,
and buildings below the minimum performance threshold are unlikely to have installed up-todate lighting technology. Both New York City and Boulder, Colorado require one-time lighting
upgrades from the buildings covered by their building performance policies. The lighting
upgrade should be required for any buildings triggering BEPS that have not yet upgraded their
lighting, regardless of whether they choose Improvement or Prescriptive path.
Energy audits: An audit is a detailed assessment of how a building could improve its energy
performance through upgrading or retrofitting its energy systems. As proposed by the BEPS Task
Force, an ASHRAE Level II audit (or higher) would be required, with the findings submitted to the
District. This additional data collection would enable the District to further enhance efficiency
targeting, following the model of NYC’s Retrofit Accelerator.145 This would require the data to be
shared, confidentially, with the DCSEU and green finance programs (see Action EB.5 for more).
Retrocommissioning: This is a systematic process that evaluates and optimizes the existing
base building systems (including the HVAC system,146 electrical and lighting systems, and
building envelope) to ensure that they are running properly. Typical retrocommissioning
measures include recalibrating sensors and controls, and cleaning and repairing existing
equipment; they do not include capital-intensive improvements such as equipment upgrades.
Various studies have identified retrocommissioning as one of the most cost-effective procedures
to increase the energy efficiency of existing buildings and have estimated that improved
operations can deliver half of the reasonably available savings from energy efficiency for a
portfolio of buildings.147
Certification of building operators: Building operators waste an extraordinary amount of energy
when they operate building systems inefficiently, or neglect them. A relatively inexpensive
solution is to offer training in the operation and maintenance of relevant building systems.
A building operator training and certification program prepares building operators to efficiently
operate and properly maintain building energy systems. This idea is explored further in Action
CCB.7.
If a building does not achieve the minimum BEPS threshold during the five-year compliance
cycle, the owner can make improvements through an established plan, either via deep retrofit
or incremental changes (Section 4.2.2.2), or pay an alternate compliance fee. Revenue from
the fee should be funneled through the DCSEU toward incentives for improvements in other
buildings.
With a self-reported dataset, third-party data quality verification will be paramount to ensuring
that the data accurately reflect building characteristics and performance. If the data is to drive
and inform policies and programs, it must be accurate, and the public must have confidence
in its accuracy. Data reports must be complete, accurate, and timely – a daunting undertaking
given the number of reports that DOEE already processes. Data quality verification may be
144 T he BEPS Task Force recommendations also included “disclosure of interval energy use.” Clean Energy DC recommends that the District pursue a path to obtain
interval energy use for all subject buildings via the utilities, similar to the Efficiency Vermont model. Further detail is available in Action EB.1
145 New York City Retrofit Accelerator, https://retrofitaccelerator.cityofnewyork.us/
146 HVAC is heating, ventilation, and air conditioning.
147 Brian Merrill, “Operational Improvements Can Double Energy Efficiency Savings in Commercial Buildings,” BusinessWire, February 6, 2013,
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130206005559/en/Operational-Improvements-Double-Energy-Efficiency-Savings-Commercial

BUILDINGS

93



contracted to a third-party firm (either by DOEE or by building owners themselves),
or verification may be undertaken in-house by DOEE with dedicated funding for staff time
spent on inspections and correspondence. Either option will require an ongoing stream of
dedicated funding.
DOEE is commencing a final, more detailed analysis with support from C40 Cities Climate
Leadership Group and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The results of this analysis should
then be used to finalize program design and implementation.

Next Steps

1

Finalize the following BEPS design details as part of the analysis with C40 Cities Climate
Leadership Group:
• Minimum ENERGY STAR score thresholds
• Included building types
• Phased-in approach by building area
• EUI improvements for the Performance Path
• Action options under the Prescriptive Path
• Enforcement procedures (including data validation)
• Exemption requirements
• Any accelerator program.

2

Design and implement a BEPS policy for public and private buildings in the District.
Implement BEPS in 2019-2020, and ensure the District Government leads by example
with its own buildings.

3

Investigate financial supports that can be provided for social housing developments
and determine compliance plan requirements for any social housing developments
seeking extensions.

94

CLEAN ENERGY DC



EB.6	Drive energy efficiency at tenant build-out
Action: Provide incentives to encourage efficiency improvements upon tenant turnover and
build-out.
Relevance: Lighting, controls, certain HVAC systems, and tenant-owned equipment (e.g.,
office/IT equipment, commercial kitchens) are routinely replaced at tenant turnover, and
less frequently replaced at lease renewal. Many commercial tenant spaces, including office
and retail, turn over an average of once every seven years. This makes tenant turnover a key
opportunity to improve efficiency.
Details: Implement a multi-pronged strategy for maximizing efficiency gains during this unique
window of opportunity, and consider programs to incentivize energy efficiency improvements
at tenant build-out. Such programs could be modeled on successes in other states (e.g.,
Massachusetts). These should be simple, streamlined and predictable to help minimize costs
and delays. Time is a key consideration at tenant build-out, when both landlords and tenants
are typically eager to complete the process as quickly as possible.
Incentives should include simple set payments (e.g., $0.30 per square foot) for pre-determined
packages for each major commercial tenant type (e.g., specific lighting densities for office,
retail, etc.) that push energy efficiency well below code-permitted levels. As energy modeling
can be costly and time-consuming, the District Government should not require energy models
to receive incentives.
Similarly, the DCRA should offer expedited permitting for tenant build-outs that exceed building
code requirements. Packages should be updated to require higher levels of efficiency at least
as often as the District updates its building energy codes. Unlike the expedited permitting
written into the District’s Green Building Act of 2006, the DCRA should not be required to
provide permits during a specific period (e.g., 30 days). Rather, the DCRA should simply move
recipients of expedited permitting to the front of the line. The DCSEU should also continue to
work with the DCRA to achieve improved compliance with building energy codes at tenant
build-out—a time when code compliance tends to be relatively low. Sub-metered tenants are
significantly more likely to focus on efficiency at build-out (see Action EB.2 for additional detail).
Lastly, federal law requires the EPA ENERGY STAR program develop and launch a new rating
system for tenant spaces by 2020. The District and the DCSEU should recognize, train, market,
and provide incentives to drive early tenant adoption of this new system as a cornerstone of
tenant awareness and action to improve efficiency.

Next Steps

1

In 2019, begin to offer incentives for pre-determined packages of improvements
through the DCSEU, and expedite permitting for tenant build-outs that include planned
packages of equipment that exceed code.

2

Recognize, train, market, and incentivize early tenant adoption of EPA ENERGY STAR’s
rating system for tenants upon its launch.

BUILDINGS

95



EB.7	Encourage the adoption of green leases through education and
training
Action: Encourage building owners and tenants to adopt green leases by providing stakeholder
training, education, and recognition programs.
Relevance: Green leasing, or energy-aligned leasing, is the practice of realigning the financial
incentives of the landlord and tenant to support energy or sustainability goals in the lease
documents. These leases overcome the principal-agent problem, whereby landlords and
tenants are dis-incentivized to undertake energy efficiency upgrades in a building, as neither
realizes the full benefit of the upgrades.
Details: In a recent study, the Institute for Market Transformation (IMT) estimated that green
leases could reduce energy consumption in U.S. office buildings by between 11% and 22%,
reducing nationwide utility expenditures by commercial buildings by as much as $0.51 per
square foot. The potential savings for the U.S. market for leased offices ranges from $1.7 billion
to $3.3 billion in annual cost savings.148
The District should provide education and resources for stakeholders such as brokers, lawyers,
and commercial real estate companies that are in a position to increase uptake of green
leases, as well as building owners and tenants. This can be done via round-table discussions, or
by providing training. The District should additionally recognize those leaders in the industry who
participate in green leasing. The Green Lease Leaders program run by IMT and the DOE already
recognizes these organizations; the District can encourage building owners and tenants to
participate, and can provide recognition to those who do.

Next Steps

1

By 2019, offer a form of recognition for leading market participants who prioritize green
leasing through a program such as the Green Lease Leaders.

2

In mid-2019, provide education and resources around green leasing to brokers, lawyers,
commercial real estate companies, tenants and owners.

148 F eierman, Andrew. What’s in a Green Lease? Measuring the Potential Impact of Green Leases in the U.S. Office Sector. Institute for Market Transformation. May 2015.
http://www.imt.org/uploads/resources/files/Green_Lease_Impact_Potential.pdf

96

CLEAN ENERGY DC



EB.8

Develop a virtual energy audit program

Action: Establish a virtual energy audit program covering all building types in the District.
Relevance: Energy audits are a critical tool to understanding a building’s current energy
performance and improvement opportunities. To meet its GHG reduction targets, the District
will be required to retrofit a large portion of the existing building stock. As such, it is critical for
the District to find ways to conduct audits on many buildings citywide, in a short period of time,
and with modest funding.
Details: There are two types of energy audits: traditional and virtual. A traditional energy audit
requires the physical presence of a trained building analyst, and the associated time and
resources. This approach provides the greatest opportunity for a building owner to identify
issues and opportunities, but is also costlier. A virtual energy audit is a streamlined version of
the traditional energy audit that uses energy and other building data, but does not require a
trained building analyst to check building systems and identify issues and opportunities, and is
thus much less expensive.
Chicago offers one example of a successful virtual energy audit program. Energy Impact
Illinois’ EnCompass is an online tool developed through a collaboration of the DOE, the
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, and the private sector.149 It uses existing ENERGY
STAR or Energy Information Administration benchmarking data to extrapolate broad trends in
retrofit needs and opportunities in large scale residential and office buildings.150 By completing a
survey on building characteristics and components, the program provides building owners with
a customized list of high value energy conservation measures, and their potential impact on
energy performance.
For substantially less effort and time, a virtual energy audit allows building owners to identify
most of the key insights that a traditional audit would deliver. It can quickly focus on key issues
that drive poor energy performance, allowing more time and resources to be spent addressing
identified issues. They make energy audits accessible to a wider set of building owners that
either cannot afford a traditional audit, or would not invest in one.
The District should establish a virtual energy audit program that is available and attractive to all
building types. For such a program to be successful, it must include the following characteristics:
• Full cooperation from local utilities to access utility data.
• Data confidentiality.
• Pairing with recommendations for energy (and other) efficiency measures.
• A one-stop shop for homeowners that pairs audit recommendations with funding and
incentives to make physical building improvements (see Action CCB.5).
• Easy availability to targeted customers (e.g., small business owners, homeowners, renters).
• Opt-In integration with regional multiple listing service website MRIS (for residential users).151

149 http://encompass.energyimpactillinois.org/
150 Energy Information Administration date comes from the Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS).
151 www.mris.com

BUILDINGS

97



Next Steps

1

Obtain approval for the use of customer utility data in a virtual energy audit program
and develop agreements with utilities to access this data in 2018.

2

Secure funding, and then commission an organization to develop and manage an
online virtual energy audit program by the end of 2018.

3

Aim to provide audit results to property owners in 2019.

4.2.3.3 ACTION ON DISTRICT GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS
EB.9	Lead by example in District Government operations
Action: Lead by example by implementing an aggressive deep energy retrofit program,
followed by a net-zero retrofit program across the District Government building stock.
Relevance: Deep energy retrofits are building-specific, whole-building analyses designed to
identify points in the building lifecycle where investments in energy efficiency can achieve the
highest return. While the achievable savings depend on the building in question, the District can
lead by example by pursuing the process for its own buildings, with targets for energy savings to
guide its efforts.
The District has a legacy of leadership through complying with its own benchmarking ordinance
and going further in publishing fifteen-minute interval data for all DGS buildings through the
BuildSmartDC program. This underscores the importance and value of such actions and
demonstrates a broader proof-of-concept for the building industry. The District should extend
this leadership beyond energy disclosure and execute an action plan to reduce its building
energy consumption via a deep energy retrofit program, followed by a net-zero retrofit
program.
Details: DGS should phase in an aggressive governmental building retrofit program over time,
beginning with a deep energy retrofit process that covers 9% of District Government-owned
buildings by square footage between 2021 and 2024. The District Government should strive
for an average of at least 30% reductions in energy and emissions, recognizing that that
circumstances will vary by building, and different levels of reductions will be financially feasible
and technically viable for different buildings. Following this initial sweep of deep energy
retrofits, the District should initiate net-zero retrofits across 12.5% of the District Government
building stock between 2026 and 2032. Achieving these two sets of retrofit targets will reduce
District Government energy consumption by approximately 16%, with comparable reductions
in energy costs and GHG emissions.152 The program should aim for a net-zero level of energy
performance across the District Government-owned building stock.

152 The impact on energy costs and GHG emissions will depend on how much of the reductions originate with electricity versus natural gas.

98

CLEAN ENERGY DC



In targeting these retrofit rates, the District Government should develop and implement a
Strategic Energy Management Plan, as recommended below. In pushing the private sector to
significantly improve building energy performance, the District Government can learn from and
work with the U.S. General Services Administration in at least three ways:153
• Identify specific leasing preferences related to GHG emissions, energy performance, and
other sustainability issues.
• Incorporate the social cost of carbon into building-related decision-making.
• Use combined purchasing power to provide market signals to suppliers to offer low, zero, or
negative carbon products.
Additionally, DGS should lead by example by entering its buildings in the compliance cycle for
the Building Energy Performance Standard (BEPS) before privately-owned buildings, as detailed
in Action EB.5.
Buildings should also be evaluated as potential participants or anchors for neighborhood-scale
energy systems and microgrids, particularly when near new commercial developments or in
conjunction with public infrastructure investments. Multifamily housing and school buildings may
be particularly strong candidates.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, undertake and complete a strategic energy plan for reducing energy and
water use across the DGS portfolio. (See action EB.10 for additional detail.)

2

Implement a deep energy retrofit program across 9% of the District Government
building stock (by square footage) between 2021 and 2024, prioritizing those buildings
whose core systems and equipment are nearing the end of their useful life. Target an
average of 30% energy use reductions from these retrofits.

3

Implement a leadership-focused net-zero retrofit program across 12.5% of the District
Government building stock between 2026 and 2032.

153 Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations

BUILDINGS

99



EB.10	Develop and implement a Strategic Energy Management Plan for
District Government buildings
Action: Develop a Strategic Energy Management Plan (SEMP) for District Government buildings
managed by DGS that aligns with the District Government’s Clean Energy DC commitments
and ensures the District Government continues to play a leadership role as climate and energy
action increases and intensifies.
Relevance: Like private building owners and operators, the District Government has a
responsibility to reduce its own contribution to climate change and the opportunity to reduce
energy costs by strategically and persistently seeking and acting on opportunities to reduce
energy costs and shift to zero-emission energy sources.
As discussed in other actions, the District Government also has an important leadership role
to play, both in setting an example and in testing solutions, assessing their experiences, and
sharing lessons with local stakeholders, as well as using lessons learned to better shape and
design programs, policies, and incentives. Examples in Clean Energy DC include implementing
the Building Energy Performance Standard and conducting deep energy and net-zero ready
retrofits earlier than in private buildings.
Details: Strategic energy management is a focused, long-term approach to reducing energy
use through efficiency and conservation, as well as taking other steps to reduce costs and
GHG emissions. The District Government has been actively working to reduce energy and
emissions for several years. For example, the DGS manages BuildSmart DC, an online platform
receiving energy data from tens of thousands of data points every day, which allows users to
review basic and detailed energy use data on more than 400 District Government buildings.154
DGS already sources 100% of its electricity from renewable sources through power purchase
agreements and renewable energy certificates.
The SEMP should establish DGS’s ongoing approach to persistently identifying, assessing,
prioritizing, and implementing energy and GHG reduction measures. It should specify any
guiding policies, clarify roles and responsibilities, codify the methods used to evaluate potential
opportunities, and identify and begin to resolve any organizational barriers. BuildSmart DC
provides a wealth of data to build upon, and energy audits conducted in most DGS buildings in
2011 likely offer a preliminary set of actions to consider.155
The SEMP should align with the scale of action called for in the balance of this report,
particularly in regard to a set of deep energy retrofits. It should act as a roadmap to ultimately
drive District Government buildings towards net-zero-ready performance levels.

154 http://www.buildsmartdc.com
155 https://dgs.dc.gov/page/energy-efficiency-0

100

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

In 2018, collect all existing policies, plans,
audit results, and similar documentation;
assemble data on current and historical
performance; and investigate and
summarize the current processes that
identify, analyze, and act upon reduction
opportunities—including who is involved
and any challenges they may be facing.

2

Once completed, DGS should develop
a SEMP (with the contents described
above). Focus on establishing the
organizational structure(s), policies,
processes, and tools necessary to
maintain continuous action, and ensure
they are adequately resourced and
supported by leadership.

BUILDINGS

101



EXISTING BUILDINGS ROADMAP

EXISTING BUILDING ROADMAP
EB.1 Increase access to building
energy performance data for energy efficiency programs
EB.2 Increase DCSEU flexibility
EB.3 Provide the incentives
necessary to operate a Districtwide deep energy retrofit program
EB.4 Coordinate and centrally
track District efficiency and
finance programs
EB.5 Implement a Building Energy
Performance Standard
EB.6 Drive energy efficiency at
tenant build-out
EB.7 Encourage the adoption of
green leases through education
and training
EB.8 Develop a virtual energy audit
program
EB.9 Lead by example in District
Government operations
EB.10 Develop and implement a
Strategic Energy Management
Plan for District Government
buildings

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

102

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2024

4.2.4



4.3

CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS

In addition to the actions above, the District should take steps to support energy use and GHG
emissions reductions across the overall building sector. The actions recommended below target
both New Construction and Existing Buildings.

4.3.1

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

4.3.1.1	
INCREASING AND IMPROVING ACCESS TO FUNDING
AND FINANCING
CCB.1	Establish a Green Bank and increase other funding for energy efficiency
and renewable energy projects in new and existing buildings
Action: Increase the funding provided for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects in
the District, including but not limited to creating a Green Bank and increasing funding for the
DCSEU.
Relevance: The first approach to funding the District’s energy transition should be the creation
of a Green Bank. Such an institution can support not only building energy efficiency, but also
renewable energy development. Green banks are typically public or quasi-public entities that
leverage private sector capital to increase the overall level of investment in renewable, lowcarbon energy. The creation of a Green Bank is essential to meeting the District’s targets, as
the investments required to carry out the actions outlined in the Plan will far exceed what the
District Government alone can provide.
As an illustration, DOEE reported that a total of $1.5 billion was required to meet the District’s
former requirements for solar energy generation.156 As the District has now doubled its
requirements for solar energy generation, even greater investment will be needed.
The value and importance of a Green Bank has been echoed by DOEE’s Single Family
and Small Multifamily Working Group in its August 2016 report, Green Residential Solutions –
Recommendations from the Single Family Small Multifamily Green Building Working Group.
Green banks have proven to be a crucial model for providing much-needed funding for
the many dimensions of energy transition, while providing additional benefits for consumers,
businesses, and investors. These include:
• Improved leveraging of private sector investment per public dollar spent.
• Continued financing of public grants with a lower public funding burden.
• Lower energy bills through efficiency and renewable energy.
• Job growth in the local economy through clean energy investments.
• Streamlining existing programs without having to consolidate program administration.
• Improved efficiency of government programs by coordinating Green Bank activities with other
agencies to maximize program value.

156 D
 istrict of Columbia Green Bank Recommendations and Implementation Plan, Department of Energy & Environment, Prepared by the Coalition for Green Capital,
June 27, 2016

BUILDINGS

103



While a Green Bank can offer larger loans, credit enhancement, loan loss reserves, and other
financial tools, there remains a strong place for more traditional incentive/grant programs
such as those operated the DC Sustainable Energy Utility. The DCSEU has made great strides
in reducing energy use, but the level of funding for the DCSEU falls short of funding levels of
peer organizations that have achieved savings comparable with the DCSEU’s performance
benchmarks. To bring funding in line with similar leading-edge efficiency programs in the U.S.
and help achieve District’s emissions reduction targets, the District should consider increasing
the funding it receives from the SETF or other sources.
Details: The DOEE commissioned an analysis of the potential benefits and design of a Green
Bank in the District, resulting in the District of Columbia Green Bank Technical Report.157
The principal recommendations from this report include:
• Pass the “Green Finance Authority Establishment Act of 2017,” introduced by Mayor Bowser
to establish the Green Bank as a new quasi-public, wholly-owned nonprofit corporation of the
District Government (District Instrumentality) that sits between the government and markets.
• Establish a Board of Directors appointed by the Mayor. Hire a team of dedicated staff to
operate the Green Bank with expertise in investing in clean energy.
• Capitalize the Green Bank with up to $100 million of public money over time, to animate
approximately $500 million in private investment.
• Provide an ongoing stream of dedicated public funding to a Green Bank on an annual basis.
• Use the Green Bank to provide a portfolio of financing and market-based solutions that target
renewable energy, energy efficiency, and low- to zero-emission transportation.
• Give the Green Bank the ability to issue bonds under various structures.
• Target specific funds to single family and multifamily buildings as well as low-to-moderate
income individuals and combine these funds with other instruments (e.g., on-bill financing).
• Explore options to include the affordable housing community in providing input to decisions
made by the Green Bank, and on establishing other funding initiatives.
The DC Green Bank should build on existing District tools for financing energy improvements,
including DOEE’s privately administered Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing
program (discussed further in Action CCB.2), a government-enabled, tax-based financing
tool that drives private capital into publicly beneficial projects that reduce energy use,
improve infrastructure, and better the District’s built environment. In addition, the District
Government has many tools such as revenue bonds, private activity bonds, and affordable
housing preservation funds that could be streamlined to maximize low carbon investment
in collaboration with other District agencies. Making clean and efficient energy technology
cheaper and readily attainable is a crucial component of transforming the District’s energy
usage. In addition to providing a mechanism to reduce carbon emissions, low-cost and longterm financing for energy efficiency and clean energy improvement projects are an important
strategy to use public sector resources to drive private sector investment into the local
economy—especially underserved communities. This saves businesses and residents money,
and creates local jobs for contractors and building service providers.
To effectively drive the levels of investment required to achieve the District’s emissions reduction
targets, the DC Green Bank should offer a portfolio of financing solutions that address both
renewable energy and energy efficiency market needs. These solutions can include:

157 Greening the District of Columbia: Incentives and Policies to Achieve Deep Green Building Construction and Renovations

104

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• PACE financing and incentives to accelerate renewable energy use and deep energy
efficiency retrofits.
• On-bill financing to open the energy efficiency market to renters.
• Low-to-moderate income whole-home solutions with alternative underwriting options.
• Standard offer loan loss reserve to drive residential lending.
• Comprehensive community solar solutions, including rooftop aggregation, to increase
solar access.
• Aggregation of solar renewable energy certificates to overcome inefficiency.158
The primary current source of funds for energy efficiency work in the District is the Sustainable
Energy Trust Fund (SETF). The SETF currently collects approximately $21 million annually through
surcharges on customer bills, most of which funds the DCSEU programs. The SETF surcharge has
been fixed at $0.01505 per therm consumed of natural gas and $0.001612 per kWh consumed
of electricity, as of Fiscal Year 2017 (this represents an 8% increase over the rate in 2016 and
prior years).159 When converted to standard units (MMBtu), these surcharges reflect a significant
gap between what is charged for the consumption of natural gas ($0.1505 per MMBtu of
natural gas) and what is charged for electricity ($0.473 per MMBtu of electricity)—the natural
gas rate is approximately 30% of the electric rate. (There is a second surcharge, the Energy
Assistance Trust Fund (EATF), which helps fund low-income energy assistance, is weighted more
heavily towards gas bills. However, the magnitude of the EATF surcharge is less, so the two do
not cancel out.) Moreover, as District-wide energy use drops, the funds collected by the SETF
will decrease as well, limiting the work the DCSEU will be able to undertake—though this may be
addressed through legislation. Given the differences between natural gas and electric markets
and efficiency opportunities and the greater total source energy footprint of electricity when
accounting for generation loss, some divergence is likely appropriate. However, the size of the
divergence should be examined.
Moreover, the District’s goals for energy efficiency savings through the DCSEU and related
programs place it among the savings achieved by leading programs in the United States. The
DCSEU is charged with performance goals of reducing electricity and natural gas consumption
by an amount approximately equal to 1% of citywide consumption, per year. Yet, as detailed
in Table 5 and Table 6 below, excerpted from the American Council for an Energy-Efficiency
Economy’s 2014 state scorecard, the District’s funding for the DCSEU is a fraction of what is
being expended in these other states, measured per unit of revenues or per customer. As the
tables also indicate, DCSEU spends less per unit of energy savings than some of these other
programs. This reflects the DCSEU’s efficiency, but also the fact that the program is relatively
young, and that the measures it is investing in to date are relatively shallow. As Demand-Side
Management energy efficiency programs mature, they typically see declining savings per
dollar spent, as the lowest-hanging fruit are addressed. Deeper measures cost more upfront,
but because of their longer lifetime of savings, still compare well in their levelized cost of
energy.160 One must also remember that the DCSEU’s underlying policy goals and contractual
requirements are generally more expansive than in other jurisdictions.161

158 F or more details on these, see the District of Columbia Green Bank Technical Report. https://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/
attachments/20170403_Green%20Bank%20Technical%20Report%20for%20DOEE_FINAL.pdf
159 D.C. Official Code § 8–1774.10(b)
160 “How much does efficiency cost” ACEEE. https://aceee.org/sites/default/files/cost-of-ee.pdf
161 TetraTech. Department of Energy and Environment Verification of the District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility FY16 Annual Evaluation Report for the Performance Benchmarks, June 28, 2017. Page 6. https://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/EMV_DCSEU_FY2016_Annual_Performance_Benchmarks_finaldraft.pdf

BUILDINGS

105



State

2016 Spending on
Energy Efficiency
Programs (percent of
electric utility
revenues)

2016 Savings from
Electric Efficiency
Programs (net
incremental electric
savings achieved as a
percent of retail sales)

Rank among
states in 2016
electricity
savings

Acquisition costs
($ spend per
MWH of savings)

Massachusetts

6.25%

3.00%

1

$343.32

Rhode Island

6.42%

2.85%

2

$365.79

Vermont

6.84%

2.52%

3

$390.40

Illinois

2.05%

1.23%

11

$153.07

New York

2.00%

1.09%

15

$265.77

Maryland

2.49%

0.91%

17

$333.20

District of Columbia

0.96%

0.65%

23

$176.13

162

↑↑ T able 5. Spending and savings on energy efficiency in electricity in selected top states, Maryland,
and the District, 2016163

State

2015 Spending on
Energy Efficiency
Programs (dollars per
residential customer)

2015 Savings from
Natural Gas Efficiency
Programs
(net incremental gas
savings achieved as a
percent of retail sales)

Rank among
states in 2016
natural gas
savings

Acquisition
Costs ($ spent
per therm of
savings)164

Minnesota

$35.94

1.40%

1

$1.76

Rhode Island

$104.09

1.26%

2

$5.89

Massachusetts

$136.52

1.13%

3

$7.39

Michigan

$24.95

1.05%

4

$1.55

Vermont

$63.73

0.75%

10

$3.68

District of Columbia

$36.95

0.33%

22

$5.19

Maryland

$14.37

0.10%

30

$9.88

↑↑ T able 6. Spending and savings on energy efficiency in natural gas in selected top states, Maryland,
and the District, 2016165
Furthermore, as a part of their annual evaluation, measurement and verification process of
the DCSEU’s programs, consulting firm TetraTech analyzed the funding that would be required
for the DCSEU to achieve its maximum performance targets in electricity and natural gas
savings.166 Under the new $100 million, 5-year contract, DCSEU is charged with achieving
electricity savings over five years equivalent to 5% of the 2014 electricity consumption of the
District of Columbia, and natural gas savings over five years equivalent to 3% of the 2014
162
163
164
165
166

DOEE calculated this column. The levelized cost of saved energy would be a better comparison metric, but could not be calculated with the data available.
ACEEE Spending/Savings Tables, 2016. http://database.aceee.org/sites/default/files/docs/spending-savings-tables.pdf
DOEE calculated this column. The levelized cost of saved energy would be a better comparison metric, but could not be calculated with the data available.
ACEEE Spending/Savings Tables, 2016. http://database.aceee.org/sites/default/files/docs/spending-savings-tables.pdf
TetraTech 2016. Pages 7-11

106

CLEAN ENERGY DC



natural gas consumption of the District of Columbia. Based on the three-year average of the
acquisition costs—that is, the amount of money that is spent for one unit of verified energy
savings— from 2014 through 2016, one can estimate how much budget would be needed to
achieve the five-year maximum savings. If the acquisition costs for the DCSEU were equivalent
to the three year historic average, DCSEU would need a five-year budget of $158 million,
including $115 million for electric programs and $42 million for natural gas programs.
It should be noted that the DCSEU’s self-reported FY 2017 results are better than past years—
achieving the maximum gas and electric savings for the first time.167 If the DCSEU were able
to continue to get the same savings per dollar for both electric and natural gas that they
were able to achieve in 2017, they would need at least $111 million to achieve their maximum
targets. However, those results had not yet been verified by third-party contractor at the time of
the publication of this report.
Nor, as already stated, should one assume that costs will stay flat or continue to decline.
ACEEE analysis of savings over time across jurisdictions suggests that, generally, acquisition
costs decline over the first five to six years of implementation, and then begin to increase as
the portfolio matures—as the “low hanging fruit” of low/no cost measures are completed,
and incremental savings require more expensive measures to achieve, such as capital
improvements and deep energy retrofits.168 This negative feedback loop has led other
jurisdictions with more established demand-side management programs to increase their
surcharge over time.169 A similar approach taken by the District Government would ensure the
continued funding necessary for the successful operation of the DCSEU.
It is not necessary to run all energy efficiency programs and renewable energy programs
through a single entity, nor fund them through a single source. What matters is that residential
and commercial consumers see a single unified brand, web presence, and meet their needs
with a simplified intake and concierge service—as detailed in other recommendations,
including CCB.5 and CRE.4.
To meet its goals, the District Government should consider whether the best approach is to
provide more funding to the DCSEU directly or through other avenues, whether to increase the
SETF, and what alternate funding streams may be available.
Next Steps

1

Establish the DC Green Bank as an independent instrumentality of the District
Government that sits between the government and markets. Capitalize the DC Green
Bank with up to $100 million of public money over time and from several sources to
unlock approximately $500 million in private investment.

2

Adjust SETF rates for electricity and natural gas to better align them with a funding
allocation that allows the DCSEU to operate at the leading edge of energy efficiency
programs in the country. The adjusted rate should account for the additional funding
needed to achieve more aggressive goals and the diminishing returns this funding may
achieve over time.

167 “2017 Annual Report: Building the Future of Energy in the District,” DC Sustainable Energy Utility, 2017. Forthcoming.
168 An Empirical Model for Predicting Electric Energy Efficiency Resource Acquisition Costs in North America: Analysis and Application, John Plunkett, Theodore Love,
and Francis Wyatt, Green Energy Economics Group, Inc., 2012. http://www.aceee.org/files/proceedings/2012/data/papers/0193-000170.pdf.
169 TetraTech 2016

BUILDINGS

107



CCB.2	Enhance the District’s Property Assessed Clean Energy financing
program
Action: Expand the District’s existing Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Commercial
financing program and explore implementation of a PACE Residential program to cover the
residential building market.
Relevance: PACE is a financing structure that funds cost-saving measures through a special
property tax assessment. Through the PACE program, building owners can secure 100%
financing for qualifying energy efficiency retrofits and renewable energy investments, and
other types of projects. Terms of repayment can be up to 20 years, which is much longer than
conventional financing. Loans are paid twice yearly on property taxes rather than monthly like
traditional loans, and remain with the property when it is sold. As such, PACE offers property
owners the opportunity to immediately improve a property’s cash flows through an energyfocused investment, and provide property owners with lower utility bills, enhanced property
values, and improved building maintenance, resident comfort, health, and resiliency. Further,
because PACE only uses the District’s tax collection authority to enhance private capital
investment, it requires no direct funding. This makes PACE an attractive and effective financing
mechanism that can increase the private investment necessary to achieve the District’s 2032
climate and energy targets.
Details: The District’s current PACE program (DC PACE) serves only commercial building owners,
including some multifamily buildings. Much work remains to scale the use of Commercial PACE
as a financial product within the local real estate market. DC PACE has committed to driving
down interest rates further through market competition among private lenders. DC PACE
is also working to better serve community-based organizations, such as locally-owned and
disadvantaged small businesses, nonprofits and public service institutions, affordable housing,
and houses of worship, which frequently have difficulty accessing solar and energy efficiency.
As noted in recommendations in the chapter, a key component of scaling DC PACE will also
be achieved through closer integration of DC PACE with the DCSEU and other District programs
to link financing solutions to ongoing grants, incentives, data management tools, technical
assistance, and marketing programs. The DCSEU’s ability to develop and manage building level
analytics should be integrated closely into DC PACE underwriting and approval processes to
reduce total program costs and streamline the customer experience.
Moreover, PACE could be expanded to serve the entire residential market, including singlefamily homes. Expanding PACE, with robust consumer protections, to serve the entire residential
market will increase the number of property owners that can access this financing program,
and thus the proportion of the District’s energy use and GHG emissions that can be targeted
with lower cost renewable energy and energy efficiency actions in the residential sector.
DOEE’s Single-Family and Small Multifamily Working Group identified a set of recommendations
for a residential PACE program:
• Coordinate with major financial institutions to overcome barriers related to subordinated
debt.170
• Create an interest buy-down program for low- and moderate-income households to enhance
utility savings.
• Partner with the DCSEU to create greater value to residential customers.

170 S ubordinated debt is debt that ranks below other loans and securities with regard to claims on assets or earnings. In the case of borrower default, creditors who own
subordinated debt will not be paid until more senior debtholders are paid in full.

108

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• Create market demand through a strong marketing and outreach strategy, led by DOEE
and a residential PACE administrator, in partnership with the District’s financial and real estate
community to create a pipeline of projects. 171
Furthermore, the Working Group recommended that the District follow the residential PACE
guidance released by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) in July 2016.172 The new FHA guidance is the first signal of support
for PACE at the federal level and aligns with the District’s current PACE program. The guidance
provided is intended to take the perceived risk out of this investment mechanism, thereby
significantly increasing the availability of affordable clean energy financing to homeowners.
In addition to the Working Group recommendations, the District should look to other successful
residential PACE programs operating in other cities and consider adopting a greater variety
of financing options, including unsecured financing and financial incentives provided at point
of sale. The District Government should also give tenants of residential buildings the option
to finance energy efficiency upgrades in smaller installations, rather than financing a large
upgrade with multiple energy efficiency improvements.
The District Government can implement a residential PACE program without any additional
legislative action. The Energy Efficiency Financing Act of 2010, the enabling legislation for the
DC PACE financing program, provides the authority necessary to originate and administer both
commercial and/or residential PACE programs. In addition, the existing DC PACE administrator
has been procured to establish and administer a District PACE financing program, whether
such a program serves commercial or residential customers. Furthermore, the current PACE
legal instruments and collection mechanisms that have already been established to serve the
commercial PACE properties can be adapted to serve residential PACE assessments with little
to no modification. Therefore, the core mechanisms for the establishment of a new District
residential PACE program are already in place.
Next Steps

1

As part of the establishment of the DC Green Bank, investigate ways to expand the
current DC PACE program to cover all residential building owners with robust consumer
protections. Explore options and look to other case studies of PACE to provide a variety
of energy efficiency upgrade financing options.

2

Issue a “standard offer” to commercial lenders and PACE originators to increase market
competition among capital providers to the DC PACE program.

3

DOEE and DCSEU should provide pre-development support incentives and funding
and subsidized energy audits that will overcome the upfront capital requirements for
subsequent financing of energy efficiency and renewable energy projects.

4

DOEE should develop specific guidance on the use of Green Bank financing programs
with other DC government finance programs and incentives, including coordinated
underwriting and pre-qualification for PACE and Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC)
by DCHFA and DHCD, and issuance of tax exempt financing through the District’s
revenue bond program.

171 Green Residential Solutions – Recommendations from the Single Family Small Multifamily Green Building Working Group, June 2016.
172 Available at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=16-11ml.pdf.

BUILDINGS

109



4.3.1.2	
POLICY AND PROGRAM RECOMMENDATIONS
CCB.3	Ensure code compliance in all buildings through increased investment
in robust code enforcement
Action: Ensure code compliance in both new and existing buildings through increased
investment in energy and green code enforcement and education.
Relevance: Even though states and cities across the nation are adopting increasingly stringent
energy and green codes, overall code compliance rates remains low. This is often the result
of a combination of factors such as insufficient financial investment in the energy code
enforcement program, lack of trained staff dedicated solely to energy and green code
enforcement, lack of political support for tough enforcement, and a local building industry that
has not yet caught up to speed and been educated on the new, more complex codes.
The District has taken many steps over the past five years to address these challenges
beginning with the establishment of the Green Building Division at the Department of Consumer
and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA). Before the Division was created, the District had similar code
compliance rates to the rest of the nation as demonstrated by a code compliance study
conducted by DCRA in partnership with the DCSEU and Institute for Market Transformation
(IMT) in 2014. In a follow-up study completed two years later, it was shown that DCRA had
vastly improved compliance, specifically at plan review. DCRA’s achievements in improving
energy code compliance were recognized in 2015 when it was awarded the national Standard
Bearer’s Award by IMT and the International Code Council, recognizing their innovation and
leadership in energy code enforcement.
Even though DCRA has made great strides in developing a robust energy and green code
enforcement program, to achieve and maintain the building performance required to achieve
the District’s 2032 targets, the District Government will need to increase staff and set specific
compliance targets.
Details: To improve code compliance in new and existing buildings, the District Government
should increase financial investment in the Green Building Division through the Green Building
Fund173, hire and train additional staff at DCRA, develop and administer an incentivized,
voluntary above-code net-zero programs for both residential and commercial buildings,
develop and invest in new tools and resources for the building industry to help streamline and
ease compliance, and train the building industry on new progressive codes To support lowincome and affordable housing developments and ensure the transition to net-zero energy
codes are accessible for all income groups, the District should provide robust, tiered incentives
based on average median income (AMI) in the form of structural incentives (expedited
permitting and design support) as well as financial incentives that facilitate design and
construction as well as award proven building performance.

173 The Green Building Fund is a special purpose revenue fund established by the DC Green Building Act of 2006

110

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Every two to three years, DCRA should undertake an energy code compliance study
to understand the current state of compliance in the District and set strategic goals
to improve performance. The previous two studies were completed in 2014 and 2016.
Reports should be made public and transparent.

2

Develop and administer incentivized voluntary above-code net-zero programs for both
residential and commercial buildings.

3

The District Government should invest additional financial resources in code
enforcement by increasing revenue brought in by the DC Green Fund, established
under the Green Building Act of 2006.

4

The DCRA Green Building Division in partnership with DOEE should lead the Energy
Code and Green Code Technical Advisory Groups during the code development
and adoption cycles to ensure that the proposed codes meet the goals and are
enforceable.

5

Each year, DCRA and DCSEU should partner to develop and deploy a training
curriculum on codes and code compliance that complements the training they
already offer, and should continue to update the curriculum to support new codes and
more ambitious targets.

CCB.4

Incentivize and require submetering

Action: Phase submetering requirements for new construction and major renovations into
District Government building codes. Change District laws and regulations to allow residential
building owners to submeter residential tenants for billing purposes.
Relevance: The energy used by tenants within their spaces can amount to up to 50% of the
energy consumed in typical commercial office buildings.174,175 In commercial, multi-tenant
buildings with a single or master meter, tenants are typically charged on a per-square-foot
basis, and have limited or no visibility on their actual energy consumption. A recent U.S.
DOE report highlighted the importance of submetering in reducing market barriers such as
poor information availability and misaligned incentives between tenants and landlords.176
Submetering these spaces and requiring building owners to inform tenants about their energy
consumption gives tenants the information they need to track and reduce consumption.
While submetering alone does not reduce energy consumption, it provides a window into a
building’s tenant- and system-level energy consumption, and allows market actors to make
informed operational and capital-investment decisions. Research by commercial real estate
practitioners indicates that submetering tenant spaces can contribute to reducing building
energy costs by more than 20%. Residential submetering also allows residents to capture the
benefits of more efficient behavior and appliances.
174
175
176

Base building systems such as heating and cooling, common area lighting, and elevator operations make up the other portion of commercial building energy use.
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy. Energy Efficiency in Separate Tenant Spaces – A Feasibility Study. April 2016.
http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/04/f30/DOE%20-%20Energy%20Efficiency%20in%20Separate%20Tenant%20Spaces_0.pdf (p.1)
Ibid.

BUILDINGS

111



It should be noted that this action can be particularly sensitive—and important—for affordable
housing. As buildings increase in their efficiency toward net-zero energy levels of performance,
developers of affordable housing must be able to provide a reduced utility allowance and
proportionally increase the rent. However, the District should ensure that the net level of
affordability for the tenant remains the same.
Details: The District should take several steps to phase in incentives and later requirements
related to submetering to secure the energy saving-benefits of submetering. The following
sequence will ensure that adequate infrastructure is in place and that owners will have
sufficient time to prepare for and respond to requirements.
First, submetering should be added to the list of equipment that the DCSEU is able to
incentivize. Currently, standard rebates are only available for certain types of equipment,
such as lighting, HVAC, refrigeration, and food service, among others. To reduce the upfront
cost of installing submeters, incentives should be expanded to potentially include hardware
and installation costs for installing submeters. In addition, the DCSEU should provide training to
building contractors, designers, and operators on the purpose, installation and use of submeters
to promote energy efficiency as part of a broader set of operational-focused training offerings.
As discussed in Action EB.2, the DCSEU should receive credit for any energy use reductions
associated with such operational training programs, pending an appropriate methodology to
account for savings. The District’s building codes should also include submetering requirements
for new construction and renovation. This will ensure that all newly constructed and renovated
spaces will be submetered, and will phase-in submetering over time with the construction and
renovation cycle.
Once a broader market share for submetering is established, the District should investigate
a submetering policy similar to New York City’s Local Law 88. Along with requirements for
lighting upgrades in large non-residential buildings, LL88 includes a provision that requires
non-residential building owners to install electric submeters for their non-residential tenants,
providing monthly energy statements to those tenants.177
The District of Columbia Code §34-1552 et seq. already requires the Commission to announce
rules and standards for building owners of nonresidential buildings to install submetering
infrastructure for the purposes of billing tenants for their share of energy consumption.178
By omission, residential units are not included in this code. To realize the energy-saving benefits
of submetering in residential spaces, the District Government should therefore legalize and
regulate the practice of submetering in residential buildings. Coordination with OPC and the
Office of the Tenant Advocate will be needed to enable residential submetering for billing
purposes. For rent-controlled buildings, the District Government should work with tenants and
landlords to devise and pass legislation to enact a fair and streamlined system of automatically
lowering rents when tenants begin to assume utility costs previously born by the landlord.

177
178

112

New York City Mayor’s Office of Sustainability, Local Law 88, http://www.nyc.gov/html/gbee/html/plan/ll88.shtml.
National Conference of State Legislatures, Utility Submetering, http://www.ncsl.org/research/energy/utility-submetering.aspx

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Work with the DCSEU to include submeters as qualifying equipment for incentives,
and offer submetering training to building contractors, designers and operators within
the District as part of its educational curriculum. Pending the identification of an
appropriate methodology, credit the DCSEU with energy use reductions associated with
these sorts of training programs.

2

As part of the next building code update, require submetering at new construction and
major renovations for non-residential buildings, and include the latest national model
codes and standards.

3

By 2018, petition the Public Service Commission to open a formal case to consider
changing its regulations to allow for submetering and billing in residential spaces, or
introduce legislation to do so, while also regulating the interaction of submeter rates
and rent increases so as to preserve housing affordability.

4

Work with industry to investigate, and if appropriate, enact a new law that requires
tenant spaces in large new buildings to be submetered or separately metered.

CCB.5	Develop a centralized online platform for residential energy efficiency
programs
Action: Create a centralized online platform to provide information on and access to
residential energy efficiency programs. Provide resources and information on program offerings,
available incentives and financing, and any other useful information for residents, multifamily
building owners, and developers.
Relevance: This recommendation provided educational and informational resources to
facilitate the process of accessing and paying for energy efficiency improvements. The District
already offers several incentives and programs to make residential energy efficiency actions
more accessible and affordable, with additional actions recommended in the Plan. A central
resource that provides information on all available programs will increase the value and use of
these incentives and programs by making them easier to access and understand. This will, in
turn, help the District leverage its program investments and generate more private investment
in the actions required to achieve its climate and energy targets.
Details: The creation of a single online platform for residential building owners will make it easier
for residents, multifamily building owners, and developers to learn about and access energy
efficiency programs, incentives, and financing offered by the District. A flexible, commercefocused resource should be integrated with other building-related resources and incentives to
provide a complete package of information, simplifying the process of investing in residential
energy efficiency improvement and renewable energy installations.

BUILDINGS

113



This platform should be integrated with the DCSEU’s existing energy efficiency website.179
The DCSEU site provides both information and the means to solicit additional information either
by phone, online chat, or email. Additional existing DOEE and Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) programs that should be integrated include:
• DOEE Weatherization
• DOEE Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program
• DOEE/DCSEU Solar for All Program
• DOEE Healthy Homes Program
• DOEE RiverSmart Homes/Communities
• DHCD Single Family Residential Rehabilitation Program
• DOEE and DHCD Lead Safe Program
• DHCD Home Purchase Assistance Program
• DHCD Employee Assisted Housing Program
To minimize barriers to adoption, the site should be made as intuitive as possible, and the District
should ensure the content is accessible to those without regular internet access. To make it
intuitive, a first step would be to create three separate entry points for the three main targets:
residents, multifamily building owners, and developers. Separating the portal into spaces
targeting each of these specific groups will improve the likelihood that users stay on the site and
take action on the information and programs. To improve accessibility for low-to-middle income
families and communities, the District should partner with trusted community organizations to
help disseminate information to all neighborhoods and communities.
Given their mandate and experience managing their existing energy efficiency website, the
DCSEU may be the ideal body for the coordination of this platform. Management could also be
coordinated by a similar third party organization, or even the District itself.

Next Steps

1

Contact jurisdictions with similar online platforms to derive insights on the use, perceived
effectiveness, and administrative costs of these initiatives in early 2018.

2

Determine the costs associated with website design, maintenance, and content
development, as well as any staff time required in 2018.

3

Direct the DCSEU to expand their existing website to include other residential buildingfocused programs in the District and provide separate platforms for different audiences,
or contract a separate arms-length organization to develop the site in 2018.

4

Launch the website by 2019.

5

Partner with trusted community organizations to help disseminate information to all
neighborhoods and communities, including through offline platforms.

179 https://www.dcseu.com

114

CLEAN ENERGY DC



4.3.1.3	
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
CCB.6	Maintain an ongoing outreach program to foster and expand
awareness, education, and opportunities for collaborating around highperformance buildings
Action: Collaborate with local organizations to deliver awareness and educational programs to
inform the public and promote highly efficient and net-zero energy buildings.
Relevance: Awareness and education initiatives can take multiple forms and target multiple
audiences. The following were identified as most impactful and together speak to a broad
audience.
1.	Develop an energy educational series. The District should consider hosting multiple series
with different topics for different audiences. As cost can be a barrier to entry for such classes,
the District should explore options to underwrite the class and/or ensure basic provider costs
are met to improve attendance and popularity. Potential topics could include the basics of
net-zero energy, net-zero energy case studies, next generation technologies, and maximizing
passive and active energy opportunities.
2.	Partner with a local organization to provide additional content on net-zero energy
technologies, design, and examples as part of an effort to expand existing energy
conferences to provide additional focus on net-zero energy buildings. Select a local
organization that has experience developing educational materials on building energy
management and operations in the past. To host a large conference on net-zero and deep
energy efficiency, the District should work with a partner to hold a single day symposium on
energy innovation.
3.	Sponsor local and international tours of examples of deep energy efficiency and community
energy provision best practices. A working model for this recommendation can be found
in the energy and green building tours provided by i-SUSTAIN. While the District may wish
to lead its own tours, it should also consider contracting or partnering with organizations
such as i-SUSTAIN. Some examples of local and international destinations for tours include
the SEED classroom at the Mary McLeod Bethune Day Academy Public Charter School,
the Chesapeake Bay Foundation Brock Environmental Center, the Omega Center, and the
Phipps Conservatory.
4.	Collaborate with local organizations to co-sponsor and organize in-depth tours and energy
events at new and remodeled net-zero homes and small businesses. The District should
partner with local groups to create a Buildings of the Future open house series in the following
categories: Single Family Home, Multifamily Buildings, Offices, Retail Stores and Restaurants.
Partnering with another organization can help distribute costs and responsibilities of this
program. The District should ensure that the content in these educational tours include
education on the various renewable energy options. This will help facilitate informed-decision
making by residents in the District. For example, differentiating between electricity needs and
heating energy needs, their associated costs, and options for each, can help residents make
the best choice in choosing an energy provider or financing package for their needs.
To boost attendance in energy education sessions, the District should also utilize and strengthen
existing partnerships with local professional organizations, such as the District of Columbia Building
Industry Association, the Apartment and Office Building Association of Metropolitan Washington,
the Urban Land Institute Washington, National Capital Region chapter of the U.S. Green Building
Council, the American Institute of Architects, the International Living Future Institute’s DC
Collaborative, and the local ASHRAE chapters.

BUILDINGS

115



Next Steps

1

Create a high-performance building and net-zero energy series. Establish an education
and marketing partnership in 2018, and begin holding the series in 2019.

2

As part of building local partnerships, organize one of the regional tours listed above.

3

Consider arranging a visit by key staff to Brussels and Sweden as a way of learning firsthand about experiences in building code acceleration.

4

Approach local organizations to create a conference partnership in 2018, targeting an
expanded conference in late 2018, or 2019.

5

In mid-2018, investigate potential partners and avenues for a Buildings of the Future tour.

CCB.7	Partner to support training and certification of building contractors and
managers
Action: Partner with HVAC and envelope/siding subcontracting unions and trade associations
to prepare for a transition to heat pump based systems and high-performance envelopes.
Support the creation of a job skills program focused on next-generation building technologies.
Relevance: Contractors and fabricators have highly refined production techniques, and often
have little capacity or interest in learning about or taking on alternative technologies and
approaches. The District Government can support the building and construction industry by
providing job training in new technologies and approaches to building design and operations.
These efforts can connect to the District’s existing economic initiatives in providing local District
residents with important, well-paying jobs that are integral to the community.
Details: To increase workforce capacity, the District Government should partner with a college,
technical school or union to hold a technical series on select technologies and approaches,
including heat pumps, high-performance detailing, and air sealing performance testing. The
University of the District of Columbia offers a potential partner for such a series, while the District
Government can act as a facilitator. Hosts should seek participation from the local private
inspection community, as well as the District Government’s own code and inspection staff.
To expand the development of construction professionals, the District Government should also
identify a technical education partner to undertake specific job training. An existing example
of such a program is offered by the Central Community College of Nebraska (Central CC).
The Mechatronics high-performance building program offers training on ground source heat
pumps, solar electric and solar thermal systems, wind turbines, and efficient switching systems.
Other areas of the College also offer classes on high-performance thermal envelopes. As part
of this, the District and partner(s) should consider developing a contractor-focused education
series and pathway toward a “Green Contractor” certification. This industry training is important
to ensuring the District has access to enough trained professionals to meet he needs of the
programs recommended here.

116

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Building Operator training is also important. Poor energy management can negate all the
gains of high efficiency building systems. Modern, energy-efficient commercial buildings
require specialized knowledge to operate. Moreover, if the District establishes a Building Energy
Performance Standard (BEPS) that includes training and certification of building operators as
an alternative compliance path (see Action EB.6), and then local or regional availability of
such training needs to be available. A good example is the City University of New York Building
Performance Lab, which offers Building Operator Certification (BOC).
The District Government and the University of the District of Columbia have begun exploring
establishing a building science center that would provide training to building operators and
facilities staff. The University of District Columbia (UDC) Community College also can provide
two year degrees and certifications to District residents on building science and energy related
topics. Other universities also have interest in this area.
Next Steps

1

In 2018, identify and establish
relationships with appropriate
education and channel partners and
launch education programming.

2

Collaborate with a major university
or other partners in the District to open
a center for building science that
offers training and certification for
building operators.

3

Aim to have the job training
program operational by 2019.

BUILDINGS

117



CCB.8

Integrate energy performance information into residential transactions

Action: Support ongoing green appraisal and green multiple listing service (MRIS) initiatives
focused on residential buildings, and endorse a home energy score for single-family and small
multifamily homes.
Relevance: Owners and renters are faced with a myriad of choices when choosing a home.
In addition to monthly rent costs, or monthly ownership expenses (mortgage, property taxes,
and insurance), utility bills are key factors determining housing affordability. However, utility
efficiency and energy burden are often left out of the decision tree due to a lack of available
data, or technical complexity. Professionals involved in home purchases (e.g., real estate
agents, residential lenders and underwriters) often have limited understanding themselves of
energy and other sustainability issues. This will enable buyers, renters, and professionals to make
more informed decisions. Efforts are already underway in the District to educate homebuyers
and train relevant professionals in high-performance building benefits and practices. The District
Government should continue to support these efforts, while addressing gaps—including a
simplified metric for increasing transparency of energy use. A standardized home energy score
will allow owners and renters to make more informed decisions about how their home,
or prospective home, uses energy and compares with similar units.
Details: To improve the capacity of homebuyers and professionals, the District Government should:
• Continue supporting efforts to integrate sustainable features into the home sales and
valuation process.
• Work with other cities, utilities, and the real estate community to develop a new standard for
the Multiple Listing Service.
• Continue green training for appraisers and collaborating with the Appraisal Institute.
• Continue encouraging residential lenders and underwriters to seek out training so that they
can appropriately value sustainable features.
• Support education and collaboration efforts with real estate associations to educate
REALTORS on green valuation fields.
• Support MRIS and DCRA efforts to encourage agents to use green fields in MLS listings.
• Streamline the process of how consumers acquire data to appropriately value sustainable
features of homes.
• Support a follow-up to the Institute for Market Transformation’s green home valuation study. 180
• Adopt a transparent home energy scale for residential units. There are several examples of
a home energy score, including the U.S. Department of Home Energy Score that is being
adopted by cities across the country.181 This data must be included in MLS listings, and systems
like Northeast Energy Efficiency Partnership’s Home Energy Labeling Information Exchange
may be able to help.182 For such a program to be successful, the following aspects are
required:
••

Full cooperation from local utilities to access utility data and use it to develop scores.

••

Safeguards to ensure data confidentiality.

••

Easy availability to targeted customers (e.g., homeowners, renters).

••

Integration with regional multiple listing service website MRIS (for residential users).

180 Recommendations from DOEE’s Single Family and Small Multifamily Working Group.
181 https://betterbuildingssolutioncenter.energy.gov/home-energy-score
182 http://www.neep.org/initiatives/energy-efficient-buildings/green-real-estate-resources/helix

118

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Partner with U.S. DOE’s Better Buildings Home Energy Information Accelerator, and work
with other jurisdictions and companies to expand access to home-energy information
and develop a pipeline of homes using these tools.183

2

Assign staff in DOEE and DCRA to act on the recommendations listed above.

3

Review these efforts once a year to gauge effectiveness and adjust actions.

4.3.1.4 LEADERSHIP AND CATALYZING CHANGE
CCB.9	Create or Leverage Existing Mid-Atlantic government leadership groups
to accelerate market transition
Action: Work with partners in other leading jurisdictions to either create a new Mid-Atlantic
Deep Energy Leadership Group, or leverage and expand an existing group to help accelerate
the market transition toward high-performance buildings.
Relevance: While the District market is substantial, it has limited capacity to facilitate broader
market transformation. Nonetheless, it can multiply its impact by partnering with leading
jurisdictions to drive adoption of high-performance buildings. The District already collaborates
through the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (MWCOG) on energy and
climate related work. It can expand this coordination in both depth with the MWCOG and
breadth with larger cities within the mid-Atlantic region. This would especially help foster a
larger market for high performance building component such as triple-pane windows. In
bringing the region’s cities, counties, and states into a shared agenda, the District could
accelerate its own transition and likely reduce costs.
Details: The District should identify partner jurisdictions and begin building a regional action
coalition, using the elements of the Plan as a platform. The District already plays a leading
role in the Climate, Energy, and Environment Policy Committee of the MWCOG, which is can
leverage to facilitate the adoption of building-related actions by other cities on DC Council.
The District should also expand collaborations with other mid-Atlantic cities such as Baltimore,
Richmond, and Philadelphia. There is already a mid-Atlantic Sustainability Network, organized
by the EPA Region 3 office in Philadelphia, made up the sustainability officials from the largest
cities in each metropolitan region, along with a representative from an intergovernmental
group such as MWCOG. This group has traditionally focused on issues such as urban heat
islands and transportation, but could be expanded to address building energy use. The Carbon
Neutral Cities Alliance or a similar organization could also facilitate similar connections, and
move forward other elements of the Plan. For example, it may be easier to pursue a more
aggressive code update if it is pursued jointly by jurisdictions in the same climate zone. Regional
building-energy conferences would enjoy higher levels of participation than those held at the
District scale. Similarly, building tours and other educational programs could attract a broader
audience if regionally advertised.
183 https://betterbuildingsinitiative.energy.gov/accelerators/home-energy-information

BUILDINGS

119



The Regional Code Collaboration (RCC) in Washington State, led by King County, offers a small
but compelling example of such a partnership. Over the last several years, the RCC has worked
collaboratively to develop an array of draft deep green codes, which RCC members are able
to adopt or modify to suit their particular needs. The RCC has also successfully championed
the statewide adoption of a significantly higher energy efficiency requirement for multifamily
buildings. However, while the District can benefit from such a regional coalition, it should not
let it limit its own progress. Inter-jurisdictional consensus is always challenging, and the District
should maintain its momentum and include other leaders as they are able and willing to join in.
Next Steps

1

In 2018, open conversations with existing groups such as the Mid-Atlantic Sustainability
Network, to test for alignment. If necessary, establish a new coalition.

2

During 2018, establish or expand the coalition and begin forming a common agenda.

CCB.10	Build examples of breakthrough design in government and/or publiclyfinanced buildings
Action: he District Government should require all significant new projects that it builds or
finances to meet 2032 EUI targets. Place net-zero energy requirements on the redevelopment
of surplus properties bid out to the private sector.
Relevance: High-profile real-world examples of “what is possible” help rapidly advance
sector-wide change. Buildings such as Seattle’s Bullitt Center have completely recalibrated
the national conversation about what is feasible in a way that concept drawings and building
models never will. Issaquah, Washington’s zHome, the first multifamily net-zero energy building in
the United States, has also had impressive catalytic effects. Within two years of the completion
of zHome, two other highly energy efficient projects were built only a few miles away.184
Neither building was required to achieve a high level of performance but was instead
responding to local expectations and possibilities.
The District Government has recently begun to include net-zero energy criteria for projects it
either builds or finances. It should expand and institutionalize this program.
The District Government can raise the design-standards bar when developing larger campusstyle developments with multiple buildings on consolidated sites. In some cases, the property
may stay in District hands (for example, the Washington Mystics arena at St. Elizabeth’s). In other
cases, such as the former Walter Reed Army Medical Center, private developers may assume
control, but under the guidance of District agencies (such as the Office of the Deputy Mayor
for Planning and Economic Development (DMPED)) or approval documents (a Small Area
Plan that includes sustainability requirements). For all such sites, the District Government should
consider neighborhood-scale energy systems oriented toward achieving the maximum GHG
reductions possible.

184 T he two buildings are Fire Station 72, the most efficient fire station in the world, and the Swedish Regional Medical Centre, one of the most efficient regional
hospitals in the United States with an observed EUI of 108.

120

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Details: Over the next five years, the District Government should build on the existing net-zero
energy criteria in its Request for Proposals (RFPs) process by requiring new construction funded
by the District to achieve net-zero energy performance. Through this expansion, the District will:
• Lead by example.
• Create built examples and real-life education platforms.
• Gain substantial internal capacity in the design and construction of high-performance
buildings, building respect and credibility with the private sector.
• Develop cost-effectiveness analytics based on actual performance.
• Build knowledge in the local design, contracting, and subcontracting communities about
high-performance buildings.
Net-zero energy buildings and neighborhood-scale energy systems offer improved resilience
to power outages; they tend to maintain a more comfortable internal temperature through
blackouts.185 As such, the District may wish to include thorough resilience performance criteria in
addition to net-zero energy requirements.
The District should also include net-zero requirements for the properties it brokers for sale. As
the kinds of financial information and bid processes necessary for District Government-funded
project can differ from those associated with private development, these types of projects will
offer private builders more relatable examples of net-zero buildings. The District Government
must ensure the bid design process clearly establishes design-performance expectations. It
should base these on a building’s projected EUI without plug loads to ensure that its heating
and cooling systems operate at the highest possible level of performance. The District may also
choose to specify certain components (such as ground source and/or CO2 based heat pumps)
to promote the use of regionally suitable technologies.
The overall costs of these higher-performing buildings should be similar to those the District
Government itself would have built, affording the District Government the opportunity to share
financial success stories to help move the broader market. A study conducted within the District
indicated that the cost premium for highly energy efficient buildings is approximately 1% to
12%, and that achieving net-zero energy performance increases the estimated cost premium
to 5% to 19%, depending on building type.186 However, it also indicated that the total cost of
ownership of these buildings (including energy costs) is likely to be lower, depending on
interest rates.187
Project developers—and affordable housing developers in particular—need access to
financing tools that help defray incremental first cost increases. For example, bonds may be
suitable, in that they offer long-term payback structure and carry low interest; the increase in
bonded amount and monthly payment is typically less than the saved energy costs.188 Upon
project completion, the District Government should document and report financial data to
help tell the story of its transition to net-zero.
Finally, the District Government should maximize the visibility—and thus the educational
benefit—of existing high-performance facilities. DGS’s BuildSmartDC.com website is the current
forum to find information on the District’s existing cohort of high-performance buildings.
185 Wilson, A., 2015, Icebox or Oven - What Happens to Interior Temperatures When the Power Goes Out.
186 Net-zero and Living Building Challenge Financial Study: A Cost Comparison Report for Buildings in the District of Columbia, 2013, http://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/attachments/20140411_Net%20%20Zero%20and%20Living%20Building%20Challenge%20Study_FINAL.pdf
187 Matthiessen, 2012, The Power of Zero report; Maclay, 2014, The New Net Zero.
188 Matthiessen, 2012.

BUILDINGS

121



However, it should provide more information on each building. The District would also benefit
from cross-referencing the website with other District Government sites.
The existing cohort of high-performance buildings can also be highlighted with tours, case
studies, or similar marketing efforts. The District Government should open its high performance
buildings in conjunction with community green-living festivals, and include them in any tours
conducted for industry professionals. It should facilitate public access to key design elements,
and visits to mechanicals rooms, and so on. The District Government may also want to consider
turning these buildings into sustainability hubs by locating key energy and environmental
programs into their spaces, including DOEE and/or the DCSEU.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, identify opportunities to open the District’s high performing buildings for public
and industry tours.

2

In early 2019, adopt a policy requiring all future facilities built or partially funded by the
District to achieve 2032 EUI targets and include appropriate resilience measures.

CCB.11	Recognize leadership with a catalog of best performing buildings and a
cohort of local building energy leaders
Action: Establish energy leadership groups made up of prominent and forward-thinking design
and construction industry members. Use available energy performance benchmarking data to
identify and highlight the District’s best-in-class energy performers.
Relevance: Leadership is an important aspect of any change or transformation. Identifying,
profiling, highlighting, and learning from leading buildings and industry professionals can help
accelerate adoption. Targeting both individuals and projects offers other industry professionals
an opportunity to learn why different choices were made, how novel approaches and designs
were achieved, and where and to whom else local building professionals can turn to for
additional support.
Details: Pulling local leaders together, recognizing their contributions, and uniting them around
a common understanding and strategy could greatly accelerate forward movement on
energy efficiency and renewable energy. The District Government should establish leadership
cohorts in conjunction with local partner organizations in existing buildings, new construction,
and distributed energy resource integration (e.g., solar panels, battery storage). These
leadership cohorts should coordinate closely and share membership with (or be subcommittees
of) the District’s Green Building Advisory Council and the Green Building Technical Advisory
Group to the District’s Construction Codes Coordinating Board (CCCB). 189
The District’s energy benchmarking and disclosure program will prove a key resource in
creating a catalog of local high-performing buildings. DOEE can start by identifying a set of
top performing buildings in each building use type (office, multifamily, institutional, etc.). It
might then secure additional performance data from building owners and operators as part
189 http://dcra.DC.gov/service/construction-codes-coordinating-board

122

CLEAN ENERGY DC



of creating short but informative case studies on each building. These case studies could
include submetering data and technical information on design, equipment, and technologies,
operations and maintenance policies and practices, and any unique issues that may affect
energy performance in either direction. The District Government should then profile these high
performers through the various channels and forums recommended in this section.
Finally, the District Government should consider expanding its existing Sustainability Awards to
recognize persons or organizations that have taken extraordinary or innovative steps to reduce
fossil fuel use from buildings. Awards can take little time and require few financial resources to
establish, but make a strong statement to stakeholders and the public. By explicitly focusing on
fossil fuels, the District Government will send a strong signal that it is committed to meaningful
climate action and energy transformation.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, perform an initial assessment of best-in-class buildings using energy
performance information from the benchmarking dataset, and begin obtaining case
study information.

2

In 2018, require building owners to publish Target Finder scores as soon as they have
been determined during the development process.

3

In 2018, require building energy models to use standardized and realistic assumptions for
key factors such as occupancy, set points, and plug loads. Specify these assumptions
by referencing one or more national and publicly available sources, such as the
COMNET Modeling Guidelines and Procedures.190

4

In 2018, establish partnerships with one or two leading organizations dedicated to
advancing deep energy efficiency in new construction.

5

Use the existing Green Building Advisory Council (GBAC) to act as a sounding board
and advocate for deep energy efficiency acceleration in the District

6

Develop and present an award in conjunction with first regional energy conference
starting in 2018.

190 http://comnet.org/download-pdfs-mgp-manual

BUILDINGS

123



CCB.12	Implement a high-performance energy media, outreach, and
communications strategy
Action: The District Government should create a “narrative of success” in addressing climate
change and fossil fuel independence in the building sector as a core element of its media and
outreach strategy.
Relevance: The District can create a “virtuous cycle” of achievement by drawing a line in
messaging between energy efficiency and renewable energy and successful net-zero energy
buildings. Demand for high-performance buildings can increase as the principles and benefits
become well-known and better understood. Individual homeowners and office tenants will
seek higher levels of efficiency in their homes and workplaces.
Details: The District is positioned near major media channels such as National Public Radio,
The Washington Post, and bureau offices of nearly every major media network. Many of these
outlets regularly cover climate issues and solutions. The District Government also has excellent
communications capacity via social and digital channels and platforms.
The District Government should create a narrative that combines positive success stories of
net-zero energy homes and offices with information about available energy incentives and
opportunities. Topics might include:
• What life is like in a net-zero energy home,
• How much it costs to achieve net-zero energy performance and what incentives are
available,
• How to invest in renewables, and
• How a building can be retrofitted to achieve net-zero energy performance over time.
These stories should include practical information about the basic actions residents and
businesses can take to incrementally improve energy performance, such as LED lighting,
insulation, home sealing (for airtightness), and PV installation, with links to incentives where
available.
Across the board, the District should focus on simple messages, clear graphics, and
photographs that tie small actions to tangible financial and GHG reduction benefits. Stories
highlighting technology, innovation, and thoughtful “lifestyles of integrity” can resonate with the
public. In addition, the District Government should partner with trusted community organizations
such as social justice advocacy groups to ensure the messages reach and resonate with all
groups and neighborhoods.

124

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Create a short-term media strategy for specific stories related to energy innovation
and efficiency. Establish strong coordination between DOEE and District Government
communications to ensure stories are told as part of a larger narrative of change.
Consider a small budget to promote these stories via the District’s social media channels.

2

Partner with trusted community organizations such as social justice advocacy groups to
ensure communications reach and resonate with all communities.

CCB.13

Create a coordinated green jobs and workforce development platform

Action: Building on DOEE’s existing Green Pathways website,191 create a robust clearinghouse
for training and workforce development opportunities and funding.
Relevance: At the national level, the growth of the green economy is expected to
continue to outpace that of the whole economy, and green jobs are expected to grow
faster and pay more compared with other jobs.192 Given the District’s steadfast commitment
to climate, energy, and green infrastructure, an opportunity exists for additional green job
training programs.
Details: While, as the Plan suggests, green training and workforce development could
be improved and expanded, there are several existing programs. A centralized online
platform, in coordination with the District’s Workforce Investment Council, could help
increase their impact.193
The online green jobs and workforce development platform would be a one-stop-shop for
those interested in career pathways and training opportunities for energy-related jobs. Several
different organizations, government agencies and other stakeholders are currently engaged
in green workforce development programs. These include DOEE-funded organizations, District
of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS) Career and Technical Education programs, union and
association training and apprenticeships, UDC and UDC Community College degrees and
certification programs, the DCSEU, summer youth programs managed by DOEE (e.g., Green
Zone Environmental Program), among others.
The platform would ideally improve coordination between these programs, the students
enrolled, and the organizations that administer and fund them. The District could then build
on this coordination to identify and address gaps and opportunities related to green jobs
training. The platform could provide, for example, career and salary information about green
jobs, training, education, and employment opportunities, and resources for residents and
employees. It could also link companies with job seekers.
To supplement this educational platform, the District should partner with local, trusted
community organizations to conduct direct outreach to LMI communities. Include requests to
partner organizations to leverage networks, expertise, and existing projects to the benefit of the
191 http://doee.dc.gov/greenpathways
192 Analyzing Building Energy Efficiency Job Opportunities, July 2015, Jobs for the Future, https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.nibs.org/resource/resmgr/CWCC/BuildingEnergyJobOpps_2015.pdf.
193 This action should be aligned with Actions CCB.5 and CRE.4.

BUILDINGS

125



jobs platform. It could also promote green jobs to LMI communities. The District Government
should explore extending training and education efforts to build pathways to meaningful
employment for at-risk youth, LMI communities, formerly incarcerated people, and
underserved communities.

Next Steps

1

In 2018, create a new position or expand an existing position at DOEE to coordinate
green jobs and green economy initiatives.

2

In 2019, create an online platform to provide a more seamless and comprehensive
listing of green job training opportunities throughout the District, or commission an
organization to do this through a competitive request for proposal.

3

Support the online platform with an additional outreach and communications strategy
in partnership with a trusted community organization to facilitate offline engagement
with LMI communities.

126

CLEAN ENERGY DC



CROSS CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS ROADMAP

CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.1 Establish a Green Bank
and increase other funding for
energy efficiency and renewable
energy projects in new and
existing buildings
CCB.2 Enhance the District’s
Property Assessed Clean Energy
financing program
CCB.3 Ensure code compliance
in all buildings through increased
investment in robust code
enforcement
CCB.4 Incentivize and require
submetering
CCB.5 Develop a centralized
online platform for residential
energy efficiency programs
CCB.6 Maintain an ongoing
outreach program to foster and
expand awareness, education,
and opportunities for collaborating
around high-performance
buildings
CCB.7 Partner to support training
and certification of building
contractors and managers
CCB.8 Integrate energy
performance information into
residential transactions
Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

BUILDINGS

127

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2024

4.3.2



CROSS-CUTTING BUILDING ACTIONS
CCB.9 Create or Leverage
Existing Mid-Atlantic government
leadership groups to accelerate
market transition
CCB.10 Build examples of
breakthrough design in
government and/or publiclyfinanced buildings
CCB.11 Recognize leadership
with a catalog of best performing
buildings and a cohort of local
building energy leaders
CCB.12 Implement a highperformance energy media,
outreach, and communications
strategy
CCB.13 Create a coordinated
green jobs and workforce
development platform
Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

128

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



ENERGY SUPPLY SYSTEM

v

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

ENERGY SUPPLY

129



130

CLEAN ENERGY DC



5 ENERGY SUPPLY SYSTEM
In this chapter, recommendations are provided for two areas related
to the District’s energy supply system: Actions to increase the supply of
zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emission energy (Section 5.1) and actions to
modernize the energy delivery system to support sustainability, resiliency,
interactivity, and affordability (Section 5.2). The Plan summarizes both
sets of recommendations in roadmaps at the end of the chapter, which
the District Government can use to guide implementation over the fiveyear span of the Clean Energy DC Plan (Plan), as well as future actions
to 2032.

5.1

CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY

5.1.1

EXISTING POLICIES AND ACTIONS

To meet its GHG reduction targets, the District must significantly increase the share of renewable
energy in its energy supply. To this end, it has set a target that clean and renewable sources
will supply half of the energy used within its boundaries by 2032.194 In pursuit of these targets,
the District Government has implemented a broad set of tools and programs to increase
renewable energy supply, both within and outside the District; foster demand for PV and other
renewable energy systems, and; adjust planning and policy to advance these objectives.

5.1.1.1

ENERGY GENERATED OUTSIDE THE DISTRICT

The District receives almost all its energy from sources beyond its borders. While utilities generate
most this energy from natural gas, coal, and nuclear fission, a growing portion of this power
comes from renewable sources, including increasingly price competitive utility-scale solar and
wind. The District’s Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) is its primary renewable energy policy
for utility-supplied energy. The RPS is a mandate intended to increase the total proportion of
renewable energy sold by electricity suppliers to customers. The current RPS directs utilities to
source 20% of District electricity from renewable sources by 2020 (including 2.5% from local solar
systems by 2023) and 50% by 2032 (including 5% from local solar systems).195,196 Pepco (in its role
as a Standard Offer Service provider197) and competitive electricity suppliers may comply with
the RPS through the following two approaches:

194
195
196
197

Sustainable DC Plan, 2012, p.11
Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016. , DC Act Number A21-0466, signed July 25, 2016, effective October 8, 2016.
2015 Quarterly State of the Market Report for PJM: January through March, p.248, http://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_Market/2015/2015q1-som-pjm-sec8.pdf
Recall that the Standard Offer Service (SOS) is the electricity purchased for those District ratepayers who do not choose a competitive supplier for their electricity. This purchase is currently made by Pepco under oversight of the PSC, but the issue of reforming the SOS is currently being investigated by the PSC in Formal
Case 1017.

ENERGY SUPPLY

131



1.	Procuring renewable energy certificates (RECs) or solar renewable energy certificates
(SRECS) for the local solar energy requirement, which may be accomplished by one of
the following:
a. Purchasing unbundled RECs or SRECs.
b.	Purchasing energy bundled with associated Generating RECs or SRECs (and retiring the
associated RECs or SRECs).
2.	Making alternative compliance payments (ACPs) to the District for that portion of the
electricity supply that does not meet the RPS requirement.
RECs are tradable certificates that represent ownership of the environmental attribute, or the
“greenness,” of the generated electricity. The owners of renewable energy generators can
choose to retain ownership of the credits attributed to their facilities, or sell it to another party
– in this case, electricity suppliers. Once sold, RECs are “retired,” meaning that they cannot
be used by another party to meet its renewable-energy generation targets. This avoids a
potential situation in which RECs are double-counted, or where both the energy generator and
any REC purchasers account for the quantity of renewable energy generated. The District’s
RPS requires that RECs come from electricity produced by renewable sources within the PJM
Interconnection Region (PJM) or within an adjacent state.198
These compliance options influence the GHG reductions that the District can achieve and
account for. For example, the 2014 RPS required renewable energy to supply 10.5% of total
electricity in the District, whereas Pepco’s fuel mix for its Standard Offer Service included only
approximately 4.0% from renewables. Pepco thus had to purchase RECs and make alternative
compliance payments to comply with the RPS requirements.199 Other suppliers would have to
do the same. As discussed in Chapter 2, only RECs that affect the GHG emissions factor used by
the District in their GHG inventory (from the EPA’s RFC-East eGRID sub-region) can be counted
toward GHG emissions reductions according to the GHG accounting protocol used by the
District.200 Therefore, the way in which electricity suppliers comply with the RPS significantly
impacts renewable energy usage and GHG reductions.
In contrast, Solar Renewable Energy Certificates, or SRECs, that are used to comply with the
District’s solar RPS requirement, can only be generated from solar-electricity projects located
in the District or in locations served by a distribution feeder that serves the District. Since SRECs
must be generated from solar energy sources within the District’s power supply, the local solar
carve-out under the RPS does contribute to GHG reductions in the District.
There are currently three different Alternative Compliance Payment rates:
• Five cents for each kilowatt-hour of shortfall from required Tier 1 renewable sources;
• One cent for each kilowatt-hour of shortfall from required Tier 2 renewable sources; and
• Fifty cents in 2016 through 2023, 40 cents in 2024 through 2028, 30 cents in 2029 through 2032,
and five cents in 2033 and thereafter for each kilowatt-hour of shortfall from required local
solar energy sources.

198 T he RPS further rules clarify that states within the PJM Interconnection Region currently include Delaware, the District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky,
Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia and West Virginia. Public Service Commission of the District of
Columbia, 2015 Report on Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard, January 30, 2015.
199 Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia. Report on the RPS for Compliance Year 2015. https://dcpsc.org/getmedia/901b3c18-4859-435d-ae1aca296584c26b/aharris_542016_831_1_FC_-_945_-_2016_-_E_-_REPORT.aspx
200 Recall from Chapter 2 that the District uses ICLEI’s U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

132

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Tier 1 renewable sources include solar, wind, biomass, landfill gas, wastewater treatment gas,
geothermal, marine energy, fuel cells fueled by any of the above resources, and wastewater
used as a heat source as a sink for heating or cooling systems. Tier 2 renewable sources refer to
hydropower other than pumped storage. 201
Under DC Code § 34–1436, all Alternative Compliance Payments supply the District’s
Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF). DOEE administers the REDF, which helps fund
new solar energy sources in the District. Due to the shortage of SRECs to meet the local solar
carve out, SRECs from these new solar energy sources will remain in the District and thus will
contribute to GHG reductions. Since REDF funding can be used for a number of activities that
support new solar energy—such as electrical upgrades, structural improvements, and new
electrical or thermal storage systems—the quantity of solar capacity added per dollar of ACP
funding varies.
While it is not affected by the RPS, the District’s primary natural gas provider has also reduced
emissions. In March 2016, Washington Gas became a founding partner in the EPA’s Natural
Gas STAR Methane Challenge. This voluntary industry program works to reduce methane
emissions and improve air quality. The commitment includes a goal to reduce the GHG
emissions per unit of natural gas delivered 18% by 2020 relative to 2008—a target the
company is on track to achieve.202

5.1.1.2

ENERGY GENERATED WITHIN THE DISTRICT

Energy generated within the District refers to that supplied to District customers via on-site
generators, such as solar photovoltaic (PV) arrays or combined heat and power (CHP) plants.
A 2013 DOEE study found that the District’s technical capacity for solar PV generation lies
somewhere between 1,207 and 2,000 MW. A more recent analysis by Mapdwell, an urban solarmapping company, indicates a solar PV technical potential of approximately 1,300 MW.203
This potential may be reduced in the light of site-specific and regulatory limitations, such as
suitable roof space, historical preservation, zoning, and other building design priorities. Still,
solar PV very likely represents the vast majority of renewable electricity generation capacity
possible in District.204 However, as of December 1, 2017, the Public Service Commission (PSC)
had only certified 44.9 MW of solar PV and thermal systems in the District, with an additional
22.4 MW eligible for the RPS’ solar requirement and certified by the PSC located beyond its
boundaries.205 The difference between potential versus installed capacity starkly highlights a
significant untapped opportunity.
As noted above, the District Government’s expanded RPS now requires that local solar
systems supply 5% of electricity by 2032.206 To achieve this target, the District Government has
committed to funding renewable energy and energy efficiency projects through
several mechanisms.
The Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016 (The Act), effective
October 8, 2016, established the District’s Solar for All Program (Solar for All). The legislation
seeks to expand the District’s solar capacity, to increase the amount of solar generated within

201 http://programs.dsireusa.org/system/program/detail/303
202 Washington Gas Joins the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR Methane Challenge Program as Founding Partner, March 30, 2016,
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160330005985/en/Washington-Gas-Joins-EPA%E2%80%99s-Natural-Gas-STAR
203 Email between DOEE and Mapdwell staff (April 8, 2016).
204 The report’s generation potential and cost figures will change as technologies improve, particularly for rooftop solar. GDS Associates for the District Department
of the Environment, Renewable Energy Technologies Potential for the District of Columbia, 2013, p.3
205 Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia, Monthly Update of Solar Generator Certification, retrieved July 27, 2016 from
http://dcpsc.datanetusa.com/Electric/Solar_generator_certification.asp.
206 Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016.

ENERGY SUPPLY

133



its boundaries, and provide the benefits of locally-generated solar energy to low-income
households, small businesses, nonprofits, and seniors.
Funded by the Renewable Energy Development Fund and administered by DOEE, Solar for All’s
specific targets are to provide the benefits of solar electricity to 100,000 low-income households
(at or below 80% Area Median Income), and to reduce their energy bills by 50% (based on the
2016 residential rate class average) by 2032. As described in the Solar for All Implementation
Plan, DOEE will implement Solar for All in five three-year phases, to allow the program to
respond to market changes and overcome barriers.207 The initial implementation phase (FY17FY19) will include development of 30 to 60 MW of solar capacity, subject to funding availability.
DOEE’s ongoing Solar for All Innovation and Expansion Grants under the initial implementation
phase are helping to identify solutions to the core barriers hindering solar deployment in the
District. Other District initiatives include the RPS’s Sustainable Energy Trust Fund (SETF), and
programs such as the District of Columbia Sustainable Energy Utility (DCSEU). Actions that have
recently been proposed or are in progress include:
• Legislation to reduce fossil fuel consumption and increase opportunities for community solar
and renewable energy systems.
• A feasibility study to identify opportunities for neighborhood-scale energy systems, including
microgrids with emphasis on distributed energy resources.
• The creation of opportunities to arrange power purchase agreements and install renewable
energy systems on government and institutional buildings.208
• The District also provides a range of financial incentives to encourage solar adoption,
including:
• Exemptions of residential solar systems from property taxes.
• Net metering and virtual net metering (via the District’s Community Renewables Energy
Act of 2013).
• The opportunity to sell SRECs to electricity suppliers regulated by the District’s Renewable
Portfolio Standard.209
• Support in procuring community solar purchases.
• A commercial property assessed clean energy (PACE) program to minimize or eliminate
upfront system costs.
Combining these programs, a $20,000 5 kW system could be eligible for as much as $9,507 in
upfront incentives, while generating 6,089 kWh yearly and saving the system owner $792 a
year. 210 In addition, the District is actively exploring a requirement that all new buildings must
be either net-zero, where all energy required to operate the building is produced on-site, or
net-positive. The latter state describes a building that produces more clean energy than it
consumes. 211
In support of these actions and to smoothly integrate higher levels of local generation, the
District’s PSC has initiated investigations into the modernization of its electricity infrastructure. As
207 h
 ttps://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/attachments/DOEE-%20Report-%20Solar%20for%20All%20Implementation-%20Final%20
for%20Transmittal.pdf
208 Actions 2.1-2.5 of Energy Goal 2, Sustainable DC, 2012; Sustainable DC Second Year Progress Report, 2015, pp.5,10
209 Solar renewable energy certificates (SRECs) are used to meet the solar requirement of the District’s Renewable Portfolio Standard and have a higher value
than other renewable energy certificates (RECs).
210 Mapdwell DC, https://www.mapdwell.com/en/solar/dc
211 Sustainable DC, 2012, p.54

134

CLEAN ENERGY DC



a part of this endeavor, the District Government will work with local educational and workforce
development institutions to train residents for new jobs in the renewable energy and energy
efficiency industry.212
Modernizing the District’s electricity infrastructure also means developing ways to manage
an increasing number of on-site intermittent renewable generation and energy storage, and
sophisticated tools for building efficiency and demand response. In this regard, microgrids or
other distributed energy resources (DER) management systems offer the tools to integrate and
optimize these resources. The availability of flexible options, as a DER manager, will greatly
enhance the District’s ability to successfully develop many DER and maximize their benefits to
the consumers and the grid. The Plan discusses energy system modernization and integrating
DER further in section 5.2.
Finally, various community-based solar power advocacy groups call the District home, including
Solar United Neighbors of DC, Groundswell, and Grid Alternatives. These groups work to expand
solar access by educating citizens about the technology’s benefits, coordinating bulk solar
purchases, and working to strengthen the District’s solar policies and programs.213 Solar United
Neighbors and similar groups have played an instrumental role in the installation of solar systems
in the District.

5.1.1.3

GOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP

In addition to the policy actions above, the District has demonstrated considerable leadership
in renewable energy procurement. The DC Department of General Services (DGS) sources 100%
of its own operational electricity from renewable sources. It does so by purchasing renewableenergy certificates, as well as via the trio of 20-year power purchase agreements it signed
in 2015 and 2016. 214 Power purchase agreements (PPA) are contracts between electricity
generators (i.e., sellers) and consumers (i.e., buyers) in which a buyer provides the payment
stream necessary for a seller to generate the electricity. The contracts ensure that electricity215
generation can help finance the development of projects in instances where it might otherwise
be unfeasible.
The first PPA, signed by the District in 2015, is one of the largest wind PPAs ever entered into by
a U.S. local government. It sources Pennsylvania wind power to provide approximately 30% to
35% of the DGS’ electricity load.216 The two solar PPAs are for 11.4 MW of local solar PV systems
that are being installed on the roofs and parking lots of District Government-owned facilities.217
The solar PPAs represent the largest on-site solar project undertaken by a U.S. city, and will
supply an additional 3.5% of DGS’ electricity load.
Because of this leadership, the District leads the country in the EPA’s Green Power Community
Challenge. As of April 2016, renewable energy power purchases now comprise 13.2% of all
electricity sold in the District.218 In recognition of these efforts, the District received a C40 Cities
Award for Global Leadership on Climate Change at the COP21 climate change conference in
Paris in 2015.219

212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219

Actions 3.3 and 3.4 of Energy Goal 3, Sustainable DC, 2012; Sustainable DC Second Year Progress Report, 2015, p.10
http://www.dcsun.org/
Sustainable DC Plan, 2012, p.14; Federal Department of Energy, http://www.energy.gov/savings/green-power-purchasing-1, accessed February 8, 2016
More information on PPAs can be found on the World Bank website: http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/sector/energy/energy-power-agreements/power-purchase-agreements
http://mayor.DC.gov/release/mayor-bowser-announces-groundbreaking-wind-power-purchase-agreement
Mayor Bowser Announces Largest Municipal Onsite Solar Project in US,
http://dc.gov/release/mayor-bowser-announces-largest-municipal-onsite-solar-project-us
EPA Green Power Partnership, Community Profile, Washington, DC, https://www.epa.gov/greenpower/green-power-communities, accessed May 30, 2016
DC.gov, 2015, http://DC.gov/release/district-columbia-receives-c40-cities-award-global-leadership-climate-change

ENERGY SUPPLY

135



Like other jurisdictions leading the shift to renewable energy, the District has much to build on
but will nevertheless require stronger and more coordinated action to achieve its long-term
targets. The remainder of this chapter provides a series of short-term actions and long-term
policy and regulatory adjustments that the District can quickly implement to advance its
renewable
energy programs.
In addition to the actions below, the District can support clean and renewable energy
development through the development of a DC Green Bank, as outlined in Action CCB.1,
as well as with PACE financing, as outlined in Action CCB.2

The image above captures one of the wind turbines producing power for the District of Columbia under a Power Purchase Agreement.

136

CLEAN ENERGY DC



5.1.2

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

5.1.2.1

RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY FROM OUTSIDE THE DISTRICT

CRE.1	Design and manage the RPS to drive renewable energy generation
and GHG reductions
Action: Investigate how best to design and manage the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) to
drive increasing investments in new renewable electricity generating capacity and maximize
GHG reductions.
Relevance: In 2016, the District Government adopted a 50% RPS for 2032, including a
requirement that local solar systems provide 5% of electricity consumed in the District. This will
be about 400 MW.220 The new RPS builds on an earlier requirement that renewable sources
deliver 20% of the District’s electricity by 2020,221 with at least 2.5% from qualifying local solar PV
and thermal systems by 2023. 222
Buildings that source the majority of their energy from electricity contribute nearly three quarters
of the District’s GHG emissions.223 For this reason, the RPS will play an important role in achieving
the 2032 GHG reduction and renewable energy utilization targets.224 However, the Sustainable
DC Plan’s renewable energy target applies to the entire energy supply, not just electricity. Thus,
a 50% RPS, while significant, will not achieve this target in isolation. Furthermore, as discussed
previously,225 the RPS allows electricity suppliers to comply with the RPS without the associated
renewable energy affecting the GHG intensity of electricity that supplies the District or, for GHG
accounting purposes, without affecting the emissions intensity of the EPA’s RFC-East eGRID
sub-region. As such, RPS compliance with RECs does not necessarily result in GHG reductions
that can be attributed to the District under standard protocols.226 Suppliers can also comply by
making ACPs. Normally, these are financial transactions that would not directly result in GHG
reductions.
ACPs are, however, designed to support new local solar-energy generation in the District under
the Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF), including the Solar for All program.227 Thus,
ACPs are increasing solar energy uptake and GHG reductions. Since a number of activities
that can support solar —such as electrical upgrades, structural improvements, and electrical or
thermal storage systems—do qualify for REDF funding, the amount of solar capacity added per
dollar of ACP funding will vary. Therefore, there is no set metric for how much GHG reduction
can be attributed to ACPs.
To maximize the effectiveness of the RPS and achieve the 2032 targets, the District Government
should drive electricity suppliers to comply in a way that drive GHG reductions, and should
adopt a higher future RPS requirement that ultimately decarbonizes the grid. Recognizing
legitimate concerns about the cost implications of the RPS, the District should determine how
best to design and manage the RPS so that it yields significant GHG reductions while costeffectively delivering reliable power.

220 Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Act of 2016.
221 2015 Quarterly State of the Market Report for PJM: January through March, p.248,
http://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_Market/2015/2015q1-som-pjm-sec8.pdf
222 DC Green Building Fund Report: Green Bank, Carbon Pricing, and Deep Retrofit Incentive Study, 2015, prepared by the Coalition for Green Capital, Capital E
and the Center for Climate & Energy Solutions
223 2011 District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Inventory, http://doee.DC.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/GHGinventory-1205-.pdf
224 Sustainable DC, 2012
225 See sections 2.2.1.2 and 2.2.2.1.
226 Recall the District uses ICLEI’s U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting Greenhouse Gas Emissions to calculate its community GHG inventory.
227 https://doee.dc.gov/service/solar-for-all

ENERGY SUPPLY

137



Details: The District’s recent strengthening of its new RPS requirement (50% by 2032) aligns with
other leading states, including New York and California, which both target 50% by 2030.228 This
change in the RPS can play a significant role in achieving the District’s 2032 GHG target. It is
also a positive step toward the District’s 2050 carbon-neutral commitment. This evolution in
the stringency of the RPS from 20% to 50% represents a profound shift in the District’s electricity
supply. It demands new thinking in how to design the RPS to drive GHG reductions and
modernize the energy delivery system to handle increased distributed energy resources
(the latter of which is discussed in section 5.2).
At the same time, the PSC and other stakeholders have raised concerns about potential
cost impacts on ratepayers. In their Report on the Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard for
Compliance Year 2015, the PSC found that the total costs of ACPs tripled between 2014 and
2015 ($6.3 million vs. $19.9 million), due primarily to a shortage in local solar capacity and thus
SRECs to comply with the local solar requirement.229 Overall RPS compliance costs increased
from $27.4 million in 2014 to $38.5 million in 2015 and $47.2 million in 2016.230 While PJM REC
prices have remained relatively stable in recent years, with prices in some PJM states declining
50% in between 2016 and 2017,231 SREC prices are much higher, and the highest among the
Mid-Atlantic States. 232
The PSC continues to support the increased deployment of renewable energy, but has asked
the District Government to consider how the RPS can be redesigned to limit ratepayer cost
burdens, and has made some specific suggestions.233 As a first step, the Renewable Portfolio
Expansion Amendment Act of 2016 required the PSC to submit a report to Council in March
2017 that estimates the amount of solar in the District that could qualify for SRECs but cannot
be purchased by suppliers (i.e., retired SRECs). It also recommends how the PSC could adjust
annual solar requirements based on its findings.234 This was part of a careful consideration of
the implementation of the new Solar for All program, which aims to reduce by half the electric
bills of 100,000 low-income households by 2032 through energy conservation and clean-energy
resources. Through this analysis, the PSC found that not enough SRECS were available to meet
the RPS solar requirements in 2016, but have not yet recommended ways to adjust
RPS requirements.235
Again, to achieve its GHG reduction target, the District must increase renewable-energy
generation and shift toward zero-emission electricity. It must also ensure residents and
businesses have access to reliable, affordable electricity. The District Government must,
therefore, figure out how to design and manage the RPS in a way that achieves all these
objectives. It is a tall order, one requiring new analysis and collaboration with key stakeholders.
Determining How to Design and Manage the RPS: Over the next five years the District
Government should convene a collaborative dialog with key stakeholders. Key stakeholders
include the PSC, Pepco, the Office of People’s Counsel, DOEE, solar developers, and other
228 S tate Renewable Portfolio Standards and Goals, Jan 15, 2016, National Conference of State Legislatures, http://www.ncsl.org/research/energy/renewable-portfolio-standards.aspx
229 Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia, Report on the Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard for Compliance Year 2015,
http://www.dcpsc.org/getmedia/901b3c18-4859-435d-ae1a-ca296584c26b/aharris_542016_831_1_FC_-_945_-_2016_-_E_-_REPORT.aspx
230 In 2014, suppliers paid $21.1 million for RECs and $6.3 million for ACPs. In 2015, suppliers paid $18.6 million for RECs and $19.9 million for ACPs. Comments of the
Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia to the Committee on Transportation and the Environment on B21-412, “Solar Energy Amendment Act of
2015” and B21-650, “Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016”, May 26, 2016,
https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/298813/2016/2016_Blog_Images/PSC_Comments_on_RPS_5-26-16.pdf?t=1474637760598
231 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2016 Wind Technologies Market Report, August 2017,
https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/10/f37/2016_Wind_Technologies_Market_Report_101317.pdf
232 Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia, Report on the Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard for Compliance Year 2016,
http://www.dcpsc.org/getmedia/1806a06a-51de-4d4d-aa5a-e0cdd0517ecb/ReportREPS2017_050117.aspx
233 p.2, Comments of the Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia to the Committee on Transportation and the Environment on B21-412, “Solar Energy
Amendment Act of 2015” and B21-650, “Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016”.
234 B21-0650 - Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016, http://lims.dccouncil.us/Legislation/B21-0650
235 Report on the Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard for Compliance Year 2016, Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia, May 1, 2017,
http://www.dcpsc.org/getmedia/1806a06a-51de-4d4d-aa5a-e0cdd0517ecb/ReportREPS2017_050117.aspx

138

CLEAN ENERGY DC



consumer advocates. The dialog should determine how to design and manage the RPS to
drive GHG reductions while maintaining system reliability and ensuring equity and affordability.
The dialog should focus on both the existing 50% requirement for 2032 and a new higher
requirement for the future. The District Government should fund research and analysis and
provide it in advance to the participants.
The District Government should consider the following when establishing this group’s initial
agenda:236
• The projected costs of meeting the current local solar requirement versus procuring renewable
energy from outside the District that still drives accountable GHG reductions.
• How to narrow compliance options over time to reduce dependence on ACPs and increase
compliance via RECs that reduce GHGs in the District, because they are bundled with the
actual purchase of renewable energy or are sourced from within the RFC-East region.
• Potential collaborations with electricity suppliers to finance renewable-energy generators.
• The role of power purchase agreements in increasing compliance that yields new renewableenergy capacity and fewer ACPs.
• How best to coordinate with other PJM states through existing committees to increase the
number of cost-effective renewable-energy generation opportunities (with a focus on utilityscale solar and wind) and avoid challenges regarding competition for RECs as states increase
RPS requirements.
• A study of the District’s realizable solar PV capacity, refining previous technical potential
studies, and considering all constraints. This study could also estimate the cost-effectiveness of
installing different levels of this realizable potential, and consider ongoing efforts and lessons
learned under the District’s Solar for
All program.
• Alignment with and establishment of related programs to support project financing, reduce
compliance costs, provide price stability (for both consumers and suppliers), strategically
upgrade the grid, and encourage demand.
• An assessment of new renewable energy between now and 2032 (in conjunction with Action
CRE.3). Study the REC-eligible regions for RPS and in the EPA’s RFC-East eGRID sub-region
(which determines the GHG intensity of electricity in the District). Focus on utility-scale wind
and solar.
• The role that existing low- or zero-carbon but not renewable electricity sources (i.e., nuclear)
can play in bridging the transition to a renewable energy delivery system.
• Options to encourage private investment, promote business model innovation, and reduce
costs (e.g., market mechanisms, government purchasing power, roles for a Green Bank).
• How decreasing compliance through ACPs may affect funding for the District’s renewable
energy programs, including Solar for All.
• The level and type of investments needed to modernize the energy delivery systems to
achieve the District’s objectives. The District will likely need to consider the grid both within the
existing distribution system, including microgrids, and the larger transmission system shared with
neighboring states where electricity is generated.

236 T his list of recommendations is based in part on analyses that other states conducted prior to adopting their own RPS requirements. Some of these items can be
informed by previous and ongoing work being done by DOEE and Pepco.

ENERGY SUPPLY

139



• The potential to mitigate grid and cost impacts through coordinated supply curtailment,
energy storage, supply diversity, advanced demand response (i.e., can adjust demand both
down and up as necessary), and regional coordination.
• An understanding of how the RPS can be designed to drive only strategic, medium-term
investments in fossil fuel-based energy sources like natural gas, to meet peak demand and
support grid resilience.
• The potential for energy storage (both within and outside of the District) to increase the
proportion of electricity consumed from renewable sources.
• How to balance regulatory stringency with flexible and alternative compliance options.
• Periodic review of RPS to account for costs, grid impacts, and technology and
market developments.
These studies should build on the PSC’s report to Council on March 1, 2017, and be aligned
with existing and future initiatives focused on improving grid resilience, protecting critical
infrastructure from power outages, building community microgrids, and integrating local
electrical and thermal generating capacity (e.g., FC1050 Investigation of Interconnection
Standards, FC1130 Investigation into Modernizing the Energy Delivery Structure for Increased
Sustainability).
To properly guide and conduct this work, some direction from District Government leadership
regarding the purpose of the RPS with respect to GHG reductions may be necessary.
Specifically:
• Recognizing that climate change is a global challenge, does the District Government want
the RPS to drive renewable energy generation and GHG reductions irrespective of location?
• Or, does the District Government want the RPS to drive renewable energy generation and
GHG reductions in locations that result in GHG reductions that can be attributed to the District
under the ICLEI Protocol?
Next Steps

1

Convene a working group to lead and facilitate a dialog on how to revise the RPS
design and management to hit the District’s GHG target while maintaining reliability
and affordability.

2

Periodically review pre-determined aspects of the RPS every three to five years
and work with appropriate PJM committees through the PSC and the Office of
People’s Counsel.

140

CLEAN ENERGY DC



CRE.2	Provide the Standard Offer Service through aggregated power
purchase agreements
Action: Sign aggregated power purchase agreements with renewable electricity suppliers to
supply electricity for the Standard Offer Service (SOS) in the District.
Relevance: Alongside the RPS, the District can use power purchase agreements (PPAs) to
make significant headway towards its renewable energy and GHG targets. As noted above,
the District already signed three PPAs in 2015 and 2016 to supply approximately 33.5% to
38.5% of the District Government’s electricity demand with wind and solar energy. The District
Government’s three PPAs drastically reduced its energy costs, yielding a projected savings of
approximately $75 million over 20 years. It is similarly expected that aggregated PPAs for the
SOS could deliver substantial savings for customers.
Details: District ratepayers who do not choose a competitive supplier for their electricity
purchase it through the District’s SOS, a purchase made by a third party under oversight of
the PSC. Pepco has been providing this service, procuring rolling three-year power supply
contracts on an annual basis through a PSC-approved short-term competitive bidding process.
Although the PSC has directed Pepco to buy power for these ratepayers who do not choose a
competitive supplier, the PSC is currently reviewing, through Formal Case 1017, whether another
entity other than Pepco should serve in this role. In 2015, approximately 24% of the District’s
electricity consumption—mostly residential ratepayers—went through the SOS.237 The PSC tracks
which electricity suppliers provide power under the SOS contract, and the fuel mix report for the
current SOS shows that in 2015 59.9% of SOS electricity came from fossil sources. Nuclear power,
along with some renewable energy, supplied the remainder. 238
As noted above, a PPA is an agreement between an electricity seller (i.e., supplier) and
buyer (i.e., consumer), in which the latter provides the payment stream the former needs to
generate electricity. For suppliers, PPA contracts provide the stream of guaranteed revenue
needed to make the electricity generation feasible. For buyers, PPA contracts allow the
stable procurement of clean, renewable electricity with no or minimal upfront capital costs
(as compared to generating their own renewable energy), and provide a hedge against
future energy market volatility, including fossil fuel price increases. When compared with nonrenewable electricity procured from the PJM, PPAs that aggregate large amounts of energy
could allow District customers to switch to renewable energy at a more affordable cost, while
offering the District the potential to more quickly increase renewable energy and decrease the
GHG emissions more effectively.
Along with a similar government instrument known as community choice aggregation (CCA),
PPAs have grown significantly in recent years as a procurement tool used by both governments
and industry. PPAs allow customers to procure large quantities of renewable energy at
affordable, fixed prices, reducing their exposure to fossil fuel costs and price volatility. In the
corporate sector, the capacity of newly signed offsite PPAs in the United States doubled from
2013 to 2014, then again from 2014 to 2015.239 In Europe, corporate PPAs nearly tripled between
2015 and 2016.240

237 Correspondence with DOEE staff on Aug 1, 2016.
238 Fossil fuel sources included 36.6% from coal, 23.0% from natural gas, and 0.3% from oil. Nuclear provided 35.8%. The remainder was provided by captured methane gas (0.3%), hydroelectricity (1.0%), solar (0.1%), solid waste (0.6%), wind (2.1%), and wood or other biomass (0.2%). Environmental Information for Standard
Offer Service Provided by Pepco,
http://www.pepco.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/Pepco%20Fuel%20Mix%20DC%204.16.pdf
239 The Rise of the Corporate Energy Buyer, https://www.renewablechoice.com/blog-corporate-energy-buyer/
240 Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 2016, https://about.bnef.com/blog/corporate-renewable-energy-procurement-monthly-december/

ENERGY SUPPLY

141



CCA is also on the rise: Six states have
enacted CCA legislation allowing local
governments to buy bulk power on behalf
of large groups of residents and businesses.
Four states have CCA legislation pending,
and two are actively investigating the idea.241
CCA appears to be growing the most quickly
in Massachusetts and California. In southern
California, for example, one research-focused
NGO expects that CCA programs will, by
2020, capture more than half of the 200 GWh
of electricity demand currently supplied
by independently operated utilities.242 For
example, San Francisco’s CleanPowerSF
offers its customers a Green option that is
40% renewable and has lower rates than the
local utility’s option with 33% renewables,
and a SuperGreen 100% renewable option
that is cheaper than the utility’s 100%
renewable option.243
For its own program, the District could supply
all or part of the current standard offer
electricity service via a mix of aggregated
renewable energy PPAs and spot market
purchases—rather than continuing with its
current practice of buying electricity for
the SOS. These contracts would need to be
phased in over three years to avoid overlap
with existing SOS supply contracts.
The modelling assumes the District will meet
70% of the PPA through various renewableenergy sources, and procure the remaining
30% from the spot market. However, DOEE is
investigating the possibility of purchasing 100%
renewable electricity through aggregated
PPAs. This would allow the District shift a
large portion of its electricity supply to
renewable, zero-emission sources relatively
quickly.244 Using this approach, renewable
energy would become the default electricity
offering; customers would be required to opt
out of using it, rather than opt in. Working
through the requirements of the SOS will also
ensure the identification and structuring of

renewable energy contracts that satisfy
the rate and load requirements of the
District’s customers.
Aggregated renewable-energy PPAs may
reduce electricity rates below those of
the current SOS, as the District Government
has found with the renewable energy
PPAs discussed in section 5.1.1.3. Analysis
is now underway to determining the cost
implications of moving such a large quantity
of electricity to a new set of power
purchase agreements.
Several trends are opening up near-term
opportunities to procure lower-cost renewable
energy PPAs. They include increases in
wholesale power prices, which have climbed
up from record lows. Also, between from
2009 and 2017, solar and wind energy prices
experienced capital cost declines of 85%
and 66% respectively, and neither energy
sources require ongoing and uncertain fuel
costs to run. In its 2017 New Energy Outlook,
Bloomberg New Energy Finance reported that
new utility-scale solar and onshore wind arrays
are already cheaper than new coal plants
in many jurisdictions. The company expects
both will be cheaper than new natural gas
plants around 2023. As such, done carefully,
the District Government can both accelerate
the shift to renewable energy, and lower the
energy costs of residents and businesses.
If cost savings materialize, the District
Government should share the savings both
to reduce SOS customers’ electricity costs
and to increase the funding available
for other renewable energy and energy
efficiency programs. The PPAs will give the
District Government another way of providing
affordable electricity to low-income residents.
Long-term energy procurement does,
however, entail risks. The District Government
needs to conduct further analysis on
procurement strategies and contract

241 C
 ommunity Choice Aggregation (CCA) Helping Communities Reach Renewable Energy Goals, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, September 19, 2017,
https://www.nrel.gov/technical-assistance/blog/posts/community-choice-aggregation-cca-helping-communities-reach-renewable-energy-goals.html
242 Community Choice Aggregation Expansion in California and its Relation to Investor-Owned Utility Procurements, Center of Climate Protection, May 2017,
https://climateprotection.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Procurement-Report-June-21-2017.pdf
243 Rates, CleanPowerSF, San Francisco WaterPowerSewer, accessed December 1, 2017, http://sfwater.org/index.aspx?page=997
244 In other jurisdictions, the bulk purchase and sale of renewable electricity by a municipality is referred to as community choice aggregation and must be
approved by the state government. In this case, the District Government is effectively the state and municipal government, allowing the District Government to
secure a PPA directly and supply it to local consumers. The NREL describes community choice aggregation (CCA) at
http://www.nrel.gov/technical-assistance/blog/posts/community-choice-aggregation-cca-helping-communities-reach-renewable-energy-goals.html

142

CLEAN ENERGY DC



structures to mitigate risks, maximize longterm benefits, and ensure competitive pricing
to maintain an adequate customer base.
Establishing suitable PPAs for the District’s SOS
will be complex and challenging, and must
be done carefully. Planning and development
may take two or three years, and the process
used to establish this program may be as
important a success factor as its design.
In planning for and setting up the operations
of the program, the District Government
should consider the following, while
recognizing that the process used to establish
this program may be as important to its
success as its design.
Limited opportunities to renegotiate PPAs:
Discussion with PPA brokers and suppliers
revealed that long-term rates are typically
held flat or change in a preset way that is not
negotiable partway through the contract.
For example, prices may adjust based on
a consumer price index, but the contracts
normally do not allow that adjustment
mechanism to be renegotiated mid-stream.
For an electricity provider, a long-term PPA
often secures the financing needed to
build a new renewable energy generator.
This financing is tied to the anticipated
revenue stream, so potential changes in that
revenue stream can reduce or remove the
agreement’s viability. This may not necessarily
be the case in all situations, but the District
should not expect to be able to automatically
renegotiate rates as part of long-term PPAs.
Aggregation of renewable power purchases
may allow the District to hedge these kinds of
risks, which require further analysis.
Program phase-in: Given the risk, scale and
complexity of the program, the District should
consider phasing in the program over multiple
years. Doing so will give the District (or the
organization running the program) more
experience with the procurement process,
and a more nuanced understanding of supply
opportunities and prices. Phasing may also
open up opportunities to save money, as
wind and solar prices continue to decline.
The District could phase in the portion of
renewable energy serving the program,
starting at a quantity equal to the current SOS,
and increasing in increments between now
and 2032.

Multiple renewable energy options: As noted
above, some local governments offer multiple
renewable energy options, with one being
the default service provided to ratepayers.
Others have started with a commitment to
be cleaner than the baseline, and increase
the renewable-energy portion over time. The
District could offer various levels of renewable
energy, while setting one option as the
default. For example, the program could offer
customers two renewable-energy options:
• Somewhat higher than the baseline
(the default), and
• Much higher than the baseline (e.g. 50% or
100% renewable).
This approach reduces risks associated with
committing to higher renewable-energy
offerings immediately, provides the District
or program operator experience running the
program, and improves understanding of
consumer demand for different renewable
energy products. Offering multiple options
may make the program more complicated
to manage in the short-term, but could help
reduce the risk of customers defecting to
lower-cost offerings.
Geographic source of supply: The District
will need to determine the SOS electricity
procurement boundaries. To claim the
use of renewable energy and associated
GHG reductions, the District likely must
procure both the physical electricity and
associated RECs (bundled electricity) from
within the PJM Interconnection Region. Key
considerations in other jurisdictions have
included supply availability, transmission
losses, and employment impacts. The most
cost-effective wind power in PJM tends to be
in the westernmost states (e.g. Ohio, Illinois,
Indiana, Pennsylvania) while the most costeffective solar tends to be in the southernmost
states (e.g. North Carolina, southern Virginia).
However, both regions are farther away from
the District, resulting in greater transmission
losses. Greater transmission losses mean more
electricity must be generated to satisfy the
District’s consumption needs, thus increasing
the cost of satisfying the SOS’s program needs.
The SOS is already procured from outside the
District, so prioritizing lower rates will not have
any negative impact on local jobs.

ENERGY SUPPLY

143



Treatment of RECs: As noted above, to claim the GHG emissions reductions associated with the
PPA, the District likely must buy bundled electricity, which includes both the electricity and the
RECs associated with renewable generation. Due to supply and demand, REC prices in some
regions tend to be higher than other regions. For example, RECs in New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
and Maryland historically cost between $10 and $20 per MWh while RECs in Texas cost $1 to
$2 per MWh.245 Price fluctuations and disparities occur due to regional differences in electricity
prices, renewable energy resource quality (e.g. wind speed), and supply and demand, with
recent growth in supply cutting REC prices in half in recent years from the historical prices
quoted above.246 Once it has established a geographic boundary for procurement and what
constitutes appropriate supply contracts, the District will need to determine how it wants to
treat RECs.
To protect ratepayers, the District may be able to participate in REC swaps or arbitrage,
whereby the District sells the PJM RECs associated with its supply contract to an entity (e.g.
electricity supplier) that needs them for regulatory compliance (e.g. for a renewable portfolio
standard), and purchase RECs at a lower price from elsewhere.
The process to establish the program: It could easily take the District a few years to gain
approval for this program and get it rolling. The following process recommendations emerged
from interviews with representatives from local governments that have established or are
working to establish CCA programs, as well as energy brokers and suppliers providing SOS
contracts:
• Agree on goals from the outset to help ensure prompt delivery and reduce unnecessary
delays. The right set of stakeholders should be involved and engaged in the process in the
early stages.
• Detailed estimates of supply research and rates should address potential customer demand
and willingness to pay. This could be done in collaboration with the PSC alongside, or as part
of, a distribution resource plan.
• A well-informed political champion will ensure the program gets up and running as soon as
possible. This person can help educate and influence other key stakeholders. This person
should attend and participate in meetings with stakeholders so they can become educated
on the issues, ask the right questions, and help anticipate criticisms and over-expectations of
the program (e.g. immediate implementation or zero risk).
• Both critical and well-intentioned stakeholders can affect the process and prolong
development time. A subject-matter expert (SME) panel and an open stakeholder
engagement process could help diplomatically respond to such stakeholder challenges.
During meetings (which the political champion should attend), the District and its consultants
can present the findings of their research and analysis and have SMEs ask questions and
provide input to the District and stakeholders. The District should start these very early on to
avoid process delays and other challenges.
• Develop a well-informed business plan for the program that demonstrates how it can
achieve its goals in a financially viable way and add value to the community. The business
plan should lay out the overall opportunity (projected customer demand, customer profile),
identify and evaluate suitable supply opportunities, and compare potential electricity rates
under the program to the baseline SOS rate. The potential new rates must account for the
supply and any operational program costs. Finally, the business plan should set aside a
reserve requirement to demonstrate financial responsibility and help ensure the feasibility of
the program.
245 U
 .S Department of Energy, Green Power Markets, Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs),
https://web.archive.org/web/20140714234954/http://apps3.eere.energy.gov/greenpower/markets/certificates.shtml?page=1
246 2016 Wind Technologies Market Report, U.S. Department of Energy,
https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/10/f37/2016_Wind_Technologies_Market_Report_101317.pdf

144

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

In early 2018, begin a more in-depth and collaborative analysis with industry experts
and a new stakeholder group to support program design, development, and
implementation.

2

Set a target to supply at least 70% of the Standard Offer Service through renewable
energy PPAs (pending further analysis).

3

Aim to sign the first aggregated renewable energy purchase agreement by 2020.

CRE.3	Enact legislation that sets a maximum GHG intensity for electricity
supplied to the District
Action: Pass legislation requiring energy suppliers to avoid buying electricity that exceeds a
certain GHG intensity threshold (i.e., GHG emissions per unit of energy). Design legislation to
steadily increase requirements over time, shifting the District’s non-renewable electricity supply
to less GHG-intensive generators. These requirements may also include appropriate provisions
for tracking and disclosure of the electricity supply sources.
Relevance: The District’s current RPS seeks to shift the District’s electricity supply toward a
portfolio of generators dominated by clean, renewable energy. As a complement to the RPS,
the District should focus on avoiding the purchase of electricity from those generators that emit
large quantities of GHG emissions per unit of energy. This will support the District in achieving its
2032 GHG reduction target by strategically eliminating the largest sources of GHG emissions in
the District’s electricity supply.
Details: The purpose of this recommendation is to set a maximum allowable GHG intensity for
all electricity delivered to the District, and establish a timeline for compliance by electricity
suppliers. It applies to all electricity supplied to the District (both new and current generators),
but begins by targeting the largest sources of emissions per unit.
Regulations of this kind have already been adopted by a few jurisdictions in North America,
including Ontario (Canada) and Oregon. In 2003, the Province of Ontario committed to phase
out all coal-fired generation using a collaborative approach designed to address system
capacity, reliability, flexibility, labor, and cost-effectiveness.247 Between 2003 and 2014, coalfired electricity usage declined from 25% of Ontario’s electricity to a full phase-out, while
nuclear generation increased from 42% to 60%.248
In 2016, Oregon announced a similar program to phase out coal power by 2030.249 Under the
same legislation, the state increased its RPS to require 50% of all electricity sold to customers to
be sourced from clean, renewable sources by 2040. The State of New York announced a similar
program to phase out coal by 2020, but has yet to enact legislation.250 Ontario and Oregon
differ from the District in that they were able to regulate coal-fired electricity generated within
their jurisdictions, whereas the District can only use the “power of the purse” when procuring
electricity from other states. However, these experiences can provide valuable lessons to help
guide the District in designing and managing this regulation.
247
248
249
250

The End of Coal, Ontario Ministry of Environment, http://www.energy.gov.on.ca/en/archive/the-end-of-coal/
Ibid.
Senate Bill 1547, Oregon Legislative Assembly, https://olis.leg.state.or.us/liz/2016R1/Downloads/MeasureDocument/SB1547/Enrolled
NY gov aims to phase out coal by 2020, The Hill, http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/265786-ny-gov-aims-to-phase-out-coal-by-2020

ENERGY SUPPLY

145



The District should first enact legislation requiring that all electricity purchased to serve District
customers must meet a minimum GHG intensity/emissions standard. Such a measure will
serve to curtail traditional fossil-fuel electricity production. In 2015, coal plants generated
approximately 36.5% of electricity in the PJM territory, down from approximately 43.5% in 2014
and 44.5% in 2013.251 It is unknown at this time how much of this was delivered to the District. In
order for the emissions standard to work effectively, DOEE and the PSC should conduct analysis
to explore and develop an appropriate legal framework for reasonable disclosure regarding
electricity supply in order to educate and inform DC consumers and track compliance.
The District does not have electricity generation plants within its borders, and so it is not
regulated by the federal Clean Power Plan (CPP) or similar regulations. A GHG emissions
standard for electricity supplied to the District would, however, have a similar effect as the CPP
in that both would drive down the GHG emissions intensity of the overall electricity supply. While
the GHG intensity of electricity supplied from other states to the District will decline due to the
CPP, enacting an emissions standard will give the District greater control over the impact of
grid-cleaning efforts.
The District should also carefully consider the role of natural gas in its electricity supply, given
the fuel’s potential impact on the District’s GHG targets. While natural gas can be less GHG
intensive than coal if methane leakage is properly managed, the GHG intensity of natural
gas is still much higher than renewable sources. Shifting from coal-fired generation to efficient
natural gas facilities may decrease GHG emissions in the short-term; however, the useful life of
natural gas facilities (30 to 40-plus years) may lock the District into fossil fuel-based infrastructure
that would be incongruent with its long range target. Furthermore, natural gas combustion is a
significant source of methane emissions, which warm the atmosphere much more quickly and
intensely than carbon dioxide.
The District should therefore ensure that any energy supply that it needs to replace traditional
fossil-fuel generation will align with its 2050 carbon neutral target. To this end, the District needs
a maximum GHG intensity regulation that steadily declines, and forces a transition to loweremissions energy sources over time. The District should additionally encourage and coordinate
with the PJM states to ensure that such a regulation does not simply redirect the output of coalfired generators into other jurisdictions. However, should these efforts founder, the District should
nevertheless move forward with its own agenda in the hope that other jurisdictions will follow its
lead and adopt stronger climate and energy policies.

251 PJM System Mix By Fuel, https://gats.pjm-eis.com/gats2/PublicReports/PJMSystemMix/Filter

146

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

By 2019, begin investigating the potential impacts of the maximum GHG intensity
regulation on system capacity, reliability, flexibility, and the cost-effectiveness of energy.
As part of this, Direct DOEE to develop energy supply scenarios out to 2050 that achieve
the District’s 2050 carbon neutral target or eliminate GHG emissions altogether (in
conjunction with Action CRE.1).

2

Conduct analysis to explore and develop an appropriate legal framework for
reasonable disclosure regarding electricity supply in order to educate and inform
consumers in the District.

3

Continue engaging the PJM states on a steady shift to less GHG-intensive resources,
promoting only strategic use of natural gas to remain aligned with the 2050 carbon
neutral target.

4

Pending further analysis, announce a plan to legislate the maximum GHG intensity

5

Enact legislation by 2020.

5.1.2.2 RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY FROM OUTSIDE THE DISTRICT
CRE.4

Develop a centralized solar information and commerce platform

Action: Create a centralized online platform, a clearing house, to provide information on and
facilitate adoption of solar PV and solar thermal systems. Provide resources and information on
the purchase process, available incentives and financing, and any other useful information for
citizens, businesses, building owners, contractors, and developers in the District.
Relevance: This recommendation addresses the education and other resources needed to
facilitate the process of learning about, paying for, and installing solar systems. As noted in
the introduction of this section, the District already offers an array of incentives and programs
to increase solar power accessibility and affordability. However, information is dispersed over
multiple websites. A central resource that provides information on all available programs can
help increase the value of existing solar incentives and programs, and eliminate potential
barriers to adoption. By improving access to relevant information including potential cost
savings, the District can increase the likelihood that residents and businesses will install solar
systems. This will in turn help achieve the solar requirement outlined in the RPS and help the
District advance toward its renewable energy targets.
Details: A single online platform will make it easier for building owners and contractors to
learn about solar systems, access government incentives and programs, and connect with
contractors and installers. This flexible, commerce-focused resource can be integrated with
other energy-related resources and incentives to provide a complete package of information,
simplifying the process of investing in renewable energy and energy efficiency. This resource
should be integrated in some way with Mapdwell’s Washington, DC Solar SystemTM mapping
tool, which depicts the solar potential of every building in the District. The mapping should also
attempt to account for roof age, shading, green roofs, and roof decks or other auxiliary roof
uses by developing this functionality or integrating with private tools from companies such

ENERGY SUPPLY

147



as SolarCity or Sunrun that account for these factors. Revenues generated through the RPS’s
alternative compliance payments program could fund this initiative.
The DCSEU’s energy efficiency website and EnergyTrust of Oregon’s Incentives and financing
for solar website both offer excellent examples of such platforms.252,253 The EnergyTrust site
aggregates and plainly communicates information on incentives, tax credits, financing options,
system requirements, purchase and installation steps, and available contractors, as well as a set
of clearly organized links to other useful resources. Both the DCSEU and EnergyTrust also provide
a means of soliciting additional information either by phone or email, including staff assigned
to primarily help clients navigate the complexities of implementing energy efficiency and
renewable energy.
This online platform need not be built from the ground up, nor created by the District alone. The
District can work with existing sites and local partners to develop and market this solution. The
DCSEU may be a good partner considering its mandate and experience managing its existing
energy efficiency website. Management could also be coordinated by a similar third-party
organization, or even the District itself. One important consideration is the way in which current
solar developers and installers will fit into the commerce platform.
As with similar recommendations focused on buildings, the District Government should work
to maximize accessibility for all residents of the District, and should work with local, trusted
community organizations to engage with LMI communities, with the intent of determining how
to ensure this information reaches all neighborhoods and communities.
Next Steps

1

Contract an organization to
develop the site.

2

Partner with trusted community
organizations to conduct offline
engagement and outreach to
all neighborhoods in the District.

3

Contact jurisdictions with existing
online resource and commerce
sites to derive insights on the use,
perceived effectiveness,
and administrative costs of
these initiatives.

4

Explore the costs associated with
website design, maintenance,
and content development,
as well as any staff time required.

5

Launch the website within the
next two years.

252 https://www.dcseu.com
253 https://energytrust.org/renewable-energy/incentives/solar/Residential/SolarElectric

148

CLEAN ENERGY DC



CRE.5	Continue to refine and implement the targeted solar proliferation
strategy that has been launched under the Solar for All program
Action: Continue to refine and implement the targeted solar proliferation strategy to install solar
PV and thermal systems on buildings across the District. The District has already begun work on
this strategy under the Solar for All program and associated Implementation Plan. 254
Relevance: A continuously evolving solar proliferation strategy will both support the District
Government’s Solar for All program, and build on its other solar policies and actions.255
This kind of strategy could yield tangible and immediate progress toward the District’s RPS
solar requirement.
Rooftop solar panels are “contagious.” That is to say, when a building owner installs rooftop
panels, others often soon follow atop other nearby buildings.256 The District’s solar proliferation
strategy can help to increase the number of solar PV installations, while generating citizen
and business awareness and interest. It builds on ongoing work to modernize and increase the
resilience of the grid, and act as a catalyst to build local workforce capacity and economic
development opportunities in the renewable energy sector.
The solar proliferation strategy also aligns with several of the District’s ongoing actions. The
District Government is already working to increase the number of solar installations citywide
to meet its goal of connecting 100,000 low-income households to solar power and cutting
their electricity bills in half by 2032.257 This will also contribute to the District’s RPS requirement
of meeting 2.5% of its electricity needs using solar PV systems (or displaced by solar thermal
systems) by 2023 and 5% by 2032. To achieve these RPS requirements, the District is working to
identify and pursue specific opportunities to install building- and community-scale solar systems
on both public and privately-owned buildings and lots.
Through December 2017, the District’s Solar for All program installed over 600 kW of solar. At the
time of writing this report, Solar for All has nearly 10 MW (or 10,000 kW) worth of panels in the
pipeline. As of October 1, 2017, there was 63.1 MW of certified solar capacity, 41.6 MW of which
is located within the District. 258
As described in the Solar for All Implementation Plan, DOEE will implement Solar for All in five
three-year phases to ensure the program is sufficiently flexible to adapt to market changes and
overcome barriers. The initial implementation phase (FY17-FY19, underway) will consist of 30 to
60 MW of solar capacity, subject to funding availability. This phase will also focus on researching
and developing the solutions necessary to execute large-scale projects in subsequent phases.
Much of this work is being completed through strategic external and inter-agency partnerships
and Solar for All Innovation and Expansion Grants.
In February 2017, DOEE announced two Requests for Applications (RFA) for $13.2 million in
Solar for All Innovation and Expansion Grants. The RFA guidelines focus on research and
development and seek to address four overarching program goals: (1) to expand solar
energy in the District; (2) to provide benefits to low-income residents; (3) to develop solutions
254 h
 ttps://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/service_content/attachments/DOEE-%20Report-%20Solar%20for%20All%20Implementation-%20Final%20
for%20Transmittal.pdf
255 Renewable Portfolio Standard Expansion Amendment Act of 2016. https://doee.dc.gov/service/solar-for-all
256 Graziano and Gillingham, 2014, Spatial patterns of solar photovoltaic system adoption: the influence of neighbors and the built environment,
http://academic.oup.com/joeg/article/15/4/815/2412599
257 Mayor Bowser Signs Renewable Portfolio Standard Bill into Law, July 25, 2016,
http://mayor.dc.gov/release/mayor-bowser-signs-renewable-portfolio-standard-bill-law
258 Includes all solar systems eligible for the RPS solar requirements. Monthly Update of Solar Generator Certification, Public Service Commission of the District of
Columbia, retrieved on December 21, 2016, https://www.dcpsc.org/Utility-Information/Electric/Renewables/Renewable-Energy-Portfolio-Standard-Program/
Monthly-Update-of-Solar-Generator-Certification.aspx

ENERGY SUPPLY

149



to program challenges; and, (4) and to identify solutions DOEE can use to establish the most
effective, predictable, and stable medium-term program. The details below can support the
District in continuing to move forward with this initiative.
Details: If the District is to grow solar generating capacity on both private and District
Government-owned buildings and open spaces in a short period of time, it will need a
continuously evolving solar proliferation strategy.259 This is a direct marketing and education
campaign that targets buildings suitable for solar and offers free solar assessments. Residents
and businesses can self-identify as interested in the solar assessment. Program staff will then get
them more information and connect them with solar installers and financing options.260
This campaign could be launched to coincide with the release of the District’s Centralized Solar
Information and Commerce Platform, potentially building on Solar for All’s existing outreach
efforts, and be implemented with and through local partners. The District may also wish to apply
to the U.S DOE to use the solar proliferation strategy as a demonstration project for other U.S.
cities to learn from.
The proposed solar proliferation strategy involves four phases. Before moving forward with this
program, DOEE should engage with local solar-focused organizations regarding the best way to
design and implement this program, as these organizations will have valuable, locally-specific
knowledge, data, and information. Based on this engagement, the District Government may
find the best approach to accomplishing this strategy is to release a request for proposal and
procure an organization to design, manage, and implement it.
Phase 1: Identify local partners and organizations: Successfully implementing this strategy
will require support from local organization and coordination with solar installers, financing
providers, marketing and outreach companies, and tenant advocacy groups. Solar installers,
financing providers, and marketing and outreach companies – will be important to continuing
to implement the District’s solar proliferation strategy and translating the implementation of the
strategy into new solar adoption.
The marketing and outreach company should be procured through a competitive request for
proposal based on the program’s overall design and objectives. This strategy has already been
launched under the Solar for All program which is currently funding nine projects under the Solar
for All Innovation and Expansion Grants as well as supporting several strategic partnerships.261
The solar proliferation strategy should build on the Solar for All program. In addition, DC PACE
and a new potential DC Green Bank should be involved as financing options for future
solar projects.
In addition to identifying interested solar installers, the District Government should consider using
a bulk buy process to decrease panel costs. As discussed in Action EV.3, the City of Boulder,
Colorado’s solar panel and electric vehicle bulk buy program enjoyed considerable success
in 2015, which has prompted the City to explore a second program.262 Potential sources of
information and support for District Government can be sourced from Boulder staff, as well as
DC SUN, which has coordinated bulk buy programs, and federal staff involved in the SunShot
Initiative’s soft costs program. 263

259 T he proposed design of this program is partly based on the successful Solar-Check program in Osnabrück, Germany.
http://www.osnabrueck.de/gruen/klimaschutz/solardaecher/solarcheck.html
260 The District Government must maintain neutrality in this process.
261 https://doee.dc.gov/service/solar-for-all
262 Discussion with Boulder planning staff, February 29, 2016.
263 For example: Non-Hardware (“Soft”) Cost-Reduction Roadmap for Residential and Small Commercial Solar Photovoltaics, 2013-2020,
http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/59155.pdf. Reducing the Solar PV Soft Cost: Focus on Installation Labor, www.rmi.org/insight/reducing-solar-pv-soft-cost-focus-on-installation-labor/

150

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Phase 2: Determine the subset of buildings to target: Next, identify a subset of the District’s
building rooftops with the highest solar potential and that are relatively easy to access. The
primary targets should include multifamily buildings, condominium buildings, small businesses,
residential solar co-ops, and nonprofit organizations. Lessons learned should be gleaned from
the Solar for All Innovation and Expansion Grant Projects which are working to address barriers
to accessing these types of roofs.
Several existing resources can facilitate the quick identification of initial buildings to target. For
example, the District Government procured updated LiDAR data from 2015 from Mapdwell’s
Washington, DC Solar SystemTM map to estimate the solar potential of all buildings in the
District.264 This is a good starting point, but may not take into account roof age and other
limiting factors (e.g., green roofs, decks, refined shading analysis). Private solar companies like
SolarCity and Sunrun offer remote analysis tools that may be able to fill in some of these gaps, if
the District can work with them while still maintaining neutrality in the marketplace.
The District may or may not want to consider several other factors in determining the subset of
buildings to target. While these factors can drive a more refined set of buildings to target, the
value gained from the additional information (e.g., fewer site visits resulting in identification
of an unsuitable building) may not be worth the time and expense required to gather this
information. As such, the District should look for an existing solar mapping tool that provides
some of this information, but likely should not dedicate significant time to gathering and sorting
through this information. Rather, some of this information should be identified during a selfselected site visit, while other information can be layered on to the solar potential map as it is
developed (e.g., related to the neighborhood-scale energy strategy, Action CRE.8, grid hosting
capacity study, Action ESM.6, and location-based energy use profile, Action ESM.7).
These considerations include:
• Ease of rooftop accessibility (e.g., by an aerial work platform or cherry picker).
• Capability of the building to accommodate a solar system.
• Ability of the local grid to absorb new renewable energy generating capacity (requires
collaboration with Pepco) and the opportunity for new technology, including microgrids, to
mitigate grid issues.
• Ability of the building to accommodate energy storage infrastructure.
• Opportunities to coordinate with upcoming construction projects to reduce installation costs.
• Alignment with the District’s neighborhood-scale energy strategy (when developed).
• Expected future lifespan of buildings and roofs.
• Achieving equity goals by targeting low-income households.
• Opportunities to install larger solar systems (e.g., community-scale).
• Access needed to federal land, given the large area of land owned by the Federal
Government in the District.
• Building ownership that may impact solar adoption.
Phase 3: Design and implement a targeted marketing campaign: Once the District has
identified target buildings, the procured marketing and outreach company should develop
a marketing campaign to directly engage with owners of identified buildings. This campaign
should clearly and simply communicate the benefits of solar systems, simply explain the
264

Conversation with DOEE staff on February 19, 2016.

ENERGY SUPPLY

151



program being offered, and summarize available incentives and support. Conduct a study
to determine the value proposition for tenants and property owners under different housing
scenarios to tailor outreach programs. Consider implementing a “Solar Coach” program
targeting rental and low-income communities to increase awareness and education on solar.
Messaging should be informed by an understanding of consumer perceptions of solar systems’
pricing, value and reliability, as well as the perceived complexity and duration of the purchase,
installation, and rebate process.265 The District should also recruit high-profile, trusted, and
credible messengers (such as the Mayor) to invite residents to participate in a momentous and
meaningful program. Finally, the marketing campaign should identify opportunities to increase
the impact of this initiative by publicizing, promoting, and branding installations as they occur.
The District may wish to consider expanding the targeted customer base to include citizens
and businesses that do not reside in the buildings targeted for solar systems. The Community
Renewables Energy Act of 2013 provides the rationale. It allows residents and businesses to
purchase electricity from solar panels on other buildings and receive credit on their utility bill as
though they owned the panels.266 This is known as virtual net-metering, in that like conventional
net-metering, it requires utilities to compensate residents and businesses for any solar they
generate on-site and supply to the grid’s distribution network.
Phase 4: Facilitate installations: After a targeted building owner has received an assessment
and wants to move forward, the District Government’s final step is to connect the building
owners with the solar installation and financing information they need by connecting them with
the appropriate organizations.
For those properties eligible for DC PACE financing, the District Government should encourage
property owners to utilize the PACE financing program as a way to install solar with no out-ofpocket costs. PACE-secured PPAs represent another pathway to expanding access to solar
energy for traditionally underserved segments of the real estate market, including houses of
worship, nonprofit institutions, small businesses, and affordable housing.
Leveraging Lessons from repeating the Program: Any data, information, and lessons generated
through this program’s implementation should be used to design future solar programs.
Next Steps

1

The District can begin the four phases of this recommendation immediately, but should
consider aligning this work with the development of a centralized solar information and
commerce platform (Action CRE.4) and the early stages of the energy delivery system
modernization work recommended in section 5.2 (particularly Actions ESM.6 and ESM.7).

2

Select organizations to design and manage the marketing campaign and/or other
phases of the strategy. Then choose organizations to perform outreach, education,
technical assistance, and customer-support for underserved sectors, especially lowincome, elderly, and disabled residents, as well as a range of nonprofit organizations
and multifamily buildings.

265
266

152

Smart Solar Marketing Strategies, 2009, http://www.cesa.org/assets/Uploads/Resources-pre-8-16/CEG-Solar-Marketing-Report-2009.pdf
Community Renewables Energy Act of 2013, http://dcclims1.dccouncil.us/images/00001/20130110170938.pdf

CLEAN ENERGY DC



CRE.6	Adopt solar-ready and renewable energy generation building code
requirements
Action: The District should update the DC Construction Codes in the current code cycle
to require new buildings and major renovations to accommodate a renewable energy
generating system. It should also update codes to require building owners to meet a certain
percentage of their building energy consumption via on-site renewable resources, variable by
building type, size, and location. Review and remove existing regulatory barriers.
Relevance: Updating the building codes to incorporate renewable energy requirements will
enable progress toward several of the District’s targets. Renewable energy-ready buildings
offer greater opportunity and flexibility in achieving the District’s 2032 GHG target and 2050
carbon neutral target, and would also support grid resilience objectives. A requirement to install
renewable energy systems on new buildings and existing buildings undergoing deep energy
retrofits will also directly support ongoing efforts to study and realize neighborhood-scale energy
systems (e.g. microgrids) and net-zero or net positive buildings.
The District’s current building codes do not require buildings to incorporate renewable energy.
Instead, developers of select building types can install a renewable energy system as one
option to meet a series of sustainable building requirements. This is achieved through the
District’s Green Construction Code (GCC), which requires new construction projects and
substantial alterations of commercial and residential buildings to incorporate a minimum
number of project electives from a menu of options. Three of these options include the
installation of renewable energy systems, which must provide between 5% and 20% of the
building’s annual energy demand. However, as of February 2016 no new construction projects
had yet elected to install a renewable energy system to fulfill the GCC requirements. 267
In addition to building codes, the District Government will need to review existing regulations,
including zoning laws, to identify barriers that will impede reasonable development of on-site
solar generation.
Details: of the following two approaches to increasing building renewable energy generation
and consumption should be pursued.
First, the District Government should require new buildings and major renovations to be
designed and built to “renewable energy-ready” design standards. These standards require
that the building design takes the necessary steps (e.g. structural design, wiring, setting aside
roof space, considering shading) to accommodate the installation of future renewable energy
systems such as solar PV.
It is important that these updates occur via the DC Construction Codes, and not through new
stand-alone legislation. Putting these requirements in the codes simplifies both implementation
and compliance. The model code on which the District’s Residential Energy Code is based
(the International Code Council’s (ICC) International Energy Conservation Code , Residential
Provisions (IECC), already includes “Solar Ready Provisions” in Appendix RB of the 2015 IECC.
The Construction Codes Coordinating Board (CCCB) has proposed the adoption of Appendix
RB into the current code update. Additionally the CCCB has proposed solar-ready code
language for the DC Commercial Energy Code. These two updates will cover all building types.
Using the codes to enact these requirements will simplify design requirements for architects and

267 Email from the District of Columbia Department of Energy & Environment staff, Feb 11 2016

ENERGY SUPPLY

153



engineers by enabling them to easily locate solar ready requirements, facilitate compliance
by building owners by centralizing enforcement under the Solar Program located in the
Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) Green Building Division,
and reduce the risk of redundancy or conflicts with other parts of the code.
This requirement should be enforced under the Solar Program located in the Department of
Consumer and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) Green Building Division. This will simplify compliance
and reduce the risk of redundancy or conflicts with other parts of the DC Construction Codes
and laws. Under the second approach, the District could require new buildings to install a
renewable energy system equal to a minimum percentage of the building’s square footage,
rooftop space, or projected energy demand. This action could be phased in over time, with a
long-term objective of supporting the District’s GHG reduction, renewable energy generation,
and net-zero and net-positive building goals. The District can determine this code update’s
stringency and timeline via a feasibility study that would assess any cost implications and
determine the appropriate approach to compliance. Such a process should engage with the
local building industry to harness existing knowledge and foster broader buy-in.
New requirements should be implemented with discretion to account for barriers, such as
individual sites’ suitability for solar generation and storm water requirements. In these instances,
the District Government should require building owners to procure the equivalent percentage
of their electricity from other solar systems in the District (e.g., community solar) or purchase
SRECs. The District Government should also consider how to phase in requirements for existing
buildings not undergoing construction to both increase the proportion of buildings covered
over time, and to allow the local building and energy industries to prepare for change. Such a
phased approach should be partnered with other requirements and incentives to support the
transition. For example, certain rezoning applications can be required to conduct a feasibility
study for the installation of an on-site renewable energy system. Similarly, expedited building
permitting can be granted where a certain percentage of energy demand is to be met with
on-site renewable generation.
It may not be feasible to set a specific, universal percentage of energy that must come from
on-site solar. Most large office buildings in the downtown core of DC today can typically only
generate a couple percentage points of their total energy use from onsite solar, absent deep
energy retrofits. Smaller buildings may be limited by height restrictions or shading from getting
sufficient solar power. The impact of microgrids and district energy need also to be considered.
Conversely, a one-story warehouse might easily be able to get 25% of its energy from on-site
solar, and a net-zero-energy single family home should be able to get most of its energy from
on-site solar. Therefore, it is important that the DCRA, DOEE, and the CCCB investigate this issue
further, and that the District Government be able to customize solar requirements to particular
contexts, and grant exemptions.
While emphasizing solar deployment, it is also essential to recognize the potential limitations of
a building-by-building approach. The most well-intentioned owner, combined with the most
progressive building code, will still fail to realize a new building’s PV potential if the new power
supply cannot be integrated with the local distribution system. Solving this problem requires
action beyond the scale of the building–either neighborhood-scale for microgrids (see Action
CRE.8), or larger areas through grid modernization (see section 5.2).
These actions follow in the footsteps of other leading jurisdictions. Vancouver (Canada) requires
one- and two-family homes (duplexes) to be solar-ready,268 and all rezoning applicants with
properties larger than two acres must conduct a feasibility study to assess the relative cost
268 Vancouver Building Bylaw, https://vancouver.ca/home-property-development/green-home-building-policies.aspx

154

CLEAN ENERGY DC



of constructing a low-carbon thermal energy plant or connecting to one nearby.269 In April
2016, both San Francisco and Santa Monica announced that new residential and commercial
buildings would be required to install solar PV or thermal systems based on their square footage
(Santa Monica) or size of the building roof (San Francisco).270 Several national, state-level, and
municipal governments in Europe have also adopted ordinances that require buildings to install
solar thermal systems.271
Aligning these building code updates with other initiatives will have considerable benefit, and
should be informed by the results of solar proliferation and neighborhood-scale energy studies.
Solar access and other renewable energy requirements should also be reviewed in the context
of the District’s planning process to ensure land use policies (e.g., building heights and shadow
implications) and bylaws are aligned with building- and district-scale renewable energy
actions. Finally, like other building code updates, the District should conduct more detailed
analysis to understand the potential cost impacts and develop the specific code language.
Next Steps

1

Within the next year, the CCCB, DCRA, DOEE, and local building, construction, and
renewable energy professionals should investigate both building code updates, include
the renewable energy-ready requirement in the current code cycle, and develop a
strategy to include a renewable energy mandate in the next code cycle or by adoption
of a law, such as the Green Building Ac.

2

Update DC Commercial and Residential Energy Conservation Codes to require buildings
to be capable of accommodating on-site or district-scale renewable energy systems.
This is currently proposed for adoption by the CCCB.

3

In the 2021 Code Cycle, update District Construction Codes to require buildings to
install an on-site renewable energy system (unless granted an exemption), or possible
satisfy a minimum percentage of their energy demand with off-site renewable energy
or renewable energy certificates. Legislation may be adopted to require an increasing
requirement over time, with different goals for different building sizes and locations, but
enforcement, and flexibility in implementation, should be delegated to DCRA.

4

Once implemented, investigate the feasibility of increasing renewable energy system
requirements and expanding to include certain scales of building retrofits.

269 E
 nergy sources include but are not limited to process/waste heat recovery, sewage heat recovery, geoexchange (open loop, closed loop, surface water exchange), air source heat pumps, bio-energy (biomass combustion, biogasification, anaerobic digestion), and other nearby district energy systems.Vancouver
Rezoning Policy for Sustainable Large Sites, http://former.vancouver.ca/commsvcs/BYLAWS/bulletin/R019.pdf
270 Santa Monica City Council Votes in Aggressive Renewable Energy Requirement on New Construction; Implementation Begins in 30 Days, http://newsroom.
smgov.net/2016/04/28/santa-monica-city-council-votes-in-aggressive-renewable-energy-requirement-on-new-construction-implementation-begins-in-30-days
Press Release: Board of Supervisors Unanimously Passes Supervisor Wiener’s Legislation to Require Solar Power on New Buildings, https://medium.com/@Scott_
Wiener/press-release-board-of-supervisors-unanimously-passes-supervisor-wiener-s-legislation-to-require-693deb9c2369#.3w2i4v6ry
271 European Solar Thermal Industry Federation, http://www.estif.org/policies/solar_ordinances/

ENERGY SUPPLY

155



5.1.2.3	
THERMAL ENERGY SUPPLY AND DER INTEGRATION WITHIN
THE DISTRICT
CRE.7

Undertake a built environment thermal decarbonization study

Action: Conduct or commission a study to determine the best way to eliminate GHG emissions
from thermal energy used in the District.
Relevance: Achieving the District’s 2032 GHG reduction target, or any future targets that are
aligned with the Paris Agreement, will require a significant shift away from fossil fuels, including
natural gas. Achieving its 2050 GHG carbon neutral target will require the District to eliminate
fossil fuel use. Consequently, the District must transition away from equipment and technologies
that currently depend on such fuels. The equipment used to heat and cool space and water in
buildings is a key aspect of this transition.
Details: In the District, the energy needed to heat and cool a building’s spaces and water
typically represent its largest source of energy consumption and building emissions. Depending
on the building’s design and equipment, this thermal energy is provided through one of three
means: electricity, natural gas, or fuel oil. Building thermal energy demand is also expected
to increase as climate change-induced increases in summer temperatures will increase the
demand for air conditioning.272 As of 2013, natural gas represented approximately 40.5% of total
building energy use in the District, while fuel oil represented 2.5%. 273
Low carbon energy sources and systems that can be used to elicit this shift include electricity,
biofuels, and low carbon neighborhood-scale energy systems. Alternative fuels derived
from sources other than petroleum are less carbon-intensive, and have less GHG emissions
associated. It is important to note that while electricity produces no emissions at the point of
consumption, the production of electricity associated with generation can be carbon-intensive
if it comes from a source such as coal (see action CRE.1). This report acknowledges that
while the current carbon intensity of electricity is high, switching to electricity does currently
provide the most flexibility and open up access to renewable-energy markets. As outlined in
other actions related to energy supply there are multiple opportunities to reduce the carbon
associated with electricity consumption.
Building heating and cooling equipment that is electric-based include electric baseboard
heaters, heat pumps. Air source heat pumps (ASHP), for example, removes heat from the air
to heat or cool the home, depending on the season. ASHPs can be added onto an existing
heating system, or work on their own. Heat pumps are also much more energy efficient than
conventional air conditioning systems. Though ASHPs are not suitable for all building types, they
are increasingly meeting the needs of many buildings with the support of a small amount of
electric resistance or natural gas as back-up heating power.
Given the long-term importance of building thermal energy demand to meeting its targets,
the District should prioritize careful research into which systems and technologies work best.
For each option, the District should assess GHG implications alongside other variables, such as
energy supply availability and stability, upfront capital requirements, costs to ratepayers, and
resilience (e.g., the flexibility of the system to rely on backup energy sources, or the energy
efficiency of equipment to minimize overall energy demand). As optimal solutions will likely
differ by building type and location, research may best be broken into multiple parts and
aligned with other energy-focused work, including updates to the building code (Action NC.1),
272 Task 2 Report – Vulnerability & Risk Assessment for the District’s Climate Ready DC Plan.
273 Based on data from email from DOEE staff on January 20, 2016.

156

CLEAN ENERGY DC



the solar proliferation strategy (Action CRE.5), and a neighborhood-scale energy strategy
(discussed next in Action CRE.8). Boulder, Colorado conducted a similar strategy in 2016. The
Natural Gas Replacement Strategies for Residential Uses modeled building energy demands,
assessed replacement technologies, conducted a financial and emissions analysis, and
developed a transition strategy.274
As a high-level framework for thermal decarbonization, this plan recommends the following
prioritized list of actions as a strategic approach:
1. Phase out fuel oil as a heating source as rapidly as possible.
2.	Understand which heating loads can be switched over to all-electric systems and away from
natural gas based systems, and target actions accordingly.
3.	For the remaining heating loads, explore how biologically derived fuels such as methane
captured from agricultural processes, wastewater treatment, or landfills can service
these needs.
4.	Look for ways to aggregate decarbonization projects to add scale and reduce costs. This
may be accomplished either through infrastructure, such as community energy systems, or
through financing (Green Bank, PACE) and agreements such as collective bulk purchases.
Finally, it’s important to note again that transitioning to a future where most thermal loads are
being serviced via electricity is critical, and understanding how these new loads will impact
electricity demand at the transmission and distribution level will be important.
Next Steps

1

Identify building and energy supply-focused actions that would benefit from a better
understanding of how to decarbonize thermal energy in the District, and determine
whether and how thermal energy research can be done to support those actions.

2

Assign staff from DOEE and DCRA to determine whether and how to split up the
components of this research based on the energy source, thermal energy equipment,
and building type.

3

Commission a thermal decarbonization study of one or more of the components in the
previous bullet with the objective of identifying preferred energy sources and systems for
different building types and outlining the steps required to begin transitioning to these
new solutions.

274 Provided by staff at the City of Boulder on May 26, 2016.

ENERGY SUPPLY

157



CRE.8

Develop a neighborhood-scale energy strategy

Action: Develop a neighborhood-scale energy strategy with a focus on identifying potential
supply and demand opportunities for thermal energy and electricity and preparing the District
to capitalize on opportunities to install neighborhood-scale energy systems.275
Relevance: Neighborhood-scale energy systems can be a cost-effective way to reduce GHG
emissions and energy costs, while improving energy system resilience. A neighborhood-scale
energy strategy could ensure that the District can capitalize on cost-effective opportunities,
as one component of larger shift to low- carbon and renewable energy. Neighborhoodscale energy also has the potential to improve resilience and efficiency by centralizing
neighborhood-scale modular systems. These systems, particularly microgrids or non-wire
alternatives for meeting load growth, can generate electricity and better manage load and
peak demand, and could lower energy costs.
The District’s current neighborhood-scale energy facilities are operated by the General Services
Administration as well as several District universities.276 New neighborhood-scale energy systems
and microgrids have also been proposed for the Walter Reed Army Medical Center and St.
Elizabeth’s Campus redevelopments, the SW Ecodistrict, the Kingman Park neighborhood, and
dozens of other sites.277 DOEE is expected to release a citywide microgrid feasibility study in the
near future, identifying dozens of potential microgrid opportunities. In 2016, DC Water produced
an overview of its energy supply opportunities, including potential low GHG thermal energy
sources such as the use of excess heat from the District’s drinking water supply in summer,
and the Blue Plains Advanced Wastewater Treatment Plant, in addition to opportunities for
electricity generation and microgrids.278
DC Water is now in the process of assessing whether there is sufficient demand to develop a
neighborhood-scale energy system at Buzzard Point. The District is in the early stages of putting
strategies and policies in place to capitalize on these or other potential neighborhood-scale
energy opportunities that may exist or emerge.
Details: Three conditions help neighborhood-scale energy facilities cost-effectively reduce
GHG emissions. First, a high load density is necessary to ensure enough heating and/or cooling
demand is available in a small enough area to bring down the costs of installing piping and
other infrastructure necessary for thermal distribution. Second, a load diversity is a function of
the time of day that energy demands are being placed on the neighborhood-scale energy
system. A high load diversity is valuable because it spreads the demand more evenly across
the day, thereby increasing the overall efficiency of the energy supply system and improving
its financial case. Finally, both the use of low carbon energy sources, and efficiency gains from
shifting to neighborhood-scale energy, can significantly reduce GHG emissions.
The DC Water study has already identified several low carbon neighborhood-scale energy
opportunities. While most these are expected to be used to satisfy DC Water’s own energy
requirements, DC Water has identified up to 200 MW of thermal energy available from
wastewater that may be able to supply buildings at locations around the city.279, 280 The District
may wish to work with DC Water to explore where this wastewater thermal supply can be
matched with nearby demand. This information should also be supplemented by a Districtled study to identify potential geothermal and hydrological sites, opportunities for low carbon
biomass and other waste-to-energy facilities, and sources of waste heat. As with solar electricity
opportunities, access to federal land could afford additional opportunities.
275 T he term “neighborhood-scale energy systems” refers to what are commonly called “district energy systems.” The term neighborhood-scale is used to avoid
confusion between district and District, where the latter refers to the District of Columbia.
276 2014 Comprehensive Energy Plan for the District of Columbia (unreleased), pp.36-37, 159.
277 Sustainable DC, 2012, p.19; DOEE 2016 Microgrid Report (unreleased).
278 DC ENERGIZED, DC Water’s Energy Opportunities, DRAFT 2-11-2016, unreleased as of March 21, 2016.
279 Communication with DOEE staff, March 29, 2016.
280 DC ENERGIZED, DC Water’s Energy Opportunities, DRAFT 2-11-2016, unreleased as of March 21, 2016

158

CLEAN ENERGY DC



While not every opportunity can or should be pursued, a map and summary of potential low
carbon neighborhood-scale energy sources will be a useful resource for District staff involved
in community planning, energy supply system planning, infrastructure planning, and retrofit
program activities. An understanding of these opportunities may affect how certain decisions
are made to increase neighborhood-scale energy demand and reduce the capital cost
to build the system (e.g., community planning to increase demand, adjusting infrastructure
planning timelines to decrease costs).
While studying the availability of local zero emission thermal energy supplies, the District should
investigate new renewable electricity generation that can be incorporated at or near the
same sites. Integrating neighborhood-scale thermal energy and electricity generation allows
the District to identify greater possible energy efficiency improvements and GHG reductions
that could not be realized by a sole focus on thermal energy, and can lead to microgrids that
support the modernization of the District’s energy delivery system and increase the electricity
grid’s ability to handle new distributed energy resources (energy delivery system modernization
is discussed in section 5.2). Two such microgrids currently under development have been
included in the modeling done for the Plan.281
The bulk of the neighborhood-scale energy strategy should focus on understanding potential
demand – both load density and load diversity – and determining how the District can support
the implementation of neighborhood-scale energy systems. The strategy can inform planning
and policy making activities (e.g., utility infrastructure planning, land use planning, building
and energy codes and bylaws, and related regulations) to ensure that the District is prepared
to capitalize on neighborhood-scale energy opportunities and alternatives to traditional utility
strategies as they come available, especially in the neighborhoods experiencing load growth.
Importantly, the District needs to ensure that neighborhood-scale energy systems are designed
to achieve increasing improvements in energy efficiency and conservation, and resiliency.
The neighborhood-scale energy strategy should be led by DOEE, involve DC Water, and
engage relevant internal and external stakeholders. These stakeholders may include the
PSC, Department of General Services, Office of Planning, Building Code Advisory Committee,
Building and Land Regulations Administration, DC Water, Pepco, Washington Gas, Office
of Budget and Planning, Economic Development and Planning, District Department of
Transportation, the DC Chamber of Commerce, the DC Building Industry Association, and
others. Participation by the District Department of Transportation can help align infrastructure
planning and development activities to share construction costs.
The team developing a neighborhood-scale energy strategy could consider the following:
• Identify thermal energy and electricity demand opportunities based on new construction,
anticipated growth, and current thermal energy demand compatible with neighborhoodscale energy.
• Perform a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis of the
potential role of the District with regards to the promotion and proliferation of low-carbon
neighborhood-scale energy systems.
• Work with the PSC (including through Formal Case 1130), local utilities, the Office of Planning,
and the Zoning Commission and the DC Council to establish a modernized regulatory and
legislative framework to allow for appropriate development of viable neighborhood-scale
systems. These would include microgrids that could accommodate various scenarios and
maximize the benefits of on-site energy assets to consumers and the grid.

281

T he model incorporates existing estimates of the GHG reduction potential of the Walter Reed and St. Elizabeths sites. that the District is actively engaged
in maximizing cost-effective microgrid opportunities. With this additional information, the next iteration of the Plan can better quantify and incorporate
these opportunities.

ENERGY SUPPLY

159



• Investigate DER-driven alternatives to traditional utility solutions for meeting load growth in
neighborhoods or substation zones.
• Incorporate neighborhood-scale energy strategies into the District’s Comprehensive Plan
amendment process, specifically the Environmental Protection, Infrastructure, and Resilience
Elements. Establish a requirement that developments in certain categories/sizes and zoning
overlay districts must undertake a feasibility analysis for neighborhood-scale energy systems,
including microgrids.
• Require all major transfers of public land to private ownership or mixed finance structures to
assess neighborhood-scale energy options for resiliency and sustainability.
• Identify policy reforms required to remove barriers, enhance support, and expand the future
market for neighborhood-scale energy (including infrastructure costs, green building policies
and programs, utility policies and incentives, and District Government policies regarding
specific energy sources, e.g., regarding biomass).
• Investigate phasing strategies to facilitate the long-term implementation of neighborhoodscale energy systems that incorporate both thermal energy and electricity supplies. These
should consider future infrastructure planning (to reduce total costs), development plans, and
anchor loads.
• Use District Government buildings as anchor tenants to improve the financial case.
• Develop a memorandum of understanding between DOEE and DC Water regarding ongoing
collaboration to identify and develop neighborhood-scale energy opportunities.
• Assemble a formal interdepartmental or interagency team focused on neighborhood-scale
energy.
• Calculate energy and GHG emission performance implications of one or more neighborhoodscale energy systems compared to a business as usual scenario.
• Select specific neighborhoods with a high potential for thermal and electric energy demand
and low carbon supply. Recommend feasibility analyses and other planning studies for further
investigation.
• Provide an extension service that offers technical expertise and planning support to
private developers, neighborhood associations, and government agencies unfamiliar with
the benefits and the complexities of neighborhood-scale energy approaches, including
microgrids.
• Identify a pilot project and developing a framework for developing projects (e.g., through a
public-private partnership, a balance of ownership and operation responsibilities between the
District and DC Water, etc.).
• Investigating the value of applying a carbon price to thermal energy sources that result in
GHG emissions.

160

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

In 2018, begin discussions with DC Water regarding the
opportunity to collaborate on neighborhood-scale energy
initiatives, with a particular focus on wastewater thermal.

2

The District Government should actively participate in nearterm pilot projects, in parallel with the suggestions of Action
ESM.11 related to grid modernization pilot projects.

3

Add amendments to the Comprehensive Plan to
emphasize neighborhood-scale energy strategies, and
require any project over 500,000 gross square feet with a
zoning overlay district to evaluate neighborhood-scale
energy and microgrid opportunities in planning.

4

Within the next two years, direct DOEE staff to assemble
a group of key neighborhood-scale energy stakeholders
(for both thermal and electric energy) and investigate
and map other low carbon neighborhood-scale energy
sources, assess neighborhood-scale energy demand
potential, evaluate the role the District can play in
facilitating neighborhood-scale energy opportunities,
and conduct the planning and policy making necessary to
ensure it is able to capitalize on emerging neighborhoodscale energy opportunities that align with its
long-term targets.

5

Once the strategy is developed, initiate any action
necessary to ensure planning and policy tools can
support and will not hinder neighborhood-scale
energy development.

ENERGY SUPPLY

161



CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY ROADMAP

CLEAN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SUPPLY
CRE.1 Design and manage the
RPS to drive renewable energy
generation and GHG reductions
CRE.2 Provide the Standard Offer
Service through aggregated
power purchase agreements
CRE.3 Enact legislation that sets
a maximum GHG intensity for
electricity supplied to the District
CRE.4 Develop a centralized
solar information and commerce
platform
CRE.5 Continue to refine and
implement the targeted solar
proliferation strategy
CRE.6 Adopt solar-ready and
renewable energy generation
building code requirements
CRE.7 Undertake a built
environment thermal
decarbonization study
CRE.8 Develop a neighborhoodscale energy strategy
Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

162

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2024

5.1.3



5.2

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION

5.2.1

AN OVERVIEW OF ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION

5.2.1.1

CURRENT ENERGY SYSTEM PRESSURES

As discussed in Chapter 2, a much higher proportion of the District’s total electricity supply must
be shifted to renewable energy to meet the District’s targets, both from outside and within
the District. This will require strategically phasing out fossil fuels, then coupling with efficient
electricity use and peak load reductions.
At the same time that the District pursues these climate and energy targets, increasing pressures
are being placed on the electricity grid. Aging infrastructure will require ongoing maintenance
and costly investments to ensure its continued reliability. Indeed, Pepco in its 2016 rate case
projects an expenditure of $1.52 billion in new capital projects between now and 2020 to
ensure reliability.282 While these investments are costly, avoiding them will see the overall
reliability of the grid decline, while electricity costs for consumers will increase.283,284
The grid is also challenged by extreme weather and flooding events associated with climate
change. A District- based Vulnerability and Risk Assessment recently found that major District
infrastructure assets, including electric substations and Metrorail, will be vulnerable to both
extreme heat events and periodic flooding as early as 2020. The consequent impact on these
important pieces of infrastructure will be significant for the businesses, governments, and
residents that depend on this infrastructure.285 To address these concerns, the District has made
resilience of energy supply system a key priority. This includes ensuring the ongoing reliability
of the electricity system, as well as its ability to resist, respond to, and recover from shocks or
attacks on the system – whether these are natural (e.g., extreme weather, animals) or manmade (e.g., physical or cyberattacks).
To this end, the Sustainable DC Plan has set a goal to reduce the total number of annual power
outages to between zero and two events of less than 100 minutes per year.286 A second goal
has been established to improve the District’s human preparedness and physical adaptability
to future climate change, with a particular focus on the District’s energy infrastructure.287 These
goals are addressed in further depth in the Climate Ready DC Plan (2016), which outlines
several actions focused particularly on energy delivery system resilience.
Further, as in most jurisdictions, the District’s current electric grid is currently inefficient in terms of
system utilization, as it was built to support the peak electricity demand that occurs for a short
period of time each year. For the remainder of the year, the grid is underused and therefore
inefficient. With overall grid utilization at approximately 53%, there is a significant opportunity
to improve the cost-effectiveness of the District’s energy delivery system through a shift in
electricity grid infrastructure and operations.288 This shift can be supported by distributed energy
resources (DER), but DER must be successfully integrated into the grid. More discussions on DER
are provided in the next section.

282 Formal Case 1139 – Application, Direct Testimony and Exhibits of Potomac Electric Power Company Witnesses Velazquez and McGowan
283 Reliability refers to the ability of the grid to deliver high quality power consistently.
284 Failure to Act: Closing the Investment Gap for America’s Economic Future, American Society of Civil Engineers,
http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/ASCE-Failure-to-Act-Report-for-Web-5.23.16.pdf
285 Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Report (p.4) developed as part of the development of the District’s Climate Ready DC Plan.
286 Sustainable DC Plan, 2012
287 Sustainable DC Plan, 2012
288 Grid efficiency figure sourced from correspondence with DOEE staff on July 13, 2016.

ENERGY SUPPLY

163



5.2.1.2 THE RISE OF DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES
The past several years have seen the growing adoption of new energy technologies that
interact with the grid in more complex ways known as distributed energy resources (DER). DOEE
broadly defines DER in a way that accounts for both the technologies themselves, as well as
the multiple aspects of the energy delivery system with which these technologies interact. DER
technologies can both increase renewable energy generation and support more efficient and
cost-effective management of the energy delivery system. DER includes energy efficiency
(both at the levels of consumers and the grid), demand response, distributed storage,
distributed generation (e.g., solar panels, thermal energy recovery systems), microgrids,
and electric vehicles.289 DER will play an important role in achieving the District’s 2032 GHG
reduction, energy use reduction, and renewable energy generation targets. Improvements in
technology, reductions in cost, and increases in GHG emissions policy have driven significant
growth in the demand for DER over the past several years. Continuing this growth will require
innovative, strategic investments in infrastructure and operational capabilities to meet existing
and new types of demands placed on the grid by these new technologies, while capitalizing
on the opportunities DER technologies offer.
Integrating DER into the existing grid presents new challenges. While DER technologies can
be connected to different parts of the grid, the District’s existing grid infrastructure is based
on a model of centralized, large-scale electricity generation (e.g., hydroelectric dams, coalfired power plants, and nuclear power plants) that is transmitted through regional distribution
networks to end-users. Integrate high quantities of DER technology into the existing grid will
impact grid performance and operation. For example, electricity generated at customers’
residences can affect the performance of both the distribution network and the broader
transmission network, as well as the way the centralized fleet of generators may be deployed
to meet energy demand.290 Such interactions can lead to reliability problems, and challenge
existing utility models, regulatory structures, and decision-making processes around the design
and operation of the grid.291 As such, utilities and regulators should consider current and future
growth in DER when planning or making investment or regulatory decisions; otherwise, they risk
making costly grid investments that are incompatible with the future operation of the grid.
The growing focus on DER and distribution planning also offers considerable benefits over
traditional energy system planning and management. Increases in DER can help reduce
the need for traditional investments in the grid and ultimately lower rates for customers. In
May 2016, the California-based Pacific Gas & Electric utility reported that the growth in DER,
energy efficiency, and demand response measures have rendered $192 million in approved
transmission improvements unnecessary.292 This trend is likely to continue: the cost of DER is
declining as technology improves; soft costs (e.g., installation costs) are declining as business
model improves; and increased production improves economies of scale. At the same time,
the price of electricity from wind and solar photovoltaic (PV) generation has fallen dramatically
over the past decade, making solar and wind the most affordable source of power in some
areas even when compared to fossil fuels.293

289
290
291
292

Comment on the Scope of the Proceeding by the District of Columbia Government (p.2), Formal Case 1130, District of Columbia Public Service Commission.
Electric Power Research Institute, 2015, The Integrated Grid: A Benefit-Cost Framework (p.xviii).
QER Report: Energy Transmission, Storage, and Distribution Infrastructure (p.S-14), 2015, Quadrennial Energy Review
Californians Just Saved $192 Million Thanks to Efficiency and Rooftop Solar, May 31 2016, Greentech Media,
http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Californians-Just-Saved-192-Million-Thanks-to-Efficiency-and-Rooftop-Solar
293 Solar Energy Is Cheapest Source of Power in Chile, Deutsche Says, Nov 4 2015, Bloomberg,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-04/solar-energy-is-cheapest-source-of-power-in-chile-deutsche-says
“€0.02 Solar is Quite Possible.” https://cleantechnica.com/2016/05/30/02-cent-solar-possible/

164

CLEAN ENERGY DC



DER can facilitate peak demand reductions and obtain associated cost savings. Peak demand
refers to the maximum quantity of electricity a customer demands at a given time. Peak
demand often results when a business is using all of its equipment, or when residents demand
high amounts of electricity for cooling on a hot summer day. An electric grid must be able to
supply enough power to satisfy peak demand, however high and for however long. Certain
DER technologies can reduce peak demand, which will help the grid operator and consumers
to predict and adjust their energy demand, thereby saving significant costs.
Local energy storage technologies also allow customers to receive a larger portion of their
electricity from nearby generators (e.g., solar panels on their roof or in their neighborhood),
thereby gaining efficiency through reduced distance that electricity must travel via transmission
and distribution lines. This in turn decreases the need for additional power lines and associated
investments, reducing line losses.294 By extension, these increases in efficiency reduce the need
for additional generating capacity and associated grid infrastructure, lowering costs
for customers.
Finally, DER can accelerate the adoption of localized renewable energy generation. Consider
that 99.2% of new electricity generation capacity added to the U.S. grid in Q1 of 2016 came
from renewable sources, more than half of which was distributed solar.295 A combination of DER
and modernized grid equipment will help ensure affordability, efficiency, reliability, resilience,
and security of the District’s electricity.
In sum, the various pressures and changes facing the grid require the District to engage in a
process of changing, improving, and upgrading the energy delivery system, and particularly
the electricity system, or what is broadly referred to as grid modernization. Making these
changes in a timely and thoughtful way will be crucial, as the inherent longevity of grid
infrastructure means that any near-term decisions will influence the composition and function of
the grid for decades to come. This section of the Plan identifies electricity system modernization
actions necessary to ensure the District’s energy delivery system can support deep GHG
reductions and capitalize on the opportunities presented by DER while meeting customers’
needs both now and in the future.

5.2.1.3 THEORY OF GRID MODERNIZATION
Grid modernization, or electricity system modernization, can be summarized as the strategic
process of assessing and updating grid infrastructure, utility business models, and regulatory
structures to achieve a balance of an affordable, sustainable, and resilient energy delivery
system.296 Grid modernization is critical to enabling widespread DER integration and helps
jurisdictions improve reliability and resilience, lower GHG emissions and energy use, increase
system flexibility, ensure security, and maintain affordability.297
A key feature of this description is the integration of DER into the grid. To maximize the value
of DER and ensure it has a positive effect on the operation of the grid; DER cannot simply
be connected to the grid. Rather, DER must be integrated through adjustments in other

294 E
 nergy Information Administration, 2016, How much electricity is lost in transmission and distribution in the United States?,
https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=105&t=3
295 Renewables = 99% Of New Electricity Capacity In Q1 2016 In USA (CleanTechnica Electricity Reports), May 31 2016,
http://cleantechnica.com/2016/05/31/renewables-99-new-electricity-capacity-q1-2016-usa/
296 Although the term “grid modernization” is more commonly used, the District Government and Public Service Commission use the term “electricity delivery
system modernization” to explicitly acknowledge the fact that the modernization process required changes to regulatory and market structures in addition to
grid infrastructure. Both terms mean the same thing in the Plan, and “grid modernization” is often used for brevity.
297 Grid Modernization Initiative, October 22, 2015, Presentation by Kevin Lynn of the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy at the U.S. Department
of Energy.

ENERGY SUPPLY

165



infrastructure, utility operations, and regulatory structures.298 This holistic grid modernization
approach to DER integration becomes increasingly important as the supply and use of
DER increases.
Although the specific process through which jurisdictions will modernize their grid is not yet fully
understood, one particular framework for the grid modernization process has been widely cited
by jurisdictions in more advanced stages of grid modernization.299 The framework outlines a
three-stage evolutionary process driven by higher levels of DER adoption:
Stage 1: Grid Modernization involves a low level of DER adoption that can be accommodated
with existing distribution systems, and without any materials changes to infrastructure or
operations.
Stage 2: DER Integration occurs when DER adoption levels reach a threshold that requires
enhanced functional capabilities to ensure reliable distribution system operation and capture
system benefits. Based on current DER adoption experiences, this appears to occur when DER
adoption reaches approximately 5% of distribution grid peak loading system-wide.
Stage 3: Distributed Markets is a conceptual stage that results from a combination of high
DER adoption and policy decisions to create distribution-level energy markets to facilitate
distributed (e.g., peer-to-peer) transactions.
Most U.S. grids, including the District’s, are in Stage 1. However, DER adoption levels and public
policy decisions in California and Hawaii place them in Stage 2 of the process, with New York
State close behind. These three jurisdictions (as well as Germany) can provide valuable learning
opportunities for the District and are referenced throughout the recommended actions below.

5.2.1.4 POLICY OBJECTIVE
To achieve the District’s objectives and drive the necessary increases in DER adoption, the
District Government should adopt the following language in establishing a specific policy
objective for this critical work:

The District of Columbia will make a phased and strategic transition to a 21st Century
energy supply system that supports the District in achieving its priorities as set forth in the
Sustainable DC Plan. The modernized energy delivery system will be designed, operated,
and regulated to empower District residents and businesses, while supporting innovation
in energy services through advanced distributed energy resources and dynamic energy
management capabilities. The system will be highly efficient, resilient, reliable, secure,
flexible, and deliver affordable power to customers.

298 E
 lectric Power Research Institute, 2015, The Integrated Grid: Realizing the Full Value of Central and Distributed Energy Resources (p.33).
299 De Martini and Kristov, 2015, Distributed Systems in a High Distributed Energy Resources Future: Planning, Market Design, Operation and Oversight

166

CLEAN ENERGY DC



5.2.1.5 EXISTING DISTRICT GOVERNMENT ACTIONS
The District is at an early stage in the process of modernizing its energy delivery system. From
a regulatory standpoint, this process is being driven by the PSC’s Formal Case 1130 (FC1130),
In the Matter of the Investigation into Modernizing the Energy Delivery System for Increased
Sustainability (MEDSIS). FC1130 was initiated in June 2015 with the objective to “identify
technologies and policies that can modernize our energy delivery system for increased
sustainability and will make our system more reliable, efficient, cost-effective and interactive.”300
DOEE has been engaged in this process through the submission of formal comments,
presentations at workshops, and attendance at meetings. This ongoing proceeding will remain
a critical early component of the District’s long-term transition to a modernized energy delivery
system. The recommended actions in this section should be integrated with DOEE’s intervention
in FC1130, as a component to build experience and capacity of the District Government with
respect to these issues. MEDSIS town hall meetings are conducted in interest of working in
collaboration with all stakeholders and interested citizens, and this outreach should continue
and expand to further engagement of stakeholders, particularly low income communities and
tenant advocacy groups.
Other related actions taken by the District Government include the near-complete deployment
of advanced metering infrastructure (e.g., smart meters) and the District’s climate change
adaptation plan, the Climate Ready DC Plan.301 As discussed in Action ESM.9 below, the
extensive deployment of advanced metering infrastructure can support grid modernization
by providing the District with valuable data with which to assess grid functioning, plan for DER
integration, support more advanced energy demand management, and identify opportunities
for pilot projects. This will be an important part of effectively managing the long-term transition
to a modernized grid while maintaining reliability and resilience. The District’s Climate Ready
DC Plan, and related Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Report, will provide a crucial layer of
information that will help to ensure that planning efforts and investment decisions are cognizant
of the anticipated effects of climate change on the grid and the grid’s role in the functioning
of the city more generally. The Climate Ready DC Plan also lays out a series of resiliencefocused actions, many of which can support the District’s grid modernization efforts. The District
Government should thus align efforts coming out of both the Clean Energy DC and Climate
Ready DC.

300 Public Service Commission Order 17912.
301 Smart meter deployment figures found in Fact Sheet, Pepco, http://www.smartgrid.gov/files/Pepco-District-Columbia-Smart-Grid-Project-2015.pdf

ENERGY SUPPLY

167



5.2.2

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

As noted above, modernizing the District’s grid infrastructure, utility model, and regulatory
structure will be fundamental to the achievement of the District’s long-term climate and
energy targets. It will affect the District Government’s decision-making about buildings,
electric transportation, and, most fundamentally, the transition toward a low carbon energy
supply system dominated by renewables. As such, grid modernization actions will both affect
and be affected by the pursuit of actions in the other sectors outlined in this Plan. The District
Government must therefore work to align the actions recommended here with those in the
other sections, as well as those discussed in the Climate Ready DC Plan.

5.2.1.5 POLICY OBJECTIVE
ESM.1	Define a vision of the future grid and characterize the stages of grid
modernization
Action: Create a vision of the District’s future electricity system as a major component of the
District’s energy delivery system. Use this vision to define the capabilities and characteristics the
grid will require, and characterize the transition required to achieve this vision.
Relevance: As outlined in section 5.2.1.3, modernizing the electricity system requires a phased
transition through three stages to a loosely-defined future state. To guide their efforts in a
strategic manner, the District must take steps to envision what this future electricity grid can
and should look like. To some extent, this process is already underway via the PSC’s FC1130.
However, it is important to include it here to emphasize its importance and to provide guidance
by drawing on the experiences of other jurisdictions and existing grid modernization literature.
Details: Planning and implementation work done by Germany, New York State, California,
Hawaii, and other jurisdictions clearly indicates the significant value in modernizing the
electricity grid and moving toward a more flexible and dynamic decentralized electricity
system.302 As such, the District Government should move swiftly beyond the evaluation of
the potential value of a modernized grid and proceed to planning and implementation.
As a first step, the District Government should clearly establish, reiterate, and quantify the
District’s objectives for grid modernization as they relate to its 2032 GHG reduction, energy
use reduction, and renewable energy utilization targets, as well as the areas of efficiency,
resilience, reliability, security, flexibility, and interactivity. With these objectives clarified, the
District can begin to envision the future state of the electricity system, and its fit with other major
components of the District’s energy delivery system, and characterize the process to achieve it.
In developing a grid vision, the District Government should conduct stakeholder engagement
around the following questions:
• What functions must the future grid be capable of providing?
• What is the emerging vision of the distributed market structure? Are there multiple distinct
options?
• What are the roles of key actors in the future system (e.g., market actors, regulators, distribution
system operator, customers)?

302 e
 .g., Staff White Paper on Benefit-Cost Analysis in the Reforming Energy Vision Proceeding, Jul 1 2015, New York Department of Public Service,
http://www3.dps.ny.gov/W/PSCWeb.nsf/96f0fec0b45a3c6485257688006a701a/c12c0a18f55877e785257e6f005d533e/$FILE/Staff_BCA_Whitepaper_Final.pdf

168

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• What market, technology, demographic, and environmental trends and developments
are likely to influence the performance of the grid and how (e.g., increased DER adoption,
climate change impacts)?
• How can potential market power concerns be mitigated? 303
Similarly, the District Government must define the three transition stages of Grid Modernization,
DER Integration, and Distributed Markets (described in section 5.2.1.3) as they relate
specifically to the District’s electricity system.304 Guiding questions that can help clarify the grid
modernization process include the following:
• What is required to enable key actors to operate effectively in the envisioned market?
• How can customers and distributed energy suppliers be best empowered? How may the
current market structure inhibit empowerment?
• How does each envisioned phase translate to changes at the different scales of the electricity
grid: buildings, neighborhoods (feeders), the city, and outside the District?
• What may change about the interface between the distribution and transmission networks
(e.g., potential role of high voltage direct current transmission)?
Following the example of New York State, the District Government should consider defining a
small set of critical path features to provide clarity on the general processes the District must
pursue. These features will assist the District in its evaluation of the current state of infrastructure,
utility models, and regulatory structures (see related actions in section 5.2.2.2). As the grid vision
continues to evolve and specific actions become clearer through additional research, analysis,
and piloting, a set of critical path features will also help the District Government to identify no
regrets actions for the design of near-term efforts (see section 5.2.2.3). Examples from New York
State include:
• Increasing the DER asset base.
• Building market and customer confidence in the expanded role of DER.
• Removing key barriers to DER adoption.
• Gaining experience and capabilities to support the implementation of the modernized
electricity system platform and distributed markets.
To guide the definition of both a grid vision and the specific transition stages, the District
Government should consider applying principles that have been developed to guide other
jurisdictions. Such principles set a tone for the overall grid modernization process and can
improve stakeholder confidence in their ability to engage in it. Examples include the four
principles found in the More Than Smart initiative based in California as well as the five principles
proposed to guide New York’s Reforming the Energy Vision proceedings.305,306 These include
principles focused on collaboration, transparency, standardization, action-orientation, planning
processes, roles, open access, flexibility, and scenario-based planning. However, as nearly all
electricity is generated outside the District’s borders, the District will need to define a set of
principles most appropriate to its context.

303 A
 dapted from Developing the REV Market in New York: Department of Public Service Staff Straw Proposal on Track One Issues, Aug 22 2015,
http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7bCA26764A-09C8-46BF-9CF6-F5215F63EF62%7d
304 U.S. Energy Information Administration, District of Columbia Electricity Profile 2014, Table 1: 2014 Summary Statistics,
http://www.eia.gov/electricity/state/districtofcolumbia/
305 More Than Smart: A Framework to Make the Distribution Grid More Open, Efficient and Resilient (pp3-4,11), 2014, Greentech Leadership Group,
http://morethansmart.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/More-Than-Smart-Report-by-GTLG-and-Caltech-08.11.14.pdf
306 Developing the REV Market in New York: Department of Public Service Staff Straw Proposal on Track One Issues, Aug 22 2015,
http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7bCA26764A-09C8-46BF-9CF6-F5215F63EF62%7d

ENERGY SUPPLY

169



Next Steps

1

Develop a District grid vision and characterize the expected transition stages by 2019.

2

Review and update the grid vision during the development of the next iteration of
Clean Energy DC, as needed.

ESM.2	Adopt a framework for valuing distributed energy resource costs and
benefits
Action: Develop or adapt an existing benefit-cost analysis framework for the consistent and
transparent evaluation of DER additions and updates to the grid.
Relevance: In moving toward a grid planning model that explicitly and increasingly focuses on
DER, governments and utilities will need to reevaluate their approach to investment decisions.
To ensure investments in infrastructure will provide value throughout their lifetime (i.e. decades
into the future), decision-makers need appropriate methods to comprehensively value the
private and societal costs and benefits of the existing distribution grid, grid enhancements, and
DER integration.
Details: A benefit-cost analytical framework should provide a consistent and transparent
approach to evaluating all potential DER and grid modernization investments. It must be
capable of accounting for the value of making progress toward each of the District’s grid
objectives (e.g., efficiency, flexibility, resilience) and focus on the short- and long-term
impacts of DER integration. Among other things, such a framework must also be capable of
accounting for:
• Current grid capabilities.
• Opportunities to defer or avoid infrastructure costs.
• Cross-dependencies between technologies.
• Anticipated capability needs of the future (Stage 3) grid.
• The equity impacts of costs and benefits.
• The locational value of DER, including a valuation of integrating DER in a specific location
on the distribution grid, and its ability to support real-time operational services, reduce peak
demand, and defer other infrastructure investments.307
In addition to accounting for the items above, the District’s framework should also account for
potential costs and benefits to LMI communities. Already, LMI communities are exempt from
paying electricity distribution costs, which account for approximately 25% of a residential utility
bill. As a more economically vulnerable population, LMIs should be explicitly considered when
developing the strategies, policies, and analytical frameworks that will guide DER integration
and expansion in the decades ahead.

307 De Martini and Kristov, 2015, Distributed Systems in a High Distributed Energy Resources Future: Planning, Market Design, Operation and Oversight

170

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Several examples of benefit-cost frameworks have been developed that can provide a
template for the District, including:
• Advanced Energy Economy Institute’s Benefit-Cost Analysis for Distributed Energy Resources308
• California’s proposed Locational Net Benefit Analysis 309
• The Distributed Energy Resource Avoided Cost Calculator (DERAC)310
• New York’s proposed Benefit-Cost Analysis (BCA) Framework 311
• EPRI’s The Integrated Grid Benefit-Cost Framework 312
• Analysis Group’s The Value of “DER” to “D” 313
Once this framework has been developed, the District Government should establish a clear
set of procedures to evaluate any DER proposed by the District Government, utilities, or other
energy supply system stakeholders. The benefit- cost framework should be used to inform the
design of policies, programs, and targeted outreach (e.g., the solar proliferation strategy in
Action CRE.5).
Next Steps

1

Collaborate with the PSC and stakeholders in 2018 to develop a framework through
which to evaluate DER.

2

Review and revise the framework as needed when updating the grid vision during the
development of the next iteration of Clean Energy DC.

308
309
310
311

2014, https://www.aee.net/aeei/resources/benefit-cost-analysis-der.html
2016, http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Efile/G000/M161/K474/161474143.PDF
2011, www.cpuc.ca.gov/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=9440
2015,
http://www3.dps.ny.gov/W/PSCWeb.nsf/96f0fec0b45a3c6485257688006a701a/c12c0a18f55877e785257e6f005d533e/$FILE/Staff_BCA_Whitepaper_Final.pdf
312 2015, http://www.epri.com/abstracts/Pages/ProductAbstract.aspx?ProductId=000000003002004878
313 2016, http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/uploadedFiles/CPUC_Public_Website/Content/About_Us/Organization/Divisions/Policy_and_Planning/Thought_Leaders_Events/
Tierney%20White%20Paper%20-%20Value%20of%20DER%20to%20D%20-%203-30-2016%20FINAL.pdf

ENERGY SUPPLY

171



ESM.3	Support the collaborative development of an integrated distribution plan
Action: Work with the PSC and Pepco to develop an integrated distribution plan designed to
strategically and cost-effectively support the modernization of the grid to its envisioned future
state. Integrate neighborhood-scale energy planning into broader real estate and economic
development planning processes.
Relevance: Electricity systems require significant investments to maintain reliable and efficient
energy delivery. As an example, Pepco is planning to invest about $1.5 billion into its distribution
infrastructure between 2016 and 2020.314 These are investments into infrastructure that will
last for decades into the future, and thus require careful planning and analysis to ensure that
investments will serve the District’s future needs. Without anticipating future integration with
DER, these costly investments are at risk of becoming stranded assets.
To ensure investments in the grid are designed to support and accommodate grid
modernization efforts, the District needs a formal planning process that accounts for high
levels of DER integration. Integrated distribution planning (IDP) explicitly accounts for DER to
help utilities and regulators make short- and medium-term investment decisions, understand
where to dedicate resources, and identify outstanding issues that need additional evaluation
or investigation. 315
In addition, as mentioned in the previous section (5.1) on Clean and Renewable Energy Supply,
a system that can manage DER, like a microgrid, may enhance the grid’s ability to integrate
a large number of solar PV systems, storage, and sophisticated demand-side management
assets, increasing the opportunity to realize the resiliency benefits of the these energy assets.
Therefore, a neighborhood-scale energy system should be considered and, if appropriate,
planned for in areas that are targeted for a large number of solar PV systems and storage, as
well as a large number of buildings with sophisticated demand-side management capabilities.
Details: Utilities traditionally engage in planning processes that focus on utility-owned
infrastructure and assets, and are driven by financial needs and reliability obligations. This type
of planning could be inadequate for a grid with a high penetration of DER.316 By contrast, IDP
involves the following:
• Explicit consideration of energy-efficiency and load-management programs, as well as
neighborhood-scale energy systems, as alternatives to typical solutions using traditional
generation resources.
• Consideration of environmental factors in addition to direct economic costs;
• Public participation.
• Analysis of the uncertainties and risks posed by different resource portfolios and by
external factors. 317
As noted by the District Government, stakeholder comments on the FC1130 proceedings
indicate that there may be an emerging consensus by a majority of stakeholders regarding the
importance of a more holistic approach to distribution system planning.318

314 F ormal Case 1139 – Application, Direct Testimony and Exhibits of Potomac Electric Power Company Witnesses Velazquez and McGowan
https://edocket.dcpsc.org/apis/pdf_files/fa35334c-b414-42f2-85ed-61aa094e2e7d.pdf
315 Integrated distribution planning (IDP) is also known as distributed resource planning (DRP).
316 Comment on the Scope of the Proceeding by the District of Columbia Government (p.3), Formal Case 1130, District of Columbia Public Service Commission.
317 Hirst and Goldman, 1991, Creating the Future: Integrated Resource Planning for Electric Utilities, Annu. Rev. Energy Environ (p. 91)
318 Supplementary Comment for the Third Information Session by the District of Columbia Government, Formal Case 1130, District of Columbia Public
Service Commission

172

CLEAN ENERGY DC



To succeed with IDP, the District Government needs a framework to guide the system planning
process. Two states have recognized the need for IDP through legislation—California and
Hawaii—while regulators and utilities are tackling IDP in other states.319,320 The District can
learn lessons from other jurisdictions, while recognizing regulatory differences. As such, the
District Government should work with the PSC, Pepco and other stakeholders to review the
experiences in other jurisdictions to identify concepts and frameworks that may be useful for the
District. To begin, the District can build on concepts outlined in grid modernization literature.321
Possible IDP processes include:
• Running multiple multi-decade DER adoption scenarios with probabilistic engineering
methods.
• Updating interconnection studies and procedures for DER based on revised planning methods
and to accommodate an expanded volume of requests.
• Conducting a hosting capacity study to determine the distribution grid’s ability to
accommodate DER.
• Assessing the locational net value of adding DERs to different parts of the grid (may be positive
or negative).
• Aligning transmission and distribution (T&D) planning and specifying the linkages between of
activities to the District’s demand forecasting and procurement proceedings.
• Identifying which capital projects are likely candidates for deferral or avoidance through the
procurement of DER alternatives.322
Unlike jurisdictions like New York, California, and Hawaii, the District imports nearly all of its
electricity. Therefore, the IDP process must also plan to increase the supply of renewable
energy procured from outside the District. Given their recent growth and rapidly declining costs,
the District should consider opportunities to procure more energy from utility-scale wind and
solar generation, while considering the impact to the grid.
An effective IDP process should be aligned with and informed by several other recommended
grid modernization actions, including the grid vision (ESM.1), DER benefit-cost framework
(ESM.2), hosting capacity study (ESM.6), and energy mapping (ESM.7). IDP should then inform
other recommended actions, including developing a list of no regrets actions (ESM.8), removing
legislative and regulatory barriers (ESM.5), and pursuing pilot and demonstration projects
(ESM.11). Actions identified in the District’s Climate Ready DC Plan should also be considered in
the development of the IDP process.

319 California Public Utility Code §769 and regulation: http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/PUC/energy/drp/.
320 Hawaii Grid Modernization Law HB1943: http://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2014/bills/HB1943_CD1_.htm.
321 e.g., De Martini and Kristov, 2015, Distributed Systems in a High Distributed Energy Resources Future: Planning, Market Design, Operation and Oversight; Electric
Power Research Institute, 2015, The Integrated Grid: Realizing the Full Value of Central and Distributed Energy Resources
322 Adapted from: De Martini and Kristov, 2015, Distributed Systems in a High Distributed Energy Resources Future: Planning, Market Design, Operation and Oversight; Developing the REV Market in New York: Department of Public Service Staff Straw Proposal on Track One Issues, Aug 22 2015,
http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7bCA26764A-09C8-46BF-9CF6-F5215F63EF62%7d.

ENERGY SUPPLY

173



Next Steps

1

After the development of the grid vision and DER benefit-cost framework (done
by 2019), collaborate with the PSC and Pepco to develop a new electricity system
planning framework based on IDP.

2

Continue to work with the PSC and Pepco to update the IDP with updates to the Plan.

3

Provide support and technical assistance to real estate developers and neighborhood
organizations, enabling them to begin analysis of neighborhood-scale energy options.

4

Conduct a District-wide screening analysis for neighborhoods or areas that could most
benefit from neighborhood-energy scale systems, and consider proposing zoning
overlay districts for those areas to develop such systems that could provide public
benefits.

ESM.4	Intervene in Public Service Commission proceedings related to
grid modernization
Action: Intervene and participate in PSC proceedings related to grid modernization to
ensure their coordination with other cases and filings that may affect or be affected by
modernization efforts.
Relevance: Grid modernization efforts currently underway in the District have been primarily
led by the PSC through FC1130 Investigation into Modernizing the Energy Delivery Structure for
Increased Sustainability.323 The PSC process invites input from and collaboration with relevant
stakeholders, and will continue to be a central actor in processes and decisions affecting grid
modernization through its proceedings on formal cases and filings.
Details: As noted above, the District Government is already actively engaged in FC1130 and
must remain engaged to ensure the District’s long-term needs and objectives are adequately
addressed. The specific formal case and filings relevant to the District’s interests will be
defined by the District’s grid vision (Action ESM.1) and integrated distribution plan (Action
ESM.3). Two recent examples in the District include FC1050 Investigation of Implementation of
Interconnection Standards in the District of Columbia and FC1114 Investigation of the policy,
economic, legal and technical issues and questions related to establishing a dynamic pricing
plan in the District of Columbia.324,325 FC1050 will likely have implications for streamlining DER
installations, while FC1114 may provide an opportunity to propose changes to rate structures
that encourage greater demand management and energy efficiency.
In an effort to ensure broad stakeholder collaboration, the District should encourage
attendance by trusted local organizations and tenant advocacy groups to ensure a wellrounded representation of tenant and property owners’ interests.

323 http://www.dcpsc.org/PSCDC/media/PDFFiles/HotTopics/cdavis_1012015_1549_1_DOEE.pdf
324 FC1050 Investigation of Implementation of Interconnection Standards in the District of Columbia, https://edocket.dcpsc.org/apis/pdf_files/4c73a3b7-b05f4aca-abaa-a9d67133e1d3.pdf
325 FC1114 Investigation of the policy, economic, legal and technical issues and questions related to establishing a dynamic pricing plan in the District of
Columbia, https://edocket.dcpsc.org/apis/pdf_files/1ae3f346-75ed-4830-b550-57508be68b07.pdf

174

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Continue to actively intervene in FC1130 and encourage participation by local
organizations and tenant advocacy groups.

2

Identify, monitor and intervene in other current and future PSC proceedings pertinent to
grid modernization efforts.

5.2.2.2 ANALYSIS OF THE ENERGY SYSTEM NEEDS AND CAPABILITIES
ESM.5	Outline a path to overcome legislative and regulatory barriers to
grid modernization
Action: Investigate grid modernization actions in other leading regions. Outline the path
he District will take to shift the current regulatory model to one capable of supporting a
grid with the characteristics necessary to achieve the District’s 2032 and 2050 climate and
energy targets.
Relevance: Like the grid itself, jurisdictions’ current legislative and regulatory frameworks were
designed to function in a centralized electricity generation model. Utilities, customers, and
other actors connected to the grid all make decisions that fit within the existing legislative
and regulatory framework. Where that framework is misaligned with grid modernization
needs, actors will make decisions that may run counter to those needed to support the grid
modernization process. As such, the District Government must update its legislative and
regulatory framework through multiple phases to properly guide actors’ decision-making,
as overall learning increases and the electricity system evolves through the modernization
stages (see section 5.2.1.3).
Details: As noted in section 5.2.1.3, the development of a grid vision and the definition of grid
modernization transition stages are both important actions to help the District Government
develop an understanding of future grid needs, and to clarify the technologies, utility business
models and incentives, and regulatory structures required to support them.
A next important step for the District Government will be to use this information to compare
existing legislative and regulatory frameworks to the anticipated needs of the future grid.
As with other actions in this section, looking to other jurisdictions further along in their grid
modernization process will help to clarify what future legislative and regulatory framework may
require. This process should be aligned with integrated distribution planning (Action ESM.3).
This process should result in two sets of legislative and regulatory changes: changes that can be
pursued right away; and those that will require additional time or information to implement, such
as additional analysis, pilot projects, or phased changes based on the scale of DER adoption
and market readiness. For example, the District Government can begin by assessing and
streamlining rules and procedures for interconnecting DER to the system, where barriers to DER
implementation can easily arise.326 Once identified, the District Government should implement
actions that support a movement into the next stage of the grid modernization process.
326 D
 e Martini and Kristov, 2015, Distributed Systems in a High Distributed Energy Resources Future: Planning, Market Design, Operation and Oversight

ENERGY SUPPLY

175



An example of changes that may require additional analysis is the set of rules governing
peer-to-peer energy transactions. These rules will be critical to move the electricity system to
the third stage of grid modernization, and can provide significant opportunities to improve grid
efficiency and reduce incidences of wasted energy in the medium-term. Realizing the benefits
of these reforms will also require the concurrent development of a fair and efficient market with
associated regulatory oversight, and will therefore require careful investigation and strategic
planning to be executed successfully.
Next Steps

1

Following the development of the grid vision (done by 2019), develop an inventory of
legislation and regulation that may affect grid modernization.

2

Identify legislation and regulations that present barriers to the District’s progression
through the stages of grid modernization, and collaborate with the PSC (and other
agencies as necessary) to revise them.

ESM.6	Conduct a hosting capacity study of the District’s distribution grid
Action: Conduct or commission a hosting capacity study to determine the level of DER
integration that can be accommodated on different parts of the distribution grid without
impacting the current grid infrastructure’s ability to deliver high quality and reliable electricity.
Relevance: Different sections of the District’s existing grid will be able to accommodate
different levels of DER, and will consequently require different types of upgrade and investment.
This detailed information on the grid’s capacity will be necessary for the District to effectively
move forward with grid modernization efforts and ultimately achieve its 2032 targets.
Details: Hosting capacity refers to the capacity of any given portion of the distribution system
to accommodate additional DER given existing and already-planned facilities.327 A hosting
capacity study of the District’s distribution grid will provide critical information for integrated
distribution planning (Action ESM.3), as well as any locational value assessments. In particular,
study results will help the District identify and compare different opportunities to increase the
capacity of existing feeder lines, either through targeted building energy use reduction actions,
or the use of new DER technologies (e.g., smart inverters).
Study results will also help the District to prioritize grid modernization actions by identifying
no regrets actions (Action ESM.8) and opportunities for pilot and demonstration projects
(Action ESM.11). The results of a hosting study could also provide valuable information for the
development of the solar proliferation strategy (Action CRE.5).
As grid modernization efforts proceed and evolve, hosting capacity studies triggered by certain
thresholds of DER adoption can be conducted on a regular basis.

327 Electric Power Research Institute, 2015, The Integrated Grid: A Benefit-Cost Framework

176

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Support Pepco to conduct a hosting capacity study in 2018, for completion in 2019.

ESM.7

Develop a location-based profile of energy use and GHG emissions

Action: Conduct a geospatial analysis of energy consumption, energy demand, PJM’s
locational marginal price, and GHG intensity based on grid location. Once complete, evaluate
the usefulness of the tool and its potential improvements, and work to integrate it in regular,
iterative analyses of the District’s energy supply system.
Relevance: While the hosting capacity study recommended above reveals information on
energy supply, an energy mapping exercise provides insights into energy demand. This provides
valuable information on the current demand on the electricity system, and overall energy
delivery system, as well as the potential future demand of a District more heavily reliant on
electricity. This exercise supports both grid modernization efforts, as well as actions that target
energy use and GHG emissions reductions directly.
Details: The District’s existing building energy benchmarking data and advanced metering
infrastructure provide a foundation upon which an energy map can be developed. Such a map
can provide a geographic picture of energy consumption, energy price, energy demand, and
GHG emissions in the District, providing valuable information for integrated distribution planning
activities (see Action ESM.3), including decisions about peak demand reduction opportunities
and infrastructure investments and deferrals. While the map may initially depend on both real
data and simulations, accuracy will be improved with the use of real data and as such should
be prioritized.
As with London’s Heat Map, the primary purpose of this mapping exercise is to support the
identification of neighborhoods where DER can be deployed to provide robust benefit to the
distribution system.328 As the prevalence of DER increases, the energy map can be overlaid with
the hosting capacity analysis (Action ESM.6). With this combined data, the District can simulate
rates of DER adoption at the neighborhood scale to help identify priority targets for different
types of investment, as well as potential candidate areas for pilot projects (see Action ESM.11).
In developing this energy map, the District Government should account for all types of
energy – both electricity and other, fossil fuel based energy sources. Developing a geospatial
understanding of natural gas demand (and building thermal demand in general) will assist
in the identification of neighborhoods where thermal energy demand is high and where
a neighborhood energy system may consequently be supported (see Action CRE.8). It will
additionally help to identify areas of high natural gas use and by extension, where electricity
growth can be anticipated as buildings shift from natural gas to electricity-based equipment for
their thermal needs.

328 London Heat Map, http://www.londonheatmap.org.uk/Content/HeatMap.aspx

ENERGY SUPPLY

177



Next Steps

1

Undertake an initial mapping analysis in 2018 to support energy use reductions and
DER increases.

2

Institute the mapping analysis as a regularly used tool through the implementation of the
Plan and progression of the grid modernization process.

5.2.2.3 IMMEDIATE “NO-REGRETS” ACTIONS
ESM.8	Generate, evaluate, and prioritize a list of actions that the can be
taken immediately
Action: Identify the infrastructural, organizational, operational, financial, regulatory, and
technological features and components that appear to be absolutely necessary for realizing
the grid vision. Prioritize these actions for immediate and short-term implementation.
Relevance: While the specific characteristics of a modernized grid will continue to emerge,
jurisdictions further along in the grid modernization process have indicated a set of key features
that are consistent across future scenarios. These characteristics should be the focal points for
immediate planning, action, and investment.
Details: The pace and scope of change required for grid modernization can be a decadelong process. However, both DER demand and the need for energy use and GHG reductions
increases and accelerates each year. To keep pace with these changes, the District must
begin to act immediately, even while planning its grid modernization process. “No-regrets”
actions represent key opportunities for the District Government to make swift progress toward
its 2032 targets.
A first step is to generate a list of the infrastructural, organizational, operational, financial,
regulatory, and technological features and components that appear to be consistent and
necessary to modernizing the grid. From this list, a subset of near-term no regrets actions that
can be taken immediately should be prioritized for investment. “No-regrets” actions are those
initiatives that both improve the state of a conventional energy delivery system or support the
shift to a modernized energy delivery system, and can help key stakeholders gain important
experience around key aspects of grid modernization.329 They may address aspects of grid
infrastructure, DER technologies, operational changes, regulatory structures, or any other
aspect of the energy delivery system.
Though the precise nature of these actions will depend on the District’s particular context,
analysts have identified a list of potential “no-regrets” actions:
• Advanced field telecommunications networks.
• Increased grid operational visibility.
• Fast and flexible bulk electric storage to balance power fluctuations and mismatches resulting
from non-dispatchable generation.
329 D
 eveloping the REV Market in New York: Department of Public Service Staff Straw Proposal on Track One Issues, Aug 22 2015,
http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7bCA26764A-09C8-46BF-9CF6-F5215F63EF62%7d

178

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• Aggregated advanced meter data at the feeder level to enhance energy services.
• Smart inverters that enable DER to provide voltage and frequency support and to
communicate with energy management systems.
• Tools that increase customer knowledge of their electricity use and how to better manage it.
• Building codes that facilitate the integration of DER with a focus on long-term grid capabilities
needed to achieve the grid vision (see Action 0).
• Tools to provide electronic sensing and automated data extraction.
• Adjustable electronics that allow dynamic control of grid power flows.
• Utility and regulatory procedures that expedite the evaluation and integration of DER.
• Legislation allowing third-party access to grid data, while considering grid security.330,331,332
The District Government should align this action with the development of integrated resource
plans (Action ESM.3) and utilize the newly developed benefit-cost framework for DER (Action
ESM.2).

Next Steps

1

After the development of the grid vision and the characterization of the District’s
grid modernization stages, conduct additional research on commonalities in grid
modernization activities across leading jurisdictions.

2

Generate a list of no regrets actions that the District Government can implement
immediately, including in collaboration with the PSC and Pepco.

330 M
 ore Than Smart: A Framework to Make the Distribution Grid More Open, Efficient and Resilient (pp3-4,11), 2014, Greentech Leadership Group,
http://morethansmart.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/More-Than-Smart-Report-by-GTLG-and-Caltech-08.11.14.pdf
331 Electric Power Research Institute, 2015, The Integrated Grid: Realizing the Full Value of Central and Distributed Energy Resources
332 Testimony of Dr. Jeffrey Taft, Chief Architect for Electric Grid Transformation, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory before the U.S. Senate Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources, March 17, 2015.

ENERGY SUPPLY

179



ESM.9

Leverage existing advanced metering infrastructure data

Action: Identify and pursue opportunities to utilize the data collected by advanced metering
infrastructure already installed across the District.
Relevance: In partnership with Pepco, the District Government undertook a Smart Grid Project
that included the deployment of advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) throughout the
District.333 Pepco has now exchanged over 99% (>296,000) of the District’s traditional meters
with smart meters.334 This deployment of AMI offers the District a strong foundation on which to
strategically modernize the grid, plan for DER deployment, and improve grid resilience.
Details: While the District is one of only a few jurisdictions in the U.S. with an extensive AMI
network, it has not yet begun to take advantage of the full functionality of this infrastructure.
For example, smart meters collect and transmit detailed real-time customer use, which can be
used by both customers and regulators to reduce peak demand. However, this data is not yet
available. Customers can get the data on a next-day basis via Green Button’s Connect My
Data Application Program Interface, but this historical interval data is not nearly as useful as
true real-time data. The AMI meters have the capability to transmit real time data to customers
via the ZigBee network; however, Pepco has not turned this function on.
By making this data available to the District and other potential stakeholders, a greater
understanding of energy use in different development contexts in the District can be achieved.
Interval meter data is useful to the District, consumers, Demand-Side Management program
operators, and potential microgrid providers. It can support the District and its stakeholders in
achieving energy use reductions, peak load reductions, GHG reductions, DER installations, and
the overall grid modernizing process.
Next Steps

1

Work with Pepco and the PSC to develop a timeline to realize the full potential of AMI in
the District.

2

If needed, develop one or more pilot programs to test the potential of improved access
to information before taking this initiative further.

333
334

Pepco-District of Columbia: Smart Grid Project, https://www.smartgrid.gov/files/Pepco-District-Columbia-Smart-Grid-Project-2015.pdf
DC PSC Electric Grid Upgrades, https://dcpsc.org/Newsroom/HotTopics/Grid-Modernization/Realizing-The-Full-Potential-of-Advanced-Metering.aspx

180

CLEAN ENERGY DC



ESM.10	Identify near-term projects that should be coordinated with grid
modernization activities
Action: Develop an inventory of large-scale development projects and government regulatory
procedures scheduled to occur within the next five years that may affect or be affected by
grid modernization. Take steps to align grid modernization efforts with these actions.
Relevance: The District Government and its stakeholders are implementing many actions
beyond grid modernization, some of which may offer mutually beneficial opportunities through
project alignment. Coordinating grid modernization efforts with such actions can lower costs,
accelerate the grid modernization process, and ultimately support the District achieve its 2032
climate and energy targets.
Details: Actions planned or currently underway offer opportunities to share upfront investment
costs, reduce transaction costs (e.g., labor and management), accelerate implementation,
and support pilot projects. The most obvious examples are larger-scale infrastructure and
construction projects. However, aligning with less tangible actions such as building and energy
code updates (see Action NC.1) or ongoing regulatory procedures (Action ESM.4) will also
help to ensure that District Government actions will cost-effectively and reliably support a
modernized grid.
As such, the District Government should develop an inventory of relevant projects and
proceedings that are either currently ongoing or expected to occur over the next five years,
and seek opportunities for alignment. This process should be repeated as grid modernization
efforts continue to ensure that staff members focused on grid modernization are made aware
of any new projects and proceedings.
This action should also be aligned with the actions presented in the Climate Ready DC Plan,
which will require significant upgrades to critical infrastructure (e.g., electricity substations,
hospitals).
Next Steps

1

In 2018, assemble an inventory of ongoing projects that may affect or be affected by
grid modernization and institute a regular process whereby such projects can
be identified.

ENERGY SUPPLY

181



5.2.2.4 PROOF OF CONCEPT PROJECTS
ESM.11	Pursue pilot projects related to key modernization capabilities
and technologies
Action: Identify and prioritize key capabilities and technologies that are critical to successful
grid modernization but that would benefit from learning generated through a real-world test
application. Develop and implement plans to undertake pilot projects, with an objective to
start in LMI communities.
Relevance: As outlined in section 5.2.1.3, grid modernization requires a phased transition
through three stages to a future state that is currently only loosely defined. To clarify that future
state, pilot projects can be used to test and evaluate grid modernization actions with uncertain
impacts to better understand both their impact and value.
Details: Grid modernization requires coordinated long-term action supported by multiple
stakeholders. The inherent uncertainty of the outcome of such a broad process can be
reduced using research or analysis (as in several of the actions discussed above), or by
conducting and evaluating real-world tests. An example of such program is California’s
Demand Response Auction Mechanism (DRAM) pilot program, initiated in 2015. The purpose of
the DRAM program is to establish demand response as a market-based and highly responsive
electricity resource. Through DRAM, California is working to establish a market-based auction,
auction protocols, a standard contract, evaluation criteria, and non-binding cost estimates.
In doing so, California will encourage third-parties to bid demand response resources into
wholesale markets, similar to how generators bid into markets, by making the process easier,
more consistent, and less risky. 335
Other examples of pilot projects can be found in Australia, which will place select
neighborhoods on microgrids powered entirely by solar and storage.336,337 These kinds of projects
are important tests of the viability of a zero GHG grid model, while providing valuable lessons
for the utilities and regulators involved. Applied in the District, such pilot projects can help the
District Government to understand the potential value of certain technologies (e.g., energy
storage) and grid configurations (e.g., microgrids), as well as key modernization concepts. They
help to clarify both the modernization process, as well as the final end state.
Pilot projects on a range of technologies and grid modernization concepts should be
considered, including:
• Aggregated solar plus battery storage microgrids
• Demand side management as virtual power plant
• Automated distribution communication and sensing
• Conservation voltage regulation
• Smart inverters
• Fault location and isolation and service restoration
• Microgrids for critical infrastructure
335 C
 alifornia Public Utilities Commission, 2015 Annual Report, http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/uploadedFiles/CPUC_Public_Website/Content/About_Us/Annual_
Reports/2015%20CPUC%20Performance%20and%20Accountability%20Annual%20Report_v004.pdf
336 Utility to take part of Melbourne suburb off-grid with solar + storage, Apr 18 2016, Reneweconomy,
http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/utility-to-take-part-of-melbourne-suburb-off-grid-with-solar-storage-94822
337 South Australia Launches Largest Trial Of Rooftop Solar & Energy Storage, May 19 2016, CleanTechnica
http://cleantechnica.com/2016/05/19/south-australia-launches-biggest-trial-rooftop-solar-energy-storage/

182

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• Zero GHG emergency or backup generation
• Batteries and other energy storage and backup generation as peak shaving resources
• Peer-to-peer energy transaction models
The District should pursue such pilot projects in coordination with stakeholders where
appropriate, and ensure the broad communication and dissemination of lessons learned.
Furthermore, the District should seek opportunities for pilot projects in LMI communities.
Successful pilot projects are likely to yield benefits including improved efficiency and greater
resilience to system outages. Improved efficiency would help reduce energy costs for LMI
communities that can already have difficulty paying energy costs, and are more likely to
be at risk in the case of, for example, a prolonged outage, so would benefit from the
increased resilience.
A pilot project opportunity in the short-term already exists at Mt. Vernon Square, where Pepco
has identified a need to install a new $298.4 million substation as early as 2020 to address
anticipated network overloads and to serve an increased load associated with new mixedused developments.338 In lieu of the investment in the substation, the District could work with
Pepco to design and implement a pilot project focused on demonstrating the ability of
demand management-focused DER to defer traditional grid infrastructure investments. Such a
project draws on the experiences of California-based Pacific Gas & Electric, which estimated
that a $192 million investment into transmission improvements could be avoided due to the
growth in DER, energy efficiency, and demand response.339 Applying this principle in the District
would demonstrate the potential of grid modernization to both avoid future investment costs
and reduce GHG emissions.
Next Steps

1

Pursue the development of a pilot project at Mt. Vernon Square.

2

Using the results of other grid modernization actions, identify and pursue pilot projects
that will help the District and its stakeholders understand the process and potential
outcome of grid modernization.

338 S upplementary Comment for the Third Information Session by the District of Columbia Government, Formal Case 1130, District of Columbia Public
Service Commission
339 Californians Just Saved $192 Million Thanks to Efficiency and Rooftop Solar, May 31 2016, Greentech Media,
http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Californians-Just-Saved-192-Million-Thanks-to-Efficiency-and-Rooftop-Solar

ENERGY SUPPLY

183



ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION ROADMAP

ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
ESM.1 Define a vision of the future
grid and characterize the stages of
grid modernization
ESM.2 Adopt a framework for
valuing distributed energy resource
costs and benefits
ESM.3 Support the collaborative
development of an integrated
distribution plan
ESM.4 Intervene in Public Service
Commission proceedings related
to grid modernization
ESM.5 Outline a path to overcome
legislative and regulatory barriers
to grid modernization
ESM.6 Conduct a hosting capacity
study of the District’s distribution
grid
ESM.7 Develop a location-based
profile of energy use and GHG
emissions

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation
Policy or Regulation Implementation

184

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2024

5.2.3



ENERGY SYSTEM MODERNIZATION
ESM.8 Generate, evaluate, and
prioritize a list of actions that the
can be taken immediately
ESM.9 Leverage existing advanced
metering infrastructure data
ESM.10 Identify near-term projects
that should be coordinated with
grid modernization activities
ESM.11 Pursue pilot projects related
to key modernization capabilities
and technologies

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

ENERGY SUPPLY

185

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK



186

CLEAN ENERGY DC



TRANSPORTATION

vi

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

TRANSPORTATION

187



188

CLEAN ENERGY DC



6 TRANSPORTATION
This chapter outlines the actions necessary to reduce the greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions that result from the District’s passenger vehicles.
It does not include actions to shift the District’s mode share (e.g.,
from driving to cycling), nor does it refer to actions to reduce GHG
emissions from fleet vehicles. This omission is deliberate and intended to
ensure that the chapter does not duplicate other research, planning,
and policy efforts, including the District’s Multimodal Long-Range
Transportation Plan moveDC and the Sustainable DC Plan. The moveDC
Plan provides long- and short-term recommendations to achieve several
transportation-related objectives, including the installation of public
electric vehicle chargers.340
The actions recommended below align with those in the Sustainable
DC Plan, the moveDC Plan, and other District plans, particularly those
focused on achieving the 2032 mode share target established in the
Sustainable DC Plan: 50% of commuter trips from public transit, 25% from
biking and walking, and 25% by car or taxi.341 The impact of the actions
described below have been calculated based on the assumption that
the District will achieve this mode share target, thus contributing to the
total emissions reductions needed to achieve the 2032 target. Based on
the model, achieving the mode share target would be one of the most
effective ways for the District to reduce GHG emissions by 2032. The set
of transportation-focused actions is summarized in a roadmap at the
end of the chapter.
As the District Government begins prioritizing the recommended
actions, designing the specific policies and programs, and developing
implementation plans in collaboration with stakeholders, it should align
Clean Energy DC with ongoing and existing work, and augment it with
other transportation actions that emerge.

340 moveDC, http://www.wemovedc.org
341 Sustainable DC Plan, p.12

TRANSPORTATION

189



190

CLEAN ENERGY DC



6.1

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION

6.1.1

REDUCING GHG EMISSIONS FROM TRANSPORTATION

Transportation sector emissions are significantly lower in the District than those that originate
from the built environment. This is a result of the District’s high density land use and abundance
of transit options. Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per capita have decreased considerably
between 2000 and 2010, in part attributable to a decrease in the number of District residents
who travel by private vehicle from 49.4% to 40.7%.342 During this same period, gasoline and
diesel used in vehicles made up only 12% of the District’s energy use, with use steadily declining
as federal standards improved vehicle fuel efficiencies and transit ridership increased, due
in part to high gasoline prices.343 However, vehicles produce approximately 21% of the
District’s annual GHG emissions, making the transportation sector an important target in its
efforts to achieve the District’s target of carbon neutrality by 2050.344 This section focuses on
recommended actions designed to shift the existing passenger vehicle stock (e.g., cars and
trucks owned by individuals) from one dependent on fossil fuels, to one made up entirely of
low-carbon and eventually zero-emission passenger vehicles.

6.1.1.1

THE NEED FOR ZERO EMISSION VEHICLES

While increases in fuel efficiency and shifts to transit and other lower emission transportation
options will continue to reduce transportation GHG emissions, passenger vehicles still form a
substantial part of personal mobility. Research has indicated that achieving carbon neutrality
by 2050 will require passenger vehicle fleets to consist entirely, or nearly entirely of vehicles
that emit no GHG emissions.345 As vehicles typically remain in use for an average of 11.5 years
or longer, shifting passenger vehicle fleets to new no-carbon technology will require a longerterm process.346 Furthermore, zero-emission alternatives are just beginning to emerge for heavy
freight uses (e.g., airline, rail, etc.). This means that if the transportation sector is to support the
District becoming carbon neutral by 2050, future work will require an additional focus on
heavy freight.
Zero emission vehicles are defined as those that emit zero pollutants (GHG or otherwise) during
their operation, including emissions that result from fuel production. Zero emission vehicles can
be powered by a range of energy sources such as electricity, hydrogen, or ethanol; however,
electric vehicles have enjoyed the most success in terms of market uptake and adoption.347
Compared to hydrogen vehicles, electric vehicles are more advanced in their technological
development, come in a wider variety of models, and can be charged at home and work,
making them more attractive and less reliant on public charging or refueling infrastructure.
Low- and zero-carbon electricity production is also more established and cheaper than
hydrogen production, and has an established transmission and distribution network.

342 T his does not include people who commute from outside the District. moveDC – Multimodal Long-Range Transportation Plan, 2014, p.5. Note, however, that the
VMT calculations in the Clean Energy DC model includes VMT for all vehicles driven in the District, regardless of origin or destination.
343 2014 Comprehensive Energy Plan for the District of Columbia (unreleased), pp.4, 24.
344 2011 District of Columbia Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory,
http://doee.DC.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/GHGinventory-1205-.pdf.
345 E.g., Williams et al. (2012). The technology path to deep greenhouse gas emissions cuts by 2050: the pivotal role of electricity. Science, 335(6064), 53–9; Kyle, P.,
Kim, S.H., 2011. Long-term implications of alternative light-duty vehicle technologies for global greenhouse gas emissions and primary energy demands. Energy
Policy 39, 3012–3024. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.03.016; National Research Council, 2013. Transitions to Alternative Vehicles and Fuels. The National Academies
Press, Washington, DC; California Air Resources Board, 2009, Attachment B - 2050 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Analysis: Staff Modeling in Support of the Zero
Emission Vehicle Regulation.
346 Average Age of Light Vehicles in the U.S. Rises Slightly in 2015 to 11.5 years, IHS Reports,
http://press.ihs.com/press-release/automotive/average-age-light-vehicles-us-rises-slightly-2015-115-years-ihs-reports
347 International Energy Agency, 2016, Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2016,
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/TrackingCleanEnergyProgress2016.pdf

TRANSPORTATION

191



Meanwhile, zero-emission ethanol vehicles depend on the development of cost-effective
cellulosic ethanol production—which has thus far proved elusive—and a stable supply of
feedstock, which has been controversial in the United States due to perceived competition with
food production. Thus, while hydrogen and ethanol vehicles may have a long-term role to play
in a low- or zero-carbon passenger vehicle future, they are a lower priority for local and state
governments than electric vehicles.
Recommendations in this section therefore focus on policies and programs that can support a
transition to electric vehicles (EV). These include battery electric vehicles powered entirely by
electricity from the grid, as well as plug-in hybrid electric vehicles powered by electricity from
the grid and supplemented by a gasoline or diesel engine to provide a longer driving range.
In some states, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles are considered a transitional vehicle on the
pathway to a 100% zero-emission passenger vehicle fleet.348
To increase EV adoption, the District Government must remove or overcome barriers that
limit consumer interest and willingness to purchase them. These barriers are rooted in both
technological characteristics and consumer preferences that have made EVs more expensive
and less attractive than conventional vehicles. In addition to higher prices, consumers also
have concerns over EV range, availability of public charging infrastructure, risks associated
with a new technology, adequate choice in available models and categories, and overall
reliability.349 Some of these barriers can be addressed directly by the District Government;
for example, through the provision of charging infrastructure. Others depend on action by
automakers, such as the continued expansion of EV driving range, or senior governments,
which can introduce policies that increase EV supply and model availability.
In addition, vehicles operated by independent ride-hailing drivers and managed by
transportation network companies (TNCs) represent a significant subgroup of private vehicles
transitioning to EVs in the near future. TNCs have signaled their intentions to transition their
independent driver networks to driverless fleets as soon as possible, expressed through
their autonomous vehicle (AV) research and development partnerships with vehicle
manufacturers.350,351,352 TNC services have been linked to decreases in public transit ridership, a
mode shift with higher emissions impacts, as ridehailing services require more VMT and vehicle
space on the road to serve the same numbers of passengers.353 However, in the future, AV
partnerships between TNCs and vehicle manufacturers have the potential to shift the private
automobile market from an ownership model to a shared or subscription-based model.354 The
District Government has already adopted policy allowing for the operation of AVs on public
roads.355 As AV technologies advance, the District Government can foster benefits by enacting
policies supportive of a shared ownership model. As shown in 8, the potential for systemic
efficiencies is greater with the shared use of mobility assets.

348 California Air Resources Board, 2009.
349 Sierzchula, W., Bakker, S., Maat, K., van Wee, B., 2014. The influence of financial incentives and other socio-economic factors on electric vehicle adoption.
Energy Policy 68, 183–194. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.01.043
350 Isaac, Mike, “Uber Strikes Deal With Volvo to Bring Self-Driving Cars to Its Network,” The New York Times, November 20, 2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/20/technology/uber-deal-volvo-self-driving-cars-.html.
351 Kokalitcheva, Kia, “GM and Lyft Will Test Self-Driving Taxis Within the Next Year,” Fortune, May 5, 2016. http://fortune.com/2016/05/05/lyft-gm-self-driving-pilot/
352 Isaac, Mike, “Lyft Adds Ford to Its List of Self-Driving Car Partners,” The New York Times, September 27, 2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/27/technology/lyft-ford-self-driving-cars.html
353 Clewlow, Regina R., and Gouri Shankar Mishra. “Disruptive Transportation: The Adoption, Utilization, and Impacts of Ride-Hailing in the United States.” University
of California, Davis, Research Report UCD-ITS-RR-17-07. http://usa.streetsblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2017/10/2017_UCD-ITS-RR-17-07.pdf
354 Higgins, Tim, “The End of Car Ownership,” The Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2017. https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-end-of-car-ownership-1498011001
355 Code of the District of Columbia. Chapter 23A. Autonomous Vehicles. https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/titles/50/chapters/23A/

192

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Benefit

Individual Ownership

Shared Ownership

Traffic safety

Yes

Yes

Time for productivity or leisure

Yes

Yes

Expanded mobility for those unable to drive

Possibly

Possibly

Fluidity of traffic flow

Possibly

Enhanced

Reduced emissions

Possibly

Enhanced

Reduced vehicle congestion

Possibly

Enhanced

Increased availability of land

Possibly

Enhanced

↑↑ Table 7. Shared Ownership of Autonomous Vehicles Can Lead to the Most Benefits 356
Aside from shared-ownership EVs, public transit bus fleets represent unique opportunities with
respect to zero emission vehicles. They represent both a significant portion of the District’s
emissions output and are directly controlled by public agencies. As of 2015, 20% of the District
metro region is commuting by transit.357 In that same year, WMATA and DDOT bus operations
accounted for approximately 160,000 metric tons of the GHG emissions (carbon dioxide
equivalent).358 In 2017, both WMATA and DDOT welcomed all-electric buses into their fleets for
the first time. This is a significant milestone, but the cost for an average 40-foot low-floor allelectric bus is still at least 60-70% higher than the comparable diesel bus, making conversion to
a zero emission fleet a challenging endeavor.

6.1.1.2

THE DISTRICT’S PASSENGER VEHICLE MARKET CONTEXT

Like all jurisdictions, the scale of EV adoption in the District depends significantly on the extent
to which automakers produce and sell affordable EVs that are attractive to most consumers.
However, the District has some unique characteristics that will require novel approaches to
increasing EVs. From a geographical perspective, the District covers a small, dense land area
that makes public transit, cycling, and walking more accessible and attractive to citizens. As
a result, 37% of households do not own a vehicle—a number that is approximately twice the
national average.359 However, the District’s geography and economy also bring approximately
400,000 commuters into the District every workday (equivalent to 60% of the District’s
population), with the majority reliant on personal vehicles.360,361 Furthermore, the District contains
no new vehicle dealerships, except for a Tesla store, meaning purchase incentives currently
have limited value. The District’s geography and land use patterns make this number unlikely
to change. 362

356 F ields, David, and Terra Curtis, “Driverless Vehicles and Your Community,” APA Planning, December, 2016.
http://nelsonnygaard.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Planning-AV-2016.pdf
357 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Metro Sustainability 2017.”
https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/sustainability/upload/2017-Annual-Sustainability-Report.pdf
358 It is important to evaluate this gross sum of emissions within the context of the respective service levels provided by WMATA and DDOT. While a heavy-duty
diesel transit bus produces more emissions per mile than the average private motor vehicle, transit has the capacity to move more people per vehicle mile
and with less area of public right-of-way per passenger trip than the average private motor vehicle.
359 National Capitol Region Transportation Planning Board (NCRTPB)
360 Commuter figures from NCRTPB.
361 Personal vehicle reliance information from 2014 Comprehensive Energy Plan for the District of Columbia (unreleased), p.180.
362 Discussion with DOEE staff, March 18, 2016.

TRANSPORTATION

193



As such, the District is highly dependent on actions taken by neighboring states (Maryland and
Virginia), and is tasked with identifying novel approaches to convince both District residents
and commuters to choose EVs rather than conventional petroleum-fueled vehicles. As a
member of the Transportation & Climate Initiative of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic States,
and a member jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, the District
Government has two valuable forums in which to coordinate actions and approaches with
neighboring states. 363,364

6.1.1.3

CURRENT DISTRICT GOVERNMENT ACTIONS

Several actions have already been taken. As of 2015, the District had more policies and
programs supporting EVs than any other city outside California (tied with Portland).365 However,
the District has a lower-than-average EV market share when compared to the other 24 most
populous cities in the U.S (0.75% of new vehicles registered in the District in 2014).366 Current
actions include:
• An exemption for vehicle title fees (available to any vehicle with a fuel economy over
40 mpg). 367
• A tax incentive to convert petroleum-fueled vehicles to electricity (and other qualifying
alternative fuels).368
• Exemptions from high occupancy vehicle lane restrictions and any time-of-day and day-ofweek driving restrictions.369
• Tax incentives for residential and public charging infrastructure. 370
In 2012, GTM Research ranked the District the tenth most “EV-ready” city in the country,
with approximately 4.7 public charging stations for every 100,000 residents.371 Furthermore,
EV charger incentives are available until December 31, 2026—indicative of the District’s
commitment to facilitating a long-term shift to EVs.
The District Government is also at the forefront of actions regulating the operation of AVs on
local public roads. An early adopter of AV policies in 2012, it is now joined by 21 states who
have enacted AV legislation since 2011.372 The District Government has taken the following
actions related to AVs and a shared ownership model:
• The Autonomous Vehicle Act of 2012 officially permitted the operation of AVs on public roads,
provided that the vehicles, among other requirements, can comply with local traffic and
motor vehicle laws, as well as traffic control devices.373

363 T ransportation & Climate Initiative - Northeast Electric Vehicle Network in Action,
http://www.transportationandclimate.org/northeast-electric-vehicle-network-action
364 Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, Electric Vehicle Planning Initiative – Documents,
http://www.mwcog.org/committee/committee/documents.asp?COMMITTEE_ID=272
365 L utsey, N., Searle, S., Chambliss, S., Bandivadekar, A., 2015, Assessment of leading electric vehicle promotion activities in United States cities.
Washington DC, USA.
366 Lutsey, 2015, ICCT White Paper – Transition to a Global Zero-Emission Vehicle Fleet: A Collaborative Agenda for Governments; Jin et al., Oct 2014, ICCT White
Paper – Evaluation of State-Level U.S. Electric Vehicle Incentives.
367 DMV (2016) Green Driver State Incentives in Washington DC, https://www.dmv.org/washington-dc/green-driver-state-incentives.php
368 Up to a maximum of $19,000. Applies to other qualified alternative fuels as well. National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015, State Efforts Promote Hybrid
and Electric Vehicles, http://www.ncsl.org/research/energy/state-electric-vehicle-incentives-state-chart.aspx
369 DMV (2016) Green Driver State Incentives in Washington DC
370 GoElectricDrive Incentive Locator – District of Columbia, https://www.goelectricdrive.org/you-buy/incentives
371 GTM Research, 2012, Top 10 EV-Ready Cities, http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Top-10-EV-Ready-Cities
372 N
 ational Conference of State Legislatures, “Autonomous Vehicles | Self-Driving Vehicles Enacted Legislation,” October 23, 2017.
http://www.ncsl.org/research/transportation/autonomous-vehicles-self-driving-vehicles-enacted-legislation.aspx
373 S lone, Sean, “State Laws on Autonomous Vehicles,” The Council of State Governments, September 15, 2016.
http://knowledgecenter.csg.org/kc/content/state-laws-autonomous-vehicles#11

194

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• The District joined the Bloomberg Philanthropies and Aspen Institute Global Initiative on
Autonomous Vehicles, selected as one of the first ten cities worldwide to join a multi-city cohort
group leading the way on autonomous technology preparedness.374
• The District Government convened an interagency working group to prepare DC for the
opportunities and challenges posed by the introduction of autonomous vehicle technology.
• The District partnered with Starship Technologies to pilot food delivery robots on sidewalks in a
pilot area in central DC, the first US-based delivery bot pilot program for this technology.375
• In 2016, the District Government approved changes to its zoning code to provide exemptions
to minimum parking requirements in select locations.376,377
• In October 2017, DDOT launched its “nightlife parking demonstration,” on Connecticut
Avenue, between Rhode Island and Dupont Circle; a yearlong pilot program converting 60
on-street parking spaces to designated pick-up/drop-off zones for use by transit, taxis, and
TNCs, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays.378,379
In addition, transit service providers in the District have taken steps to reduce their vehicles’
emissions footprints. WMATA and DDOT have already taken up the following actions to improve
the emissions footprint of their transit services:
• Both agencies operate bus fleets featuring a mix of propulsion technologies, beyond
traditional diesel propulsion, including clean diesel buses, hybrid diesel-electric buses,
compressed natural gas buses, and full electric buses.380
• In 2017, both WMATA and DDOT debuted their first all-electric transit fleet vehicles.
• DDOT adopted its sustainability plan in 2010, defining eight priority areas to implement mores
sustainable practices in its operations.381
• WMATA adopted its Sustainability Initiative in 2014, setting 10 performance targets to pursue
and achieve by 2025.382 This initiative has influenced new sustainable capital procurements,
improved efficiencies in service and maintenance operations, and its progress is documented
in WMATA’s annual sustainability report. 383
• One of WMATA’s sustainability targets is to reduce GHG emissions per vehicle mile by 50% by
2025.
It should be noted that actions recommended below target a critical aspect of reducing
vehicle GHG emissions—transitioning from petroleum-fueled vehicles to zero-emission vehicles—
but do not cover the range of actions required to reduce both GHG emissions and energy use
374 B
 loomberg Philanthropies,“Five More Cities Join Bloomberg Philanthropies And The Aspen Institute’s Global Initiative On Autonomous Vehicles,” January 9,
2017. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/five-more-cities-join-bloomberg-philanthropies-and-the-aspen-institutes-global-initiative-on-autonomousvehicles-300387730.html
375 Mayes, Liz Ellis, “DC will be the first US city to pilot food delivery bots,” Technical.ly DC, January 6, 2017.
https://technical.ly/dc/2017/01/06/food-delivery-bots-starship/
376 Office of Zoning, “Zoning Handbook: Vehicle Parking,” District of Columbia, accessed November 21, 2017.
http://handbook.dcoz.dc.gov/zoning-rules/general-rules/parking/vehicle-parking/
377 64 DCR 6110 (June 30, 2017). https://dcregs.dc.gov/Common/DCMR/RuleDetail.aspx?RuleId=21298
378 Owens, Terry, and Michelle Phipps-Evans, “DDOT to Launch a Nightlife Parking Demonstration,” District Department of Transportation, October 3, 2017.
https:// ddot.dc.gov/release/ddot-launch-nightlife-parking-demonstration
379 Schneider, Benjamin, “D.C. Gives Uber and Lyft a Better Spot in Nightlife,” CityLab, October 25, 2017. https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2017/10/a-dcneighborhood-rethinks-parking/543870/.
380 Clean diesel buses are diesel-powered buses outfitted with emission-reducing components, such as diesel particulate filters and select catalytic reduction
systems. The EPA has a list of verified clean diesel technologies that can help a diesel engine meet the EPA’s clean diesel standards. Sources: (1) Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, “Clean Diesel Bus Fleets,” August 5, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/policy/hst/hi5/cleandiesel/index.html. (2) U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, “Verified Technologies List for Clean Diesel,” updated May 22, 2017.
https://www.epa.gov/verified-diesel-tech/verified-technologies-list-clean-diesel
381 District Department of Transportation, “Sustainability Plan,” October 2010.
https://ddot.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddot/publication/attachments/final_ddot_sustainability_plan_07-October-2010.pdf
382 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Sustainability Initiative,” accessed November 21, 2017.
https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/sustainability/sustainability-initiative.cfm
383 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Metro Sustainability 2017.”
https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/sustainability/upload/2017-Annual-Sustainability-Report.pdf

TRANSPORTATION

195



from vehicles. To significantly reduce GHG emissions from passenger vehicles, the District must
also decarbonize the electricity the District consumes. Indeed, the very concept of EVs as
zero-emission transportation mode assumes and requires a decarbonized electricity grid.
Actions focused on this objective are included in the Plan’s Clean and Renewable Energy
Supply section.

6.1.2

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

6.1.2.1

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS

EV.1

Adopt an EV-ready building code

Action: Update the DC Construction Codes to require buildings to install EV charging
equipment and/or the ability to install future EV charging equipment.
Relevance: More than 80% of EV charging occurs at home or work. To achieve the level of EV
adoption necessary to achieve the District’s long-term GHG reductions, property owners will
need to equip many more residential and commercial parking spaces with charging stations.
Both the perceived and actual availability of chargers are critical to increasing consumer
comfort with EVs, and thus the willingness to purchase one. While the installation of charging
infrastructure can be costly, work in other jurisdictions indicates that it is significantly more costeffective to install EV charging stations if the electrical infrastructure is already in place.384 As
such, ensuring building parking and electrical systems are designed to accommodate future
EV charging stations will improve the overall cost-effectiveness of achieving the District’s GHG
reduction target.
The District currently offers financial incentives for EV charging station installations, but does not
require charging stations or associated electrical infrastructure to be installed.385 The District’s
Green Construction Code requires that new buildings and substantial building alterations install
a minimum number of sustainable building requirements from a set of options. One option is the
installation of one electric vehicle charging station (or the equivalent electrical infrastructure
suitable for a future installation of electric vehicle charging stations) for every 30 parking
spots. The DC Green Construction Code applies to construction in residential and commercial
buildings greater than three stories and 10,000 square feet. Thus far, however, it appears only
one development has elected to install an EV charger or the required electrical infrastructure.386
Details: At least three other cities have adopted building codes with EV requirements. Los
Angeles requires that all residential buildings be equipped with either an EV charging outlet
or the infrastructure necessary to install an outlet in the future.387 The code requires all one-totwo family residential buildings to provide at least one EV charger-ready space, while all other
residential buildings and high-rise commercial buildings must ensure that 5% of parking stalls are
EV charger-ready. Similarly, San Francisco’s building code requires all new structures to be wired
for EV charging stations, while Vancouver (Canada) requires a minimum of 20% of parking stalls
in multi-family residential buildings to include a receptacle for EV charging.388,389 The City of
384 C
 alifornia Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014, Electric Vehicle Ready Homes: Report on Electric Vehicle Readiness Study,
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/codes/calgreen/ev_readiness_report_complete.pdf.
385 Residential stations are eligible for a $1,000 tax credit and public charging stations are eligible for a $10,000 tax credit (up to 50% of purchase and
installation cost).
386 Conversation with DOEE Staff on Feb 10, 2016.
387 U.S. Department of Energy Alternative Fuels Data Center, 2014, Los Angeles Sets the Stage for Plug-In Electric Vehicles, http://www.afDC.energy.gov/case/1002
388 San Francisco requirements from Lutsey, N., Searle, S., Chambliss, S., Bandivadekar, A., 2015.
389 City of Vancouver, 2012, Electric vehicle charging requirements, http://vancouver.ca/home-property-development/electric-vehicle-charging-requirements.aspx

196

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Vancouver also requires developers to ensure that electrical rooms in these buildings provide
sufficient space to contain the equipment necessary to provide EV chargers to 100% of stalls in
the future.
The experience of these and other jurisdictions indicates that it is particularly difficult to get
EV charging infrastructure installed at multi-family residential buildings.390 As noted above,
it is also more expensive to install chargers once the building has been constructed. Given
that buildings stand for several decades, it is important for the District to take steps now to
prepare for the transportation needs of the future. As such, the following recommendations are
suggested:
• Update the building code to require single-family, multi-family, and commercial buildings to
install a minimum number of EV charging stations and/or provide the electrical infrastructure
(e.g., conduits, outlets) necessary for the installation of future charging stations.
• To gain value from the visibility of charging stations, ensure that the code requires EV charging
stations and not only the infrastructure for future stations. Apply these rules to major retrofits to
parking areas as well.
• Ensure building systems can accommodate EV future charging infrastructure across the entire
parking lot.
• This requirement should be enforced by the DCRA Green Building Division.This will simplify
compliance and reduce the risk of redundancy or conflicts with other parts of the DC
Construction Codes and laws.
In designing EV building code requirements, the District may need to consider the electrical
grid’s ability to absorb large EV loads. For example, an analysis of California’s electrical system
showed that its grid could reliably handle 240 volt/40 amp charging stations, but that it could
become overloaded with 240 volt/80 amp stations.391 The District’s grid should be evaluated in
a similar way, particularly during future code reviews as the grid is upgraded, EV market share
expands, and EV charging technology evolves. This action should also be coordinated with the
adoption of an EV-ready parking lot requirement (Action EV.2) to ensure that requirements are
mutually reinforcing and cover both building-sited and standalone parking lots. Of course, the
cost impact of EV charging infrastructure and cost-reduction strategies should be considered in
implementing this action.

390 California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014
391 Herron, D., 2014, California soon to require all new housing to be “EV Capable”, with conduit for electric vehicle charging infrastructure, http://bit.ly/1TBRFP0

TRANSPORTATION

197



Next Steps

1

During the next code cycle update, add a requirement for EV charging stations
and EV-ready infrastructure in new and renovated buildings. Develop the code
requirements with an understanding of the scale of EVs required in the future for the
District to achieve its GHG targets.

2

Review the requirement during each code cycle and update it to steadily increase
requirements, account for EV adoption and the projected number of EVs necessary
to achieve the District’s GHG targets, and account for developments in EV charging
infrastructure technology.

3

Work with Pepco to continue to assess the ability of the electrical grid to absorb more
and higher power charging stations. This work should be conducted by DOEE staff
focused on EV infrastructure planning and Pepco, in coordination with the Construction
Codes Coordinating Board (CCCB) and DCRA’s Green Building Division.

EV.2

Adopt an EV-ready parking lot requirement

Action: Update DC Construction Codes and related regulations to require new and renovated
parking garages and parking lots to install EV chargers and/or the electrical infrastructure
necessary to install EV charging infrastructure in the future.
Relevance: While they are used less than residential and workplace chargers, publicly available
EV chargers (e.g., in parks and shopping centers) play a valuable role in facilitating a long-term
transition to EVs in that they help build consumer confidence that electric vehicles can meet
their travel needs. Parking lot charging stations increase consumer awareness of and comfort
with EV technology, which can help increase adoption.
Requiring parking lots to install EV chargers and/or infrastructure helps ensure publicly
accessible parking lots can add EV chargers in the future more easily and at a lower cost.
Further, conduit installation costs can be 95% lower if carried out during initial construction or
ongoing retrofit than as a standalone construction project.392 However, the District currently has
no requirements for publicly accessible parking lots to be EV-ready. Rather, publicly available
EV chargers have been installed voluntarily by businesses or in partnership with the District.
Details: Two precedents form a basis for this recommendation. First, New York City requires a
minimum of 20% of parking spaces in open lots and garages be embedded with the conduits
necessary to install EV charging stations in the future.393 This applies to both new construction
and lots undergoing upgrades, except for retail parking spaces. Similarly, California began a
process of updating its construction codes in May 2016, and is expected to require all parking
lots to have a minimum number of EV charger-ready spots.394 The precise number of spots
is contingent on the size of the parking lot, but covers approximately 6% to 12% of stalls. The
following recommendations draw on lessons from these examples:
392 p
 lugincars, 2013, New York Requires Garages and Lots to be Built EV-Ready,
http://www.plugincars.com/new-york-requires-lots-and-garages-be-built-ev-ready-129063.html
393 Ibid.
394 Final Express Terms for Proposed Building Standards of the California Building Standards Commission, 2015,
http://www.documents.dgs.ca.gov/bsc/2015TriCycle/Commission-Review/Jan-2016/BSC-04-15-FET-Pt11.pdf

198

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• Update the District’s Construction Codes to require that a minimum percentage of parking
stalls in all parking lots contain EV chargers, and is wired to add EV charging stations in the
future.
• Apply the new codes to all new parking lots and parking lots in the process of being
upgraded.
• In a future code cycle, incorporate a mandatory requirement for EV chargers to be installed in
new and renovated parking lots and parking garages,to increase awareness of and comfort
with EVs.
• Work with DDOT and other District and Federal agencies governing public space to ensure
that these requirements are also applied to District-owned parking lots and other relevant
public lots.
This action should be coordinated with the adoption of an EV-ready building code (Action
EV.1) to ensure the requirements are mutually reinforcing and cover both building-sited and
standalone parking lots. The ways in which this action may align with other recommendations
to pursue an EV-only car sharing fleet (Action EV.6) should also be considered.
Next Steps

1

During the next code cycle update, add a requirement for new and renovated parking
lots and garages to install a minimum percentage of EV-ready spots and EV charging
stations. As with the EV-ready building code above, develop these requirements with
an understanding of the scale of EVs required in the future for the District to achieve its
GHG targets, as well as the grid’s capacity to absorb new EV loads.

2

Review the requirements during each code review and update it to steadily increase
requirements, while accounting for EV adoption, the projected number of EVs necessary
to achieve the District’s GHG targets, and developments in EV charging infrastructure
technology. This work should be conducted by DOEE staff focused on EV infrastructure
planning and Pepco, in coordination with the Construction Codes Coordinating Board
(CCCB) and DCRA’s Green Building Division.

TRANSPORTATION

199



6.1.2.2 ELECTRIC VEHICLE ADOPTION
EV.3

Implement an EV bulk buy program

Action: Partner with one or more automakers to offer District residents an EV bulk buy program.
Relevance: As noted above, the District’s small size and high land values restrict the possibility
of any new vehicle dealerships.395 Rather, the District is dependent on what dealerships in
neighboring states offer. Furthermore, District residents cannot take advantage of those state
incentives if the vehicles are registered in the District. As such, drivers may be even less likely to
be interested in EVs than drivers in other regions. To overcome this barrier, the District must find
innovative ways to increase both the availability and attractiveness of EVs to local drivers.
An EV buy program offers a feasible near-term solution: in addition to generating a one-time
increase in the number of EVs on District roads, the program can increase the visibility of EVs,
thus potentially improving consumer awareness of and comfort with the vehicles.
Details: Boulder, Colorado (and nearby Adams County and Denver counties) implemented a
bulk buy program of both EVs and solar panels in 2015, to great success. Boulder collaborated
with Nissan North America and Boulder Nissan to offer the 2015 Nissan LEAF S with Quick Charge
Package for more than $8,000 below the retail price ($23,461 vs. $31,810), before state and
federal tax credits (which total $12,500).396 Nissan Boulder sold 150 vehicles in just two months (a
substantive increase over the monthly average of 15-20 sales), with an additional 300 customers
in the pipeline. Given the success of the program, Boulder is currently investigating a second EV
bulk buy program with Nissan and other automakers.397
Drawing on the results of this program, the District should take the following actions:
• As in Boulder, the District may wish to align the EV bulk buy program with EV chargers and
solar panels. If so, the District should align this bulk buy program with the recommendation to
implement a targeted solar proliferation strategy in the Plan’s Clean and Renewable Energy
Supply section.
• This program should also be used as an opportunity for the District to develop EV information
materials and introduce the vehicle purchase incentive recommended below. Importantly,
the program will need to be coordinated with the next recommendation (Install an EV
Showcase and Purchase Center) to ensure the two programs support rather than undermine
the cost-effectiveness of one another.
A well-orchestrated bulk buy program will require no government funding (other than staff
time), and will result in an increase in the number of EVs on the road and the overall presence
of EVs in the region. The program can be operated by the District or by another organization
that is found through a competitive bid RFP process. Consumers will also benefit from lower EV
pricing, while participating automakers can enjoy substantially lower acquisition fees, marketing
costs, transaction costs, and failed leads.398

395
396
397
398

Discussion with DOEE staff, March 18, 2016.
RMI Outlet, 2015.
Discussion with Boulder planning staff, February 29, 2016.
RMI Outlet, 2015, What Electric Vehicles Can Learn From the Solar Market,
https://rmi.org/electric-vehicles-can-learn-solar-market

200

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Assign DOEE staff to connect with Boulder to learn how that city designed and
managed its program. Determine which staff may be best suited to lead the initiative,
how the discount was arranged, and whether a minimum number of buyers would
need to be procured.

2

Within the next year, coordinate with one or more automakers to participate in
the program. Depending on the success of the program’s first round, repeat it with
additional automakers, as is currently being explored in Boulder.

3

To increase the value of District Government staff efforts on this action, consider
aligning either the first or second round of this program with the marketing involved in
the solar proliferation strategy.

EV.4

Establish an EV Showcase and Purchase Center

Action: Partner with automakers and local organizations to install an EV-only Showcase and
Purchase Center in the District.
Relevance: While the EV bulk buy program recommended above offers a short-term solution
to the low accessibility of EVs, an EV Showcase and Purchase Center offers a more permanent
and effective solution over the long-term.
The Center would offer prospective EV drivers access to a wide variety of EV models from
several automakers. It would allow residents to learn about and consider the prospect of
purchasing an EV over a longer period, potentially generating additional sales than would
be generated during a short-term bulk buy program. Finally, such a program will increase EV
adoption and improve consumer awareness of, comfort with, and interest in EV technology. It
also creates an opportunity to collect information about prospective EV buyers in the District
and set up opportunities to potentially contact them in the future, thus laying the groundwork
necessary for mass adoption of EVs in the future.
Details: This action will require the District to contract a qualified organization to set up and
manage an EV Showcase and Purchase Center to sell EVs and/or generate customers for
online purchases. Such a program would be unique to the District and suitable given its lack
of vehicle dealerships. It has flagship program potential that can demonstrate the District’s
leadership in facilitating a long-term transition to a zero-emission passenger vehicles and a low
carbon economy. Such a showroom would offer residents the opportunity to learn about, test
drive, and purchase EVs without leaving the District. The District could also claim that the only
new vehicles available for sale in the District are EVs.
Based on the above, the following actions should be taken:
• Design the showcase to maximize visibility and accessibility. The location should be
determined by balancing costs and the opportunity to maximize visitors, including commuters
from outside the District. The hours of operation should be set to be convenient for people to
visit, including evenings and weekends.

TRANSPORTATION

201



• Partner with as many automakers as are willing to offer their EVs for purchase through this
program and make models available for test drives. To reduce costs, test drive vehicles
could be kept at a separate location, such as a government parking lot. Test drives could be
scheduled with prospective drivers either over the phone, online, or in the showcase center.
• Share costs and other resources required to develop and run the center with participating
automakers.
• Develop information regarding what it is like to own an EV in the District, including benefits
(e.g., fuel savings, high occupancy vehicle lane access), financial incentives, the ability of
vehicles to meet daily driving needs, and the placement of public EV charging stations. These
materials could also be designed to address misperceptions and misunderstandings about EV
ownership that may be limiting purchases.
Under this program, automakers would be responsible for providing clear and easy-tounderstand marketing materials. These materials must be customized to provide prospective
buyers the opportunity to easily understand both basic and detailed information about the
vehicles, with a focus on the types of information that consumers typically have access to at
dealerships. Rather than provide a staff member, automakers should provide a phone number
that prospective buyers can call to ask questions about specific vehicles. Customers can
then have more direct contact with the automakers through the test-drive program, whereby a
representative of the automaker can be scheduled to join prospective purchasers on a
test drive.
The program should also be coordinated with the implementation of an EV bulk buy program
to ensure that the two programs support rather than undermine one another. It should also be
coordinated with a financial purchase incentive adopted by the District (see below) and the
development of any information and marketing materials.
Next Steps

1

Within the next year, assign DOEE staff with the support of other key internal District
Government stakeholders to outline a public-private partnership proposal that the
District can take to all automakers offering EVs, and release a request for proposal for
the development and management of the center.

2

Outline the overall programming of the initiative and potential roles and contributions of
each party.

3

202

By year two, implement the showcase program alongside the financial purchase
incentive recommended below. The program will likely require coordination between
staff involved in EV policy and programming alongside District Government staff that
run marketing campaigns and events.

CLEAN ENERGY DC



EV.5

Provide an electric vehicle purchase incentive

Action: Adopt a financial incentive for the purchase of EVs registered in the District.
Relevance: While they form an important part of EV adoption strategies in other regions, strong
vehicle purchase incentives have not been a part of the District’s EV adoption policies, again
due to the lack of new vehicle dealerships in the District.399 However, the District does exempt
vehicles with a fuel economy above 40 mpg (including EVs) from vehicle title fees (typically
6% to 8% of the vehicle price), and offers an income tax credit for vehicles converted from
petroleum to a qualified clean fuel (including electricity).400,401
In implementing an EV bulk buy program and installing an EV Showcase and Purchase Center,
the District may require a financial purchase incentive as a short-term tool to convince residents
to buy EVs over conventional petroleum-fueled vehicles.
Details: Purchase incentives that decrease the upfront cost of EVs are one of the most common
tools used by states to generate EV sales. The effect of these incentives on vehicle sales varies
between regions. For example, Colorado offers one of the highest state vehicle credits (up to
$6,000), but this has not translated into high EV adoption.402 Georgia, however, saw very high
EV sales while it had a tax credit in place, but sales collapsed when the credit was removed
midway through 2015.403 For a local comparison, Maryland offers an excise tax credit of up to
$3,000 and, like the District, less than 1% of new vehicles sold in the state are EVs.404 California
has the highest market share at around 3.5% in 2015.
Based on these programs, the District should take the following actions:
• Adopt a financial purchase incentive designed to prioritize vehicles that offer the largest GHG
reductions (e.g., full battery electric vehicles should receive a higher incentive than plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles with a gasoline engine to back up the battery).
• The size of the purchase incentive needed may depend on vehicle discounts the District
can arrange with automakers through both the EV adoption recommendations above, most
importantly the installation of an EV Showcase and Purchase center.
As part of this, the District should consider providing income-based EV subsidies to improve LMI
community access to sustainable transportation options.

399 Overview of EV strategies in other regions from Lutsey, N., Searle, S., Chambliss, S., Bandivadekar, A., 2015.
400 V
 ehicle title fee exemption from DMV (2016) Green Driver State Incentives in Washington DC,
http://www.dmv.org/washington-dc/green-driver-state-incentives.php
401 Income tax credit covers 50% of the conversion cost up to $19,000. National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015, State Efforts Promote Hybrid and Electric
Vehicles, http://www.ncsl.org/research/energy/state-electric-vehicle-incentives-state-chart.aspx
402 Lutsey, N., Searle, S., Chambliss, S., Bandivadekar, A., 2015.
403 Caputo, M., 2015, Georgia EV sales sputter without tax credit, http://www.marketplace.org/2016/01/08/world/georgia-ev-sales-sputter-without-tax-break
404 Lutsey, N., 2015, Transition to a Global Zero-Emission Vehicle Fleet: A Collaborative Agenda for Governments.

TRANSPORTATION

203



Next Steps

1

In developing an EV bulk buy program and/or EV Showcase and Purchase Center,
determine the level of discount the District can obtain from the automakers.

2

Review financial incentives in other jurisdictions and determine what level of financial
incentive may be required to achieve a high level of EV adoption, and how to structure
a potential income-based incentive for residents in LMI communities.

3

Adopt a financial purchase incentive at the level required to make the bulk buy
and Purchase Center actions viable and significantly increase vehicle adoption in
the District.

EV.6

Pursue an EV-only car sharing fleet

Action: Contract one or more car share operators to supply an EV-only car share fleet in
the District.
Relevance: The District is an excellent candidate for car sharing programs given its small
geographic size, high land use density, and high number of households that do not own
personal vehicles. These characteristics may also make it ideal for an all-electric car sharing
fleet. Car sharing of any kind helps the District decrease congestion, achieve mode share
objectives, and decrease GHGs and local air pollution. Implementing an EV-only car share
program will further decrease GHGs and local air pollution while helping increase awareness of
EVs as a passenger vehicle technology that is ready to meets individuals’ driving needs. Three
corporate and two peer-to-peer car sharing programs are already available in the District, but
none of these are fully electric.405
Details: The District can follow in the footsteps of the increasing number of international
cities offering EV-only car sharing fleets. Paris launched the first all EV car sharing program
with Autolib’ in 2011. The program now has 3,000 vehicles and more than 150,000 members,
prompting London to announce in 2015 that it, too, would offer a full EV car sharing fleet.406
In September 2015, Indianapolis began its own EV-only car sharing fleet with BlueIndy,
while Montreal issued a call for proposals to invite companies to provide a fully electric car
sharing fleet starting in 2016.407,408 Montreal’s existing car sharing programs welcomed the
announcement, including Car2Go, which already has fully electric fleets in Amsterdam,
San Diego, and Stuttgart. The call for proposals resulted in the launch of Montreal’s Téo Taxi, an
app-based ridehailing service offering all-electric vehicles with free Wi-Fi for the same cost as a
taxi.409 On the west coast of the continent, Los Angeles is piloting a car-sharing program in 2016
targeted to low-income residents, with plans for 80% of the vehicles to be EVs.410
405 ZipCar, Car2Go, and Enterprise CarShare, as well as Getaround and Relayrides.
406 Werber, C., 2015, The electric car-sharing service that swept through Paris is coming to London,
http://qz.com/428116/the-electric-car-sharing-service-that-swept-through-paris-is-coming-to-london/
407 Matlack, C., 2015, Paris Is Sharing Electric Cars by the Thousand. Will It Play in Indianapolis?,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-17/paris-is-sharing-electric-cars-by-the-thousand-will-it-play-in-indianapolis408 Madger, J., 2015, Montreal looks into setting up an electric-car sharing service,
http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/montreal-looking-into-setting-up-an-electric-car-sharing-service
409 http://teomtl.com/en/
410 Spector, J., 2015, L.A.’s Bold Plan to Bring Car-Share to the Poor, http://www.citylab.com/cityfixer/2015/07/las-bold-plan-to-bring-car-share-to-the-poor/400031/

204

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Key to the success of this program is the availability of public charging infrastructure and the
ability to encourage enough membership.411,412 The District should learn from the experiences
of other cities, and then collaborate with the prospective car-share company (or companies)
to determine how to install an adequate amount of EV chargers and market the program to
residents. The District should additionally work to align the EV charger installation with efforts to
make EV chargers available to more people and increase the visibility of EVs to citizens. Finally,
given the proximity of the District to neighboring states and cities, as well as the high commuter
population, the District Government should seek opportunities to coordinate with these
governments and regional transit providers to develop an electric car share system that can
augment existing interregional transit options, thus making it attractive to more commuters.
Next Steps

1

In 2018, assign staff from DOEE and the District Department of
Transportation (DDOT) to connect with staff from the cities identified
above, as well as their EV car share providers, regarding their experience
with an EV-only car sharing fleet.

2

Engage with existing car share providers regarding the District’s intention
to establish a 100% electric car sharing fleet and gauge their interest in
participating. If an existing car share company is willing to provide an
electric fleet (steadily shifting to 100% electric), the next step may not
be necessary.

3

As needed, release a call for proposals for the provision of an EV-only car
share fleet in the District. As needed, consult with Pepco regarding the
ability of the electrical grid to handle additional loads. Aim to have an
EV-only fleet in operation by 2020.

411 Importance of public infrastructure from Madger, J., 2015.
412 Importance of encouraging adequate membership from Werber, C., 2015.

TRANSPORTATION

205



6.1.2.3 SHIFTING TO ZERO EMISSION TRANSIT VEHICLES
EV.7	Set target for reducing transit bus emissions 65% per vehicle mile by
2032
Action: Enact legislation requiring a 65% reduction in transit bus fleet GHG emissions per vehicle
mile from a 2013 baseline by 2032.
Relevance: As part of its Sustainability Initiative, WMATA adopted a sustainability performance
target of achieving a 50% reduction in GHG emissions per vehicle mile from a 2013 baseline
by 2025. With 53% of WMATA and 4% of DDOT vehicle miles served by electricity-powered
rail service, renewable energy from local electricity providers is key to achieving this goal. 413
However, buses serve 48% of combined annual vehicle miles traveled by both agencies. 414
Zero-emission buses, therefore, have a critical role to play in significantly reducing transit
emissions in DC. Transit agencies also have generally more control over the propulsion type of
their buses than the fuel stock of local electricity suppliers.
Stated goals such as this one, and that already expressed in WMATA’s Sustainability Initiative,
communicate to transit bus manufacturers what service providers will be seeking in future bus
procurements.415 As the nation’s capital, the impact of a GHG emissions target such as this
can also go further in setting the course for other cities and transit service providers across the
country.
Details: Figure 19 and Figure 20 display forecasts of five future scenarios of bus fleet energy
consumption and tailpipe GHG emissions at WMATA and DDOT through 2032.416 Scenario 1, a
baseline scenario, estimates transit bus energy consumption and emissions, based on current
vehicle procurement planning from both service providers.417,418 Scenarios 2, 3, 4, and 5 present
scenarios in which all new buses acquired through 2032 have one of four propulsion types:
• Scenario 1: Fleet as Currently Planned (baseline)
• Scenario 2: Clean Diesel
• Scenario 3: Diesel/Electric Hybrid
• Scenario 4: Compressed Natural Gas (CNG)
• Scenario 5: Electric
As shown in Figure 20, these scenarios demonstrate that electric buses have the greatest
potential for reducing transit bus fleet emissions; scenario 5 shows the depth of bus emissions
reductions known to be possible today, under current fleet purchasing practices. 419 In addition,
these scenarios show that a significant investment in electric buses is necessary to achieve this
65% emissions reduction target by 2032.
See Appendix A1.2.3.4. for forecasts of criteria air pollutants, based on these scenarios.

413 Federal Transit Administration, “2016 Service,” National Transit Database. https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/data-product/2016-service
414 Federal Transit Administration, “2016 Service,” National Transit Database. https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/data-product/2016-service
415 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Sustainability Initiative,” accessed November 21, 2017.
https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/sustainability/sustainability-initiative.cfm
416 The scenarios presented are based on the mode share forecast. Achieving the mode share target increases the differences between the scenarios.
417 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Customer Service, Operations and Security Committee, Action Item III-A, Adoption of Bus Fleet Plan,”
September 14, 2017. https://www.wmata.com/about/board/meetings/board-pdfs/upload/3A-Metrobus-Fleet-Plan-TO-POST.pdf
418 District Department of Transportation, “DC Circulator 2017 Transit Development Plan Draft,” September 2017.
http://www.dccirculator.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/DC-Circulator-2017-TDP-Update-101818.pdf
419 See Appendix A1.2.3.4. for a complete list of transit fleet bus emissions forecast assumptions.

206

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Annual Energy Consumption (billion kBTU)

1.8

Electric

1.6

Current Plans

1.4

Clean Diesel

1.2

Diesel Electric
hybrid

1.0

Natural Gas

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0.0

↑↑ Figure 19: Annual Energy Consumption Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
180,000

Electric

160,000

Current Plans
Clean Diesel

Annual GHG Emissions (tCO2e)

140,000

Diesel Electric
hybrid

120,000

Natural Gas

100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure 20: Annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses

TRANSPORTATION

207



Next Steps

1

In 2018, assign staff from DOEE and the District Department of Transportation (DDOT)
to connect with staff from the cities identified above, as well as their EV car share
providers, regarding their experience with an EV-only car sharing fleet.

2

Engage with existing car share providers regarding the District’s intention to establish a
100% electric car sharing fleet and gauge their interest in participating. If an existing car
share company is willing to provide an electric fleet (steadily shifting to 100% electric),
the next step may not be necessary.

3

As needed, release a call for proposals for the provision of an EV-only car share fleet in
the District. As needed, consult with Pepco regarding the ability of the electrical grid to
handle additional loads. Aim to have an EV-only fleet in operation by 2020.

EV.8	Pursue funding options to subsidize electric transit buses, and electric
charging infrastructure
Action: Identify funding options to subsidize the purchase of electric transit vehicles and electric
charging infrastructure.
Relevance: Starting prices for electric bus orders today are generally over $750,000, while diesel
buses can be in the range of $400,000-$450,000. In addition to the gap in vehicle purchase
price, transit service providers also need to acquire new vehicle charging infrastructure to
recharge vehicle batteries. This gap in costs makes the conversion to an all-electric fleet a
challenging endeavor for any transit agency, but peer service providers across the country
are pursuing it.420,421,422,423 Legislation setting emissions reduction requirements signal to bus
manufacturers what transit service providers will require in future bus purchase orders. The
dedication of financial resources demonstrates that service providers will not only have higher
future standards, but also will have funding to support advanced technologies.
Details: According to the emissions forecast in Figure 20 a significant percentage of both
WMATA and DDOT bus fleets will need to be electric buses to meet a target of a 65% reduction
in emissions per vehicle mile. Using this target as guidance, the District Government can
estimate funding need and work to align appropriate funding sources.

420 F ryer, Alex, “New report charts course to zero-emission, carbon-neutral King County Metro bus fleet,” King County, March 1, 2017.
http://kingcounty.gov/elected/executive/constantine/news/release/2017/March/01-metro-zero-emission.aspx
421 Scauzillo, Steve, “LA Metro commits to 100 percent electric buses by 2030,” San Gabriel Valley Tribune, August 30, 2017.
http://www.sgvtribune.com/2017/07/28/la-metro-commits-to-100-percent-electric-buses-by-2030/
422 Foothill Transit, “Foothill Transit Announces All Electric Bus Fleet by 2030,” May 24, 2016.
http://foothilltransit.org/foothill-transit-announces-all-electric-bus-fleet-by-2030/
423 Antelope Valley Transit Authority, “Electric Bus Fleet Conversion,” http://www.avta.com/index.aspx?page=482

208

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Next Steps

1

Explore funding sources, both short- and long-term, that can be used to subsidize the
procurement of electric buses and electric vehicle charging infrastructure by public
transit agencies serving the District.

2

By 2020, establish a long-term subsidy program for electric transit buses and electric
vehicle charging infrastructure

6.1.2.4	
ANTICIPATING ELECTRIC AUTONOMOUS RIDEHAILING VEHICLE
FUTURE
EV.9

Prepare for reduced parking demand near activity centers

Action:Prepare for reduced parking demand near activity centers in the District.
Relevance: Single-occupancy vehicle trips have the highest GHG emissions intensity per persontrip. They also come with the need for available space for car parking close to a person’s
origins and destinations. One of the most significant impacts AVs are poised to make on the
urban landscape is on the need for and spatial relationships with parking.
Since AVs do not need to park near the destination of their passengers, the requirement of
minimum car parking per individual property can become obsolete. Zoning requirements that
shift to prioritizing space for people over car storage can encourage people to travel in ways
that do involve car parking, such as public transit and active transportation, all of which have
lower emissions intensities per trip than private car travel.
Details: Parking minimums are generally set per land use zone to satisfy an estimated peak
demand for free parking.424 Removing and reducing these minimums enables developers
to anticipate and even build for a future when pick-up and drop-off zones are valued more
highly than parking spaces. In this way, properties can be built to make more space for active
use by people, instead of car storage. As the absence and reduction of parking minimums
allows developers to utilize existing parking capacity for more profitable uses by people, this
encourages people to travel within the District by means that have lower emissions intensities
per passenger trip.
Parking is often over-supplied currently in the District. The District Department of Transportation
(DDOT) and the Office of Planning (OP) led a research effort starting in February 2014
to understand how parking utilization in multi-family residential buildings is related to
neighborhood and building characteristics. According to the study, “on average, in the over
115 developments researched, only 60% of parking stalls are being used.” 425

424 Shoup, Donald C. “The Trouble With Minimum Parking Requirements,” Transportation Research, Part A 33 (1999): 549-574, http://shoup.bol.ucla.edu/Trouble.pdf
425 Park Right DC, District of Columbia, accessed January 24, 2018, http://parkrightdc.org/background.php

TRANSPORTATION

209



In 2016, the District Government amended its zoning code to provide exemptions to minimum
parking requirements in select locations.426,427 Expanding on this step can enable more property
owners and developers to shape the built environment in a way that can prioritize pick-up
and drop-off zones, over large vehicle storage facilities; this is conducive to fostering a sharedownership model for AVs.

Next Steps

1

Monitor development patterns in cities that have eliminated parking minimums.428,429,430

2

Support continuous updates and monitoring of parking supply data in the District.

3

Support zoning code revisions to expand the reduction of parking minimums in the
District to all activity centers.

4

Explore further opportunities to eliminate or reduce parking minimums as demand
shifts with market preferences, technology advancements, and the availability of
alternatives to car ownership.

EV.10	Provide financial incentives encouraging shared autonomous
vehicle travel
Action: Expand demand-based pricing for parking and high-demand corridors, District-wide.
Relevance: Parking pricing is a common tool for influencing travel behavior in high-demand
areas. Enabling travelers to internalize the true cost of driving in the District can lead them to
less emissions-intensive travel modes, such as carpooling, transit, and active transportation. As
AVs come to market as a new mode of travel, a combination of road and parking pricing can
incentivize shared AV use.
Details: A common and significant source of GHG emissions in urban communities like D.C. is
from drivers circling the vicinity of their destinations in search for parking. In December 2017,
the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Authority (SFMTA) found its pilot of demand-based
parking pricing to be so successful that its board moved to implement the pricing mechanism
citywide in January 2018. The pilot program, SFpark, demonstrated that demand-based
pricing of public parking resulted in decreased time spent and vehicle miles traveled by drivers
searching for available parking.431 An indirect result of the lessened VMT from circling for parking
is lowered GHG emissions. In DC, the Park Rite DC study found that price was found to have a
significant impact on parking utilization and parking supply.432
426

O
 ffice of Zoning, “Zoning Handbook: Vehicle Parking,” District of Columbia, accessed November 21, 2017.
http://handbook.dcoz.dc.gov/zoning-rules/general-rules/parking/vehicle-parking/
427 64 DCR 6110 (June 30, 2017). https://dcregs.dc.gov/Common/DCMR/RuleDetail.aspx?RuleId=21298
428 Strong Towns, “Progress on Removing Parking Minimums,” accessed November 21, 2017.
https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1fpQabG3XKyHH7YNlmQobUHjwuLI&hl=en&ll=39.032575230163985%2C-96.36995452128917&z=4
429 Poon, Linda, “Buffalo Becomes First City to Bid Minimum Parking Goodbye,” CityLab, January 9, 2017.
https://www.citylab.com/equity/2017/01/buffalo-is-first-to-remove-minimum-parking-requirements-citywide/512177/
430 Schmitt, Angie, “Hartford Eliminates Parking Minimums Citywide,” Streetsblog USA, December 13, 2017.
https://usa.streetsblog.org/2017/12/13/hartford-eliminates-parking-minimums-citywide/
431 Jose, Ben, “San Francisco Adopts Demand-Responsive Pricing Program to Make Parking Easier,” San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency, December 5,
2017. https://www.sfmta.com/blog/san-francisco-adopts-demand-responsive-pricing-program-make-parking-easier
432 http://parkrightdc.org/supply_price_opt.php

210

CLEAN ENERGY DC



DDOT is currently piloting ParkDC, the District’s own demand-based parking pricing system in
Penn Quarter and Chinatown.433 This pilot is intended to shape future deployment of demandbased parking pricing throughout the District.434 By expanding its demand-based parking
pricing system, the District Government can influence travel behavior, and also collect more
data on how people travel in DC. This data can play a key role in further developing policies
and infrastructure that foster a shared-ownership model of AVs, leading to further emissions
reductions from transportation.

Next Steps

1

Direct DDOT to expand ParkDC, the District’s demand-based parking pricing program,
for publicly owned and operated motor vehicle parking facilities District-wide by 2020.

2

Support DDOT in monitoring parking utilization in public parking facilities, and adjusting
parking pricing based on demand.

EV.11

Adjust approaches to managing curb space

Action: Amend right-of-way design standards pertaining to sidewalk and curb lane space.
Relevance: Autonomous vehicles have potential to significantly increase the movement
of people in travel lanes, which could in turn lead to higher emissions outputs from the
transportation sector, absent energy generation changes by power suppliers and vehicle
manufacturers. If the District Government encourages the use of AVs as shared mobility
resources, it can reduce the share of single-occupant vehicle trips, the most energy-intensive
mode of travel.
Careful management of curbside space can limit the potential for higher levels of emissions
and congestion, regardless of a vehicle’s energy source. A key part of managing right-ofway to reduce the share of single-occupant vehicle trips is using metrics that better reflect
this. Replacing measures of vehicle delay in the District Design and Engineering Manual with
measures of vehicle miles traveled, can better equip the District Government in assessing road
design changes to favor high-occupancy and active transportation trips.
Details: Streets behave differently throughout the day, with various activities being more and
less active at different hours. Delivery trucks occupy many loading zones near restaurants
and shops in early morning and late night hours, commuters build up road traffic during peak
commute hours, and pedestrian traffic bustles during lunch and evening hours as people eat,
drink, and socialize.
Right-of-way design standards that prioritize the use of curbside road space for vehicle parking
encourage single-occupancy vehicle trips by providing opportunities for cars to be stored in
space near a person’s destination. AVs present the opportunity to prioritize curbside space for
people walking and bicycling, and boarding or departing mass transit and shared-mobility
services, with less of a perceived impact on independent motorists.
433 D
 ey, Soumya, “ParkDC: Penn Quarter/Chinatown: Multimodal Value Pricing Pilot and Curbside Management, Program Overview” District Department of
Transportation, April 24, 2016.
https://ddot.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddot/page_content/attachments/E1_parkDC_publicpresentation_forDDOTwebsite_2016-04-24.pdf
434 District Department of Transportation, “Multimodal Value Pricing Pilot for Metered Curbside Parking – Penn Quarter/Chinatown,” accessed November 20, 2017.
https://ddot.dc.gov/page/multimodal-value-pricing-pilot-metered-curbside-parking-penn-quarterchinatown

TRANSPORTATION

211



In addition, this is an opportunity to amend transportation design metrics to better assess
desired behaviors. Replacing measures of road level of service (LOS) with measures of vehicle
miles traveled (VMT) can better reflect how future right-of-way changes impact singleoccupant vehicle travel, as well as emissions. .

Next Steps

1

Amend design standards for right-of-way space in the District Design and Engineering
Manual by 2020 to preference wider sidewalks, bicycle facilities, and transit lanes to
anticipate and encourage higher-occupancy vehicle travel.

2

Amend the District Design and Engineering Manual by 2020 to replace measures of LOS
with measures of VMT.

3

Phase in allocations of more curb space to passenger loading, rather than parking. On
roads with bike lanes or transit service, amend loading zone design standards to reduce
conflicts with active transportation and high-occupancy vehicles.

4

Ensure that local laws and plans pertaining to the operation of AVs and the safety of
people walking and bicycling necessitate AVs adhering to laws and plans protecting
people walking and bicycling in the public right-of-way.

5

Monitor curb space utilization by time and type of use to assess how it is currently used,
and where it can be re-assigned, priced, or regulated to encourage higher occupancy
motor vehicle travel, especially by AVs. Investigate creating EV-only waiting/pick-up/
drop-off areas.

6

Monitor current interactions between ride-hailing vehicles and people biking and
walking, to assess relative changes in right-of-way safety for people in a shared
autonomous future.

7

Monitor the outcomes of research by the National Academy of Science Transportation
Research Board on the impact of AVs on land use. 435

435 “
 Request for Proposals on Impact of Transformational Technologies on Land Use and T transportation,” National Academy of Sciences Transportation Research
Board, accessed January 24, 2018. https://apps.trb.org/cmsfeed/TRBNetProjectDisplay.asp?ProjectID=4364

212

CLEAN ENERGY DC



ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION ROADMAP

ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS AND ADOPTION
EV.1 Adopt an EV-ready building
code
EV.2 Adopt an EV-ready parking
lot requirement
EV.3 Implement an EV bulk
buy program
EV.4 Establish an EV Showcase
and Purchase Center
EV.5 Provide an electric vehicle
purchase incentive
EV.6 Pursue an EV-only car sharing
fleet
EV.7 Set target for reducing transit
bus emissions 65% per vehicle mile
by 2032
EV.8 Pursue funding options to
subsidize electric transit buses, and
electric charging infrastructure
EV.9 Prepare for reduced parking
demand near activity centers
EV.10 Provide financial incentives
encouraging shared autonomous
vehicle travel
EV.11 Adjust approaches to
managing curb space

Planning, Research, and Program
and Policy Development
Plan or Program Implementation

Pilot Project
Program Evaluation

Policy or Regulation Implementation

TRANSPORTATION

213

2032

2031

2030

2029

2028

2027

2026

2025

2023

PROJECTED PATH TO 2032
CLIMATE AND ENERGY TARGETS
2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

FIVE-YEAR OUTLOOK

2024

6.1.3



214

CLEAN ENERGY DC



APPENDIX

vii

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CLIMATE AND ENERGY ACTION PLAN

AN EQUITABLE TRANSFORMATION

215



216

CLEAN ENERGY DC



A1 MODEL OVERVIEW
AND ASSUMPTIONS
A1.1

MODEL PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW

The consultant team developed an Excel-based energy and GHG emissions model for the
Plan. The model accounts for all energy and GHG emissions in the District and focuses on
representing energy supply, buildings, and transportation. The consultant team used the
model to understand current energy and emissions, estimate future energy and emissions, and
quantify the potential impact potential actions would have on different sectors. The structure,
equations, and data inputs have been discussed with and vetted by DOEE staff.
The Plan is intended to inform the District on how it can achieve its climate and energy targets
(section 1.1). Given this purpose, the model was used to quantify actions in different ways. The
team quantified specific programs and policies where actions are more directly quantifiable,
such as the RPS and new construction codes. For actions that do not as easily lend themselves
to direct quantification, the team focused on determining the scale of action required to
achieve the District’s climate and energy targets. This was then used to help inform policy and
program development as well as collaboration with District Government representatives and
others. The team took this approach primarily where a more comprehensive suite of policies
and programs is required to achieve significant energy and emissions reductions, such as the
programs, policies, regulations, and incentives required to drive the market transformation
necessary to improve the performance of existing buildings. Some of these actions are not
readily quantifiable, but are critical to enabling the District’s success nonetheless. In this
way, the team used the model as an analysis and engagement tool to foster a common
understanding of what it will take the District to achieve its targets. The District Government has
been given a copy of the model and, going forward, can use it to evaluate whether the District
is on track to meet its targets. The methodology for calculating greenhouse gas emissions in this
document aligns with the District’s own regular GHG Inventories. Emissions are measured and
reported according to leading national and international greenhouse gas reporting protocols,
and follows guidance from ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability, C40 Cities Climate
Leadership, and the World Resources Institute.
The model is not intended to be a predictive tool and does not account for costs or externalities
other than GHG emissions. The intent of the Plan is to provide the District with a roadmap to
achieving its 2032 GHG reduction target, the most achievable and arguably most important
of its 2032 targets, while leading the District in the direction of achieving their energy use
reduction and renewable energy goals. The Plan provides this roadmap through a package
of policy and program recommendations, with additional information and recommendations
regarding the design and implementation of such actions based on available research and
experiences in other leading jurisdictions. The specific design and implementation of many of
these actions will take further analysis, including understanding the potential cost-effectiveness
and relative feasibility of program and policy approaches and designs. This analysis, design,
and implementation work (some of which is underway, see section 1.8) will be conducted in
coordination with District stakeholders, many of whom are identified in the Plan.

APPENDIX

217



A1.2

MODEL ASSUMPTIONS AND DATA SOURCES

The team used the model to project a business-as-usual (BAU) estimate for energy consumption
and GHG emissions based on assumed developments and activity in energy supply, buildings,
and transportation. The team then simulated actions in each of these areas to develop a set
of policy scenarios, resulting in a set of actions that reduce GHG emissions, reduce energy
consumption, and increase renewable energy, as presented in section 2.2.2. The sections
below summarize the assumptions behind the BAU projection and policy scenario.

A1.2.1 BUILDINGS
Energy and emissions in the building sector are based on square footages, energy use
intensities (EUI), and fuel mixes. The sector is split into a set of building types to align with how
buildings are categorized in District Government data sources, account for differences in
energy consumption characteristics, and allow users of the model to target specific actions to
different building types.

A1.2.1.1 BUSINESS-AS-USUAL ASSUMPTIONS
Building square footage changes as a result of changes in the building stock due to new
construction, demolitions, and building rehabs. Table A1 summarizes the square footages for
each building type in 2015, as well as growth assumptions for each modeled building type.
Building square footages were extracted from the District Government’s Office of Tax and
Revenue’s Computer Assisted Mass Appraisal Database (CAMA). Annual construction rates
are based on data maintained by the Office of Planning. New square footage growth rates
represent annual net growth in square footage in the District that results either from developing
on undeveloped sites or redeveloping sites with a net increase in square footage. These rates
are based on employment, household, and population projections for 2010 to 2045. Square
footage replacement rates represent new construction that results in new square footage
that replaces old square footage. This involves removing square footage associated with an
older building (from the existing building stock), typically with a poorer energy performance,
and replacing it with square footage at an energy performance based on latest building
code. These rates are based on the 2010 to 2045 projections referenced above, as well as the
breakdown of development types (e.g., new construction, demolition, renovation, and rehab)
tracked in the Office of Planning’s Development Activity Database (as of October 2015).
Building energy and emissions are driven by square footage, energy use intensities (EUI), fuel
mix, and fuel GHG intensities. Table A2 summarizes the estimated EUI and energy consumption
by fuel type for each building type in 2015. Site energy use was chosen because changes
in site energy use can most easily be affected by local policies and quantified in the model,
and because generation losses, transmission losses, and fugitive emissions are accounted
for through the GHG calculations (discussed in further detail below). Each building type’s
EUI was determined through a combined bottom-up top-down approach using multiple
data sources. The purpose of the approach is to calculate total energy consumption by fuel
type using square footage and EUIs (bottom-up) so that it matches estimated total energy
consumption for buildings in the District (top-down). Total energy consumption by fuel type was
sourced from 2013 data from Pepco via DOEE in January 2016. More recent accurate building
energy consumption data was not available at the time the model was populated. The team
determined EUIs first from 2014’s Private Building Benchmarking Dataset as cleaned by the

218

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Center for Urban Science and Progress at New York University.436 Where additional data was
needed to match the bottom-up and top-down figures, the team sourced data from nearby
states (preferably in the same climate zone as designated by the Commercial Buildings Energy
Consumption Survey), then from national sources as needed (primarily data from the 2012
Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey). Single-family residential energy data is not
included in these sources, so was sourced from data used for a previous iteration of the Plan.

Gross Square Footage
in 2015

Annual Construction Rates
New Gross Square
Footage Growth

Gross Square
Footage
Replacement

Residential

358,205,024

-

-

Single Family Dwellings and
Small Multifamily

186,532,207

0.20%

0.09%

Medium and Large Multifamily

171,672,817

1.05%

0.45%

Institutional and Government

151,582,127

-

-

Education and Other Institutional

31,620,942

0.78%

0.33%

Federal Government

81,398,472

0.00%

0.00%

Municipal Government

29,720,568

0.00%

0.00%

Embassy

8,842,145

0.00%

0.00%

Commercial and Industrial

249,205,839

-

-

Office

171,578,263

0.97%

0.42%

Hotel

23,543,628

0.78%

0.33%

Other Commercial and Industrial

47,463,319

0.78%

0.33%

Hospital and other Medical

6,620,629

0.78%

0.33%

Total

758,992,990

-

-

↑↑ T able A1. Summary of building stock square footage and growth and development assumptions
*Includes buildings designated under the District of Columbia Housing Authority.

436 Benchmarking and Data Quality Analysis of Energy Disclosure Data for Washington, DC, October 28, 2015.

APPENDIX

219



A1.2.1.2 BUILDING CODE ASSUMPTIONS
The model uses building codes to affect the energy performance of new and rehabilitated
buildings. Two sets of building codes are applied: one targeting single-family and small
multifamily buildings (residential buildings under 10,000 ft2) and another targeting commercial
and large multifamily buildings. Both codes are updated for 2018, 2020, and 2026. Current
codes are based on ASHRAE 2013 and no new construction includes fuel oil. For single-family
and small multifamily buildings, the impact of new codes is felt two years after code adoption
(e.g., code adopted in 2017 impacts energy use of new buildings in 2019). For commercial and
large multifamily buildings, the impact of new codes is felt three years after code adoption
(e.g., code adopted in 2017 impacts energy use of new buildings in 2020). Each code adoption
impacts building energy performance by reducing the EUI of the building type. The code
adoption cycle is summarized in Table A3.

220

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Site Energy Use Intensities (EUI) in
2015 (kBtu/ft2)

Estimated Site Energy
Consumption in 2015
(million kBtu)

Total

Total

Electricity Natural Gas Fuel Oil

24,352

7,866

14,955

1,530

Electricity

Natural Gas Fuel Oil

Residential
Single Family Dwellings
and Small Multifamily

51.4

9.50

36.0

5.9

9,588

1,772

6,715

1,101

Medium and Large
Multifamily
Institutional and
Government

86.0

35.5

48.0

2.5

14,764

6,094

8,240

429

16,289

9,742

6,467

80

Education and
Other Institutional

104.0

61.5

42.0

0.5

3,289

1,945

1,328

16

Federal Government

109.5

65.0

44.0

0.5

8,913

5,291

3,582

41

Municipal Government

104.5

65.0

39.0

0.5

3,106

1,932

1,159

15

Embassy

111.0

65.0

45.0

1.0

981

575

398

9

24,618

18,148

6,259

212

Commercial and
Industrial
Office

89.5

76.5

12.5

0.5

15,356

13,126

2,145

86

Hotel

105.5

59.0

46.0

0.5

2,484

1,389

1,083

12

Other Commercial
and Industrial

114.5

54.5

58.0

2.0

5,435

2,587

2,753

95

Hospital and other
Medical

203.0

158.0

42.0

3.0

1,344

1,046

278

20

1,262

700

562

0

Facilities Excluded from
Analyses*
DC Water

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

762

700

62

0

GSA Central Heating
Plant

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

500

n/a

500**

0

Total

66,521

36,456

28,243

1,822

Total Site Energy Use from DOEE

66,849

36,637

28,380

1,829

Total Missing Site Energy Use

325

181

137

7

Percent Missing Site Energy Use

0.5%

0.5%

0.5%

045%

↑↑ T able A2. Summary of building energy use
**These facilities are not included in policy simulations because the Plan assumes building actions do not affect their
performance.
**Natural gas use at the GSA Central Heating Plant includes only natural gas consumed in the process of generating
steam for Federal Government buildings, so as to avoid double counting GHG emissions captured by these buildings’
energy consumption.

APPENDIX

221



Adoption Year

Single-Family and Small Multifamily
Buildings

Current

Based on EUIs for 2012’s International Energy Conservation Code 437

2018

High-performance code update with EUIs 35-65% lower than the average
existing building, depending on building type 438

2020

Net-zero code adopted, the majority
of building energy is shifted to
electricity based on a breakdown of
fuel consumption by end use and the
relative energy efficiencies of HVAC,
DHW, and other technologies 439

2026

Commercial and Large Multifamily
Buildings

High-performance code update with
deeper EUI reductions that vary by
building type
Net-zero code adopted 440

↑↑ T able A3. Assumed code adoption cycle
**These facilities are not included in policy simulations because the Plan assumes building actions do not affect their
performance. **Natural gas use at the GSA Central Heating Plant includes only natural gas consumed in the process
of generating steam for Federal Government buildings, so as to avoid double counting GHG emissions captured by
these buildings’ energy consumption.

The high-performance code update for commercial and large multifamily buildings is assumed
to get new buildings approximately halfway between the EUI required under the 2018 code
update and the net-zero codes adopted in 2026. Buildings constructed under net-zero codes
are assumed to have EUIs that would allow the building to be supplied with on-site energy
(approximately 75-80% lower than average existing buildings in the District). However, the
specific EUI and fuel source requirements will vary by building type and size, as well as other
characteristics, and the EUIs used in the model should not be seen as a “net-zero level EUI” for
purposes beyond this broad modeling exercise. DOEE is able to update these assumptions as
net-zero energy codes are further researched and developed. Further, any renewable energy
associated with these buildings is assumed to be covered by the RPS local solar requirements,
so additional renewable energy is not added to the model. The model assumes code
compliance of 85% for all codes except the first three years of net-zero codes, which have
compliance rates of 70%, 75%, and 80%, respectively.441 Based on the structure of the model, an
85% code compliance rate means the District achieves 100% of the code’s energy and GHG
reduction potential from 85% of the affected building square footage, and no energy use or
GHG reduction from the remaining 15%. In reality, the 15% non-compliant buildings would very
likely still achieve some energy use and GHG reduction from partial code compliance. This
means the GHG reductions attributed to new construction may be slightly underestimated.

437 P
 acific Northwest National Laboratory, 2013, Energy and Energy Cost Savings Analysis of the IECC for Commercial Buildings
https://www.energycodes.gov/sites/default/files/documents/PNNL-22760.pdf
438 Informed by Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, December 2017, Energy Savings Analysis of the Proposed Revisions of the Washington, D.C. Non-Residential
Energy Code, as well as correspondence with DOEE staff on September 21, 2016.
439 Data sources for fuel switching calculations based on a compilation of data sources noted in the model, including from the Energy Information Administration’s
RECS 2009 and CBECS 2012 survey results and the Northeast Energy Efficiency Partnerships’ Northeast/Mid-Atlantic Air-Source Heat Pump Market Strategies
Report (2014) and associated air-source heat pump database (2017).
440 Ibid.
441 Recall, compliance targets are typically set at 90% because the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) legislation required states to develop
plans to achieve 90% compliance with the energy codes by 2017 in order to receive energy funding.

222

CLEAN ENERGY DC



A1.2.1.3 EXISTING BUILDING ASSUMPTIONS
The model uses ongoing programs offered by the DCSEU, retrofits, a building energy
performance standard (BEPS), and gut rehabs to reduce energy and emissions from existing
buildings. The DCSEU is assumed to achieve energy use reductions a bit higher than the Utility’s
minimum performance targets for energy use reduction, based on improving trends of annual
energy use reductions by the DCSEU.442 These reductions are assumed over the current five-year
contract between the District Government and the DCSEU, after which the model shifts towards
deeper retrofits, which would be implemented by the DCSEU alongside other organizations, like
the proposed Green Bank.
The retrofits assumed in the model are intended to provide the District a sense of the scale
of action required in the existing building sector to achieve their 2032 GHG reduction target,
while being realistic enough to achieve and sustain for over a decade. The scale of retrofits
assumed for private buildings is equivalent to achieving a 40% energy use reduction across
2% of the building stock each year from 2022 through 2032 (or a lower average energy use
reduction across a larger portion of existing buildings, etc.). The term retrofits in this regard is a
bit of a misnomer; in reality, the modeled retrofits will include a variety of building interventions
focused on reducing energy and/or emissions, ranging from lighting upgrades to full envelope
and HVAC system replacements. Put another way, the combined actions on existing buildings
requires the District to reduce energy use in buildings by approximately 0.75-1% of BAU building
energy per year (or higher if accounting for energy use reductions from previous years).
(It is important to note how the building assumptions in this Plan compare to the 2013 report
prepared for DOEE, Electric and Natural Gas Energy Efficiency and Demand Response Potential
for the District of Columbia. Readers of that study may note that the energy use reductions
deemed realistically achievable in this Plan are lower than those in the Potential study. This is
due to differences in the purpose and methodology of the two pieces of work. In short, the
purpose of the Potential study was to identify and characterize opportunities to improve energy
performance in building across the District using a methodology common among utilities
that estimates the technical, economic, and achievable potential for energy use reductions,
considering the full economic benefits of energy efficiency work to society. It was also based
on national and regional assumptions combined with a high-level understanding of the building
stock in 2013, prior to the systematic collection of building-level energy benchmarking data.
The primary purpose of Clean Energy DC is to provide the District with a full plan and phased
roadmap to achieve its overall energy and emissions targets, considering the overall state of
energy and emissions in the District, the District Government’s current set of plans, policies,
and programs alongside an understanding of their historical and current performance, and
the resources the District Government has to dedicate to the implementation of the Plan over
the next several years. As a result, the Clean Energy DC team’s existing building assumptions
focused more on overall program limitations, and the development of the Plan sought the
most realistic set of actions to achieve the District’s 2032 targets across buildings, transportation,
and energy supply. For the existing building assumptions in particular, this involved reviewing
existing and planned programs in other jurisdictions, checking assumptions with experts in
existing building energy performance programs, and engagement with knowledgeable District
Government staff and external stakeholders. The final result is that the Plan finds a path to
exceed the District’s GHG reduction target with lower building energy reductions that found
to be achievable in the Potential study. Neither study should be seen as in conflict with the
other. The Plan provides the District an overall roadmap to achieve the 2032 GHG target. The
Potential study, which provides more specific information on the energy reduction potential
of different in-building changes, will continue to be valuable to those designing, developing,
442 Breakdown of targets and projected performance provided by the DCSEU on December 1, 2017

APPENDIX

223



resourcing, and implementing existing building programs on-the-ground. It is the Clean Energy
DC team’s intent that the two separate pieces of work be used together as the District moves
forward.)
The model assumes the District Government implements a more aggressive retrofit program,
as summarized in Table A4. The program involves deeper energy use reductions sooner and
across a higher portion of the building stock. Again, the actual portion of square footage that
needs to be retrofitted will depend on the depth of the average energy use reduction (deeper
average reductions mean less of the building stock needs to be retrofitted and vice versa). The
retrofits are intended to improve performance, as well as provide leadership and demonstrate
building energy efficiency capabilities to the private sector (for deep energy retrofits and netzero codes). The model assumes the Federal Government retrofits 20% as much square footage
as the District Government at the same average energy use reduction. The model does not
assume that any embassy buildings are retrofitted.
Years

Annual Square Footage
Affected by Retrofits

Average Energy Use
Reduction

2021

1.50%

30%

2022

2.00%

30%

2023

2.50%

30%

2024

3.00%

30%

2026 and 2027

1.00%

80%

2028 through 2030

1.50%

80%

2031 through 2032

3.00%

80%

↑↑ T able A4. Retrofit assumptions for District Government buildings
Two other actions are captured in existing buildings that drive down energy consumption
and GHG emissions. First, the model includes a building energy performance standard (BEPS).
BEPS covers all buildings required to comply with the District’s benchmarking requirements
and requires the worst performing buildings (for each building type) to improve their energy
performance every five years. The energy use reductions included in the model are based on
modeling done in support of a BEPS analysis focused on determining how best to design BEPS
for the District. The model uses the midpoint energy use reduction estimate of two potential
BEPS designs. Both designs require buildings triggering BEPS to improve their performance
through a suite of mandatory improvements and either an Improvement Path (requiring a
15 point increase in ENERGY STAR Score) or a Prescriptive Path (requiring retrocommissioning,
an energy audit, and action on items with a payback less than three years). The difference
between the two designs is the threshold of buildings that trigger and are required to comply
with BEPS: the bottom 20th percentile or the bottom 40th percentile of buildings in each building
category based on ENERGY STAR Score. This is not the final proposed design recommendation
for BEPS; design options have been made to the District separately and Action EB.5 summarizes
the key considerations. The resulting penetration rates and average energy use reductions used
in the model are summarized in Table A5. The data used to generate these values was taken
from 2014’s Private Building Benchmarking Dataset.

224

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Building Type*

Percent of Total Square
Footage Affected by BEPS
(between 2020 and 2032)

Average Energy Use
Reduction

Multifamily (5+ units)

19.60%

13.30%

Education and Other Inst’l (non-gov.)

40.30%

14.60%

Office

21.50%

13.60%

Hotel

35.00%

15.10%

Other Comm. and Industrial

6.80%**

15.70%

Hospital and Other Medical

5.80%**

10.90%

↑↑ T able A5. Summary of energy use reduction and penetration inputs used to represent BEPS
*District government buildings are also subject to BEPS and are captured in the other building types.
**The small percentage of Other Comm. and Industrial (n=27) and Hospital and Other Medical (n=6) buildings
triggering BEPS results from the low number of buildings covered by the 2014 benchmarking dataset and the
approach of capturing the worst performing buildings based on their relative performance.

Second, the model assumes that a portion of existing buildings go through a rehab each year,
triggering the requirement to comply with the most recent building codes for the portion of
the building undergoing a rehab. The portion of buildings undergoing a rehab each year is
based on the Office of Planning’s Development Activity Database (updated October 2015),
which tracks buildings (but not square footage) undergoing development each year (e.g., new
construction, demolition, renovation, rehab). Given that the Development Activity Database
does not track exactly what portion of each building undergoing a rehab, and thus the aspects
of the building triggering code compliance are unknown, representatives from DOEE and the
consultant team agreed to assume that the rehabs result in the average building improving
their energy performance by half as much as if the entire building was required to meet the
latest code.

A1.2.2 ENERGY SUPPLY
GHG intensity factors are applied to energy use by fuel type to calculate total GHG emissions.
The GHG intensity of electricity accounts for losses from generation and transmission. The
model uses the RFC-East sub-region factor from the EPA’s eGRID database of regional GHG
intensities.443 The GHG intensity of natural gas includes fugitive emissions from transmission
and distribution.
The GHG intensity (tCO2e/kBtu) of all energy types stays constant in the BAU scenario (Table
A6) including electricity. This was done to capture and communicate about the impact of the
District’s existing Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) requirements. The model does not assume
additional declines due to the federal regulation or electricity generation plant closures and
replacements. The implementation of and compliance strategies in response to the CPP, as well
as other plant closures, will have an uncertain impact on the District that is likely to overlap with
emissions reductions achieved through the RPS (as states and suppliers look for the most costeffective approaches to complying with both regulations). As such, to avoid overly optimistic
assumptions about declining electricity emissions, these external forces were assumed not to
443 T he RFC-East eGRID subregion includes the District of Columbia, Delaware, New Jersey, and portions of Maryland and Pennsylvania,
https://www.epa.gov/energy/egrid

APPENDIX

225



decrease the electricity emissions factor. This means deeper emissions reductions from changes
in electricity supply are very likely to occur by 2032 than is modeled for the Plan’s BAU scenario.
If the GHG intensity of the electricity grid declines due to such external forces, such as a shift
from coal to natural gas, it will reduce the GHG reductions attributed to actions in the Plan,
but ultimately should lead to lower GHG emissions.
Energy Type

BAU GHG Emissions Factor
(tCO2e/kBtu)

Electricity

0.000116 444

Natural Gas

0.000055 445

Fuel Oil

0.000074 446

Gasoline

0.000074 447

Diesel

0.000074 tCO2e/kBtu 448

Notes for Policy Scenarios
Declines due to energy supply
policies in the policy scenario.

Stays constant in all scenarios

↑↑ T able A6. GHG emissions factors for energy types in BAU simulations

A1.2.2.1 EXISTING BUILDING ASSUMPTIONS
Two energy supply policies target the GHG emissions intensity of electricity. The first is the
District’s increasing RPS. The RPS has a local solar requirement as well as overall renewable
energy requirements. As described in the Plan, suppliers can comply with either portion of the
RPS either by acquiring renewable energy certificates (RECs) or paying alternative compliance
payments (ACPs) where RECs are unavailable to more costly than ACPs. All ACPs are used to
fund local solar projects, so the model assumes that the District ultimately achieves the entire
local solar portion of the RPS. As explained in section 2.2.1.2, the requirements of the GHG
accounting protocol used by the District, in combination with the compliance options offered
by the RPS, mean it is very unlikely that the full potential of GHG reductions possible under the
remainder of the RPS will be captured by the District.449 Therefore, the actual decline in the
District’s electricity GHG emission factor is uncertain and depends on RPS compliance. As such,
representatives from DOEE and the consultant team decided to assume 57% of the potential
GHG emissions reductions that may be achieved under the non-local portion of the RPS are
captured by the District, while the remainder of the RPS is complied with using ACPs or RECs
that do not affect the GHG emissions intensity of electricity in the District.450 In reality, the GHG
reductions that may be triggered by and attributable to the RPS could be higher or lower than
this, as discussed in the Plan.
444 T he U.S Environmental Protection Agency’s eGRID factor for RFC-East subregion for 2014, updated on February 27, 2017 (accessed August 2, 2017).
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-02/documents/egrid2014_summarytables_v2.pdf
445 Sourced from ICLEI with fugitive emissions added. ICLEI source: Table B.1, Appendix C, ICLEI U.S. Community Protocol V1.1,
http://icleiusa.org/publications/us-community-protocol/
446 Table B.1, Appendix C, ICLEI U.S. Community Protocol V1.1, http://icleiusa.org/publications/us-community-protocol/
447 Calculated from 2012 and 2013 transportation demand, energy consumption and GHG emissions data provided to DOEE by the Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments, which is also used for the District’s GHG inventory.
448 Ibid.
449 The District uses ICLEI’s U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions (Community Protocol).
450 Based on the finding that 57% of all non-hydroelectric renewable energy capacity built in the United States from 2000 to 2015 is being used to meeting RPS
requirements. Finding soured from Barbose, Galen. 2016. “U.S. Renewables Portfolio Standards: 2016 Annual Status Update.” Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. https://emp.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbnl-1005057.pdf

226

CLEAN ENERGY DC



The second policy is supplying the District’s standard offer service (SOS) through a renewable
energy power purchase agreement (PPA). Approximately 24% of the electricity supplied to the
District is sold through the SOS.451 The policy scenario assumes that the full PPA can be supplied
by a set of renewable energy PPAs with an average of 70% of the electricity supplied by
renewable energy and the remainder from the spot market (the spot market uses the average
electricity GHG emissions intensity for that year). To be conservative, the model assumes 10%
of customers opt-out after the switch to the renewable energy PPA, reducing the portion
of electricity consumption served by the SOS to 21.6%. Actual customer retention or loss is
uncertain at this time and could be higher or lower than the assumption above. It is likely that if
a lower electricity rate can be secured, more customers may shift to the SOS than are currently
supplied by it, thereby increasing the GHG reductions achieved by this action. SOS adoption
may also increase due to a desire by electricity customers to be supplied by renewable and/or
zero emission energy.
Table A7 summarizes the assumed GHG intensity of electricity until 2032 when the above
policies are implemented. The actual GHG intensity of the grid, as experienced by the District,
between now and 2032 will depend on multiple factors, including compliance with the RPS,
what can be achieved by the PPA for SOS, and external factors that affect the regional
electricity grid (e.g., market forces, federal regulatory impacts).

Year

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

GHG Intensity 0.000106 0.000105 0.000101 0.000097 0.000094 0.000094 0.000094 0.000092
Year

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

GHG Intensity 0.000090 0.000088 0.000086 0.000084 0.000082 0.000080 0.000078 0.000076

↑↑ T able A7. Estimated GHG intensity of electricity (tCO2e/kBtu) under the policy scenario

A1.2.2.2 NEW DISTRICT ENERGY SYSTEMS
Finally, the energy supply is affected by installations of new district energy systems, referred
to as neighborhood-scale energy systems in the Plan. The model includes two assumed sets
of new district energy systems. First, the District is able to capture 20% of the wastewater
thermal supply identified by DC Water by 2032, totaling 37 MW of supply at a capacity factor
of 47.4%.452 The district energy systems are assumed to supply buildings with zero-emission
baseload energy to meet 67% of demand, with peaking natural gas providing the remaining
33%. Second, two natural gas-fired combined heat and power systems are installed at the
Walter Reed and St. Elizabeth’s sites currently under development. The annual GHG reduction
potential from these sites is initially 7,000 and 14,000 tCO2e, respectively, and then declines as
the GHG intensity of electricity declines.453

451 Correspondence with DOEE representatives on August 1, 2016.
452 DC ENERGIZED, DC Water’s Energy Opportunities, DRAFT 2-11-2016.
453 GHG reduction potential provided by Urban Ingenuity on September 20, 2016.

APPENDIX

227



A1.2.3 TRANSPORTATION
A1.2.3.1 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND MODE SHARE
In addition to growth in the building stock, the model assumes growth in transportation
demand and associated energy and GHG emissions. BAU transportation demand and mode
share are based on recent transportation data from the Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments (MWCOG) as well as the District’s Multimodal Long-Range Transportation Plan
moveDC.454 moveDC forecasts total transportation demand and mode share out to 2040 in
a BAU scenario,455 which is translated into VMT demand by mode share (passenger vehicle,
transit, cycling and walking) out to 2032. BAU mode share in 2032 is 55% passenger vehicle,
24% transit, and 19% cycling. For the policy scenario, the consultant team assumed the same
total VMT demand but shifted demand from passenger vehicles to transit, cycling and walking
based on the District’s mode share target in the Sustainable DC Plan.456
The model captures energy consumption and GHG emissions from the Metrorail (metro), transit
buses, and other medium and heavy duty vehicles based on the aforementioned MWCOG
transportation data provided to DOEE. Energy and emissions from on-road transit vehicles
(buses) and metro transit grow with increasing transit demand, which is driven by the changes
in mode share discussed above. For metro transit, the model assumes that metro energy
consumption grows at 30% the rate of metro demand growth.457 The GHG emissions associated
with metro transit are then affected by the changes in the GHG intensity of electricity. Transit
buses are discussed further in section A1.2.3.3. Energy consumption by medium and heavy
duty vehicles is assumed to grow at the same rate as passenger vehicle demand in the BAU
scenario. No policies target these vehicles because this was out of scope.

A1.2.3.2 VEHICLE ASSUMPTIONS AND POLICIES
As the passenger vehicle stock grows, existing vehicles in the stock are retired and new vehicles
are purchased each year. As a result, the average fuel efficiency of the vehicle stock and
the vehicles that comprise it change. Each year, 6.67% of the existing passenger vehicle stock
is replaced by new vehicles.458 New vehicles entering the stock have a higher fuel efficiency
rating due to the federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standard, which results in
the average fuel efficiency of the entire stock declining.459 The GHG and energy use reduction
impacts of the CAFE Standard were included in the policy scenario wedge diagrams to make
its impact explicit to readers. Because it is a federal regulation already in place, the CAFE
Standard will achieve GHG reductions regardless of action taken by the District, but the level of
its impact changes based on the mode share changes achieved by the District.

454 B
 ased on all vehicle miles traveled in the District, regardless of origin or destination. Recent transportation data comes from 2012 and 2013 transportation
demand and mode share data provided to DOEE by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, which is also used for the District’s GHG inventory.
moveDC, http://www.wemoveDC.org/index2.html
455 Table V.3 in Move DC Vehicle section, p.31.
456 50% of commuter trips from public transit, 25% from biking and walking, and 25% by car or taxi. Sustainable DC Plan, p.12
457 This is calculated based on relative GHG emissions factors (between electricity and gasoline and diesel) the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority’s
2015 sustainability report, which states that switching from driving to metro results in approximately a 50% GHG reduction. WMATA Sustainability Report 2015,
p.7, https://www.wmata.com/initiatives/sustainability/upload/2017-Annual-Sustainability-Report.pdf
458 Based on the number of new vehicle sales vs. the number of total registered vehicles in the United States over the past several years. This assumption
means vehicles in the model last for 15 years, whereas the NHTSA has found that the average life on the road is about 11.5 years (https://www.statista.com/
statistics/185198/age-of-us-automobiles-and-trucks-since-1990/), with approximately 70% of vehicles on the road after 15 years, and some longer
(http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809952.pdf). Total registered vehicles in 2015 - https://www.statista.com/statistics/183505/number-of-vehicles-in-the-unitedstates-since-1990/. Light vehicle retail sales: https://www.statista.com/statistics/199983/us-vehicle-sales-since-1951/
459 CAFE Standard fuel efficiency values are based on modeling down to support the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s Annual Energy Outlook 2015.

228

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Electric vehicle (EV) adoption is also assumed to increase over the model time period. The
model includes battery electric vehicles, which are powered entirely by electricity from the
grid, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, which are initially powered by a battery, then a
petroleum fuel-based engine when the battery is depleted.460 The consultant team assumed
EV market share for new vehicles (the share of new vehicles sold that are electric vehicles)
reaches 30% by 2030, and 38% by 2032. This requires effective policies and programs focused
on EV readiness and adoption, and is in line with the levels of adoption found necessary for
California to achieve its 2050 GHG reduction target of 80% below 1990 levels.461 The model
assumes the mix of battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs)
starts at 50/50, and steadily shifts towards BEVs with 60% of EV sales in 2030 and 72% in 2032.
This reflects the anticipated to purely electric vehicles (BEVs) as EV technology improves and
consumers become more comfortable with EVs.

A1.2.3.3 FULL TRANSIT BUS EMISSIONS FORECAST RESULTS
The following five future transit bus fleet scenarios were forecasted through 2032 to assess the
emissions reductions possible through the use of different bus propulsion types. The first scenario
reflects the currently planned future bus purchases by WMATA and DDOT; this scenario served
as the baseline for the analysis. The other four scenarios reflect future bus fleets in which all
buses purchased through 2032 are of a single vehicle propulsion type.
• Scenario 1: Fleets As Currently Planned (baseline)
• Scenario 2: Clean Diesel
• Scenario 3: Diesel/Electric Hybrid
• Scenario 4: Compressed Natural Gas (CNG)
• Scenario 5: Electric
The following charts display forecasts of energy consumption, GHG emissions, and criteria
air pollutant emissions based on these scenarios, and Table A8 summaries the 2032 results
compared to 2017. Note that these values assume BAU mode share and scale of reductions
achieved in any scenario increases as more share increases under the policy scenario.

460 T he model assumes plug-in hybrid electric vehicles operate on electricity 66% of the time and gasoline 34% of the time. Based on Marshall, B.M., Kelly, J.C.,
Lee, T.-K., Keoleian, G.A., Filipi, Z., 2013. Environmental assessment of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles using naturalistic drive cycles and vehicle travel patterns:
A Michigan case study. Energy Policy 58, 358–370; Kelly, J.C., MacDonald, J.S., Keoleian, G. a., 2012. Time-dependent plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging
based on national driving patterns and demographics. Appl. Energy 94, 395–405.
461 e.g., Greenblatt, J.B., 2015. Modeling California policy impacts on greenhouse gas emissions. Energy Policy 78, 158–172; Greene, D.L., Park, S., Liu, C., 2014a.
Public policy and the transition to electric drive vehicles in the U.S.: The role of the zero emission vehicles mandates. Energy Strateg. Rev. 5, 66–77; Greene,
D.L., Park, S., Liu, C., 2014b. Analyzing the transition to electric drive vehicles in the U.S. Futures 58, 34–52; Wei, M., Nelson, J.H., Greenblatt, J.B., Mileva, A.,
Johnston, J., Ting, M., Yang, C., Jones, C., McMahon, J.E., Kammen, D.M., 2013. Deep carbon reductions in California require electrification and integration
across economic sectors. Environ. Res. Lett. 8, 014038; Yang, C., Yeh, S., Zakerinia, S., Ramea, K., McCollum, D., 2015. Achieving California’s 80% greenhouse gas
reduction target in 2050: Technology, policy and scenario analysis using CA-TIMES energy economic systems model. Energy Policy 77, 118–130.

APPENDIX

229



Metric (unit)

2017 Value
All Scenarios

Projected 2032 Values, by Scenario

Associated
Figure

1

2

3

4

5

Energy Consumption
1,666
(million kBtu)

1,606

1,638

1,385

1,606

650

GHGs (tCO2e)

156,163

148,390 163,011 137,888 129,996 49,396

Carbon Monoxide
(lbs. CO)

146,049

234,584 63,610

Nitrous Oxide
(lbs. N2O)

98,021

89,464

141,094 140,317 9,039

1,043

Coarse Particulate
Matter (lbs. PM10)

2,445

1,951

2,971

2,955

357

22

Fine Particulate
Matter (lbs. PM2.5)

2,171

1,697

2,615

2,597

269

20

Volatile Organic
Compounds (lbs.
VOC)

8,061

8,234

6,084

6,068

11,530

42

Sulphur Oxide
(lbs. SOx)

1,681

1,554

1,967

1,663

957

11

31,713

↑↑ T able A8. Summary of Transit Bus Fuel Switching Scenario Results

230

CLEAN ENERGY DC

510,275 229



Annual Energy Consumption (billion kBTU)

1.8

Electric

1.6

Current Plans

1.4

Clean Diesel

1.2

Diesel Electric
hybrid

1.0

Natural Gas

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0.0

↑↑ Figure A1. Annual Energy Consumption Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Busesl

180,000

Electric

160,000

Current Plans
Clean Diesel

Annual GHG Emissions (tCO2e)

140,000

Diesel Electric
hybrid

120,000

Natural Gas

100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A2. Annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
APPENDIX

231



600,000

Electric

Annual Carbon Monoxide Emissions (lbs)

Current Plans
500,000

400,000

Clean Diesel
Diesel Electric
hybrid
Natural Gas

300,000

200,000

100,000

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A3. Annual Carbon Monoxide Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses

Annual Nitrous Oxide Emissions (lbs)

160,000
140,000

Electric
Current Plans
Clean Diesel

120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A4. Annual Nitrous Oxide Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
232

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Diesel Electric
hybrid
Natural Gas



3,500

Electric
Current Plans

3,000
Annual PM10 Emissions (lbs)

Clean Diesel
2,500

Diesel Electric
hybrid

2,000

Natural Gas

1,500
1,000
500

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A5. Annual Particulate Matter 10 Micron Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
3,000

Electric
Current Plans

Annual PM2.5 Emissions (lbs)

2,500

Clean Diesel
Diesel Electric
hybrid

2,000

Natural Gas
1,500

1,000

500

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A6. Annual Particulate Matter 2.5 Micron Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
APPENDIX

233



14,000
12,000

Electric
Current Plans

Annual VOC Emissions (lbs)

Clean Diesel
10,000

Diesel Electric
hybrid

8,000

Natural Gas

6,000
4,000
2,000

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A7. Annual Volatile Organic Compounds Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
2,500

Electric

Annual Suplhur Oxide Emissions (lbs)

Current Plans
2,000

Diesel Electric
hybrid
1,500

1,000

500

20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
20
23
20
24
20
25
20
26
20
27
20
28
20
29
20
30
20
31
20
32

0

↑↑ Figure A8. Annual Sulphur Oxides Forecast, WMATA and DDOT Buses
234

Clean Diesel

CLEAN ENERGY DC

Natural Gas



A1.2.3.4 FULL TRANSIT BUS EMISSIONS FORECAST RESULTS
The following assumptions apply to the transit emissions evaluation model used for the
forecasting described in Appendix A1.2.3.3. These assumptions were dependent on data
availability, project scope, and project timeline, among other factors. 462
• The model base year is calendar year 2016 using 2015 fleet composition and mileage data in
order to avoid distortions caused by major rail maintenance programs.
• Beginning with the large legacy diesel retirement in Year 2, operating miles per vehicle are
held constant per fleet (WMATA, DDOT).
• Fuel economy varies within the model according to Phase 2 fuel economy standards for
2021-2027. 463,464
• Schedule of fleet additions and retirements are based on the following:
•• Transit agency future procurement forecasts 465,466
•• Standard WMATA transit fleet vehicle service life, assuming mid-life overhaul: 15 years
Standard DDOT transit fleet vehicle service life, assuming mid-life overhaul: 15 years 467,468,469
• Due to the time constraints of this project and difficulty in accurately characterizing criteria
air pollutants from power generation plants outside the District, within those time constraints,
criteria air pollutants are only quantified at the point of consumption – combustion in the transit
vehicles.
• Per the scope of this project, the following criteria air pollutants are accounted for in the
model: carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), particulate matter (PM), volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), and sulfur oxides (SOx).
• The “clean diesel” alternative is based on diesel propulsion buses manufactured or retrofitted
to comply with 40 CFR 88.105-94, and the self-reporting of WMATA and DDOT identifying
vehicles within their fleets as compliant.
• Legacy diesel vehicles are modeled using constant 2006 criteria pollutant emission factors
found in the EPA’s MOVES2014a model.470
• The alternative fuel factor multiplier for carbon monoxide emissions of CNG transit buses was
reduced from 44.34 to 1 to mirror that of passenger vehicles.
• Deterioration factors for CO and VOC emissions derived from the MOVES2014a model were
changed to gradually increase over the 30 year period to reflect more likely behavior.

A1.2.4 OTHER EMISSIONS SOURCES
Although GHG emissions from waste are included in the model, waste was not within the scope
of the Plan, so these emissions are not affected by policies. Rather, they are held static to reflect
uncertainty in the interaction between growth in waste and the impact of District action to
achieve its zero waste vision. 471
462 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “SafeTrack,” accessed November 20, 2017. https://www.wmata.com/service/SafeTrack.cfm
463 Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, “Federal Vehicle Standards,” accessed December 4, 2017.
https://www.c2es.org/content/regulating-transportation-sector-carbon-emissions/
464 DieselNet, “United States: Heavy-Duty Vehicles: GHG Emissions & Fuel Economy,” accessed December 4, 2017.
https://www.dieselnet.com/standards/us/fe_hd.php
465 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, “Customer Service, Operations and Security Committee, Action Item III-A, Adoption of Bus Fleet Plan,”
September 14, 2017. https://www.wmata.com/about/board/meetings/board-pdfs/upload/3A-Metrobus-Fleet-Plan-TO-POST.pdf
466 District Department of Transportation, “DC Circulator 2017 Transit Development Plan Draft,” September 2017.
http://www.dccirculator.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/DC-Circulator-2017-TDP-Update-101818.pdf
467 Sean Egan, phone call with project team, October 30, 2017.
468 Mid-life overhauls are scheduled to begin with model year 2014 vehicles. Source: District Department of Transportation, “DC Circulator 2017 Transit
Development Plan Draft,” September 2017. http://www.dccirculator.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/DC-Circulator-2017-TDP-Update-101818.pdf
469 Sean Egan, phone call with project team, October 30, 2017.
470 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, MOVES2014a Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator. http://www.epa.gov/otaq/models/moves/index.htm
471 https://zerowaste.dc.gov/

APPENDIX

235



A2 PUBLIC REVIEW AND
ENGAGEMENT REPORT
The District Government is committed to a vision of a sustainable city
that benefits all—a commitment that extends to climate action. To
achieve the GHG goals, the District Government will need to listen
to and consider the perspectives, opinions, concerns, experiences of
all those who live and work within its boundaries. Given the scale of
action this Plan proposes, and its broad and long-term implications,
engaging community members and key local stakeholders proved
crucial. This appendix details the phases the plan went through during
development, public comment, and revision. A separate appendix,
published on the DOEE website, will detail each comment received,
and how DOEE and the Clean Energy DC Team response.

A2.1

PLAN DEVELOPMENT HISTORY

A2.1.1 DEVELOPMENT OF THE INITIAL PLAN
The Clean Energy DC Plan is the District’s latest Comprehensive Energy Plan (CEP). The District of
Columbia Department of Energy and Environment (DOEE) is mandated to create and update
a Comprehensive Energy Plan on regular intervals by the D.C. Energy Act of 1980 (D.C. Official
Code § 8–171.04). Completing a brand-new Comprehensive Energy Plan was called for in the
District’s Sustainable DC Plan, in Energy Action 1.3. The Sustainable DC Transformation Order
(Mayor’s Order 2013-209) further mandated that the new Comprehensive Energy Plan lay out a
pathway to achieve the District’s goal of reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions by 50% by
2032. Due to its focus on GHG emissions, and the fact that 97% of the District’s GHG emissions
come from the use of energy, it in many ways serves as the District’s new climate mitigation
plan. In the process of developing the current Plan, it was decided to brand it as “Clean Energy
DC,” to reflect the fact that it combines elements of a traditional state comprehensive energy
plan and a typical municipal climate action plan.
The timeline of the development of the Clean Energy DC plan is laid out in Figure A9, and
discussed below.

236

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Interactive Workshops,
Interviews, Analysis,
Iterative Modeling

Visioning Workshops,
Interviews,
Global Best Practices,
Consultant Team’s
Own Ideas

Aug–Dec 2015

Jan–Mar 2016

Mar–Jul 2016

90+ Actions,
Community
Energy Model

Plan and Model
Revision, Final Plan

Published Draft Plan
with
Actions

55

Aug–Oct 2016

Peer Review Draft,
Peer Review,
Revision

Nov 2016

Jan-Sept 2017

Oct 2017Feb 2018

Public Engagement,
Scenario Analysis

↑↑ Figure A9. The Clean Energy DC Plan Development Process
In May 2015, DOEE released a Request for Applications (RFA) for assistance in completing and
communicating a Comprehensive Energy Plan for the District of Columbia (DOEE RFA #20151511-EA).472 After a competitive selection process, DOEE selected Integral Group LLC as the
lead grantee, with the Institute for Market Transformation (IMT) and the International Living
Future Institute (ILFI) as partners. Nelson\Nygaard and LINK Strategic Partners were brought
on as additional partners in 2017, to add additional expertise in the areas of transportation
planning and public engagement, respectively.
Work began in August 2015, with a Visioning Workshop held in October 2015. Integral Group,
IMT, and ILFI worked to compile the feedback from the visioning session, interviews with key
experts both within DC and globally, and international best practices into a set of over 90
possible actions. These actions were plugged into a Community Energy Model (as described
in Appendix A1) that was developed for the plan, which led to the production of the first draft
of the plan. This plan and model were reviewed during two days of interactive workshops in
March 2016. After substantial feedback from DOEE and other government stakeholders, more
interviews, analysis, and modeling, a peer review draft was completed in August 2016.

A2.1.2 PEER REVIEW
In September 2016, DOEE distributed a “peer review” draft of the plan to key stakeholders and
experts for a technical review. 143 attendees representing 74 distinct organizations were invited
to the peer review. DOEE held six peer review discussion meetings, each 90 minutes long, with
six distinct stakeholder groups. 79 people, representing 39 distinct organizations, attended one
or more of these meetings and many provided comments, both orally and in writing. The list of
participating organizations is provided in A2.1.5. The plan was again edited before its publishing
at the end of October 2016. Over two-thirds of the peer review comments were fully addressed

472 RFA for Completing and Communicating a Comprehensive Energy Plan, May 29, 2015, https://doee.dc.gov/node/1070582

APPENDIX

237



in the published draft. Some comments could not be addressed at that time, as they required
more time and resources to investigate; however, most have now been addressed in this final
plan. A full list of the people and organizations who participated in the peer review is provided
in the Peer Review Report published by DOEE; this report also contains DOEE’s original responses
to all peer review comments.473 All comments are also included in this appendix, though many
have updated responses.

A2.1.3 PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
At the end of October 2016, DOEE published a draft plan, along with a summary report, for
broader public comment.
Between May and November 2017, DOEE and the LINK Strategic Partners organized and
operated a city-wide outreach effort to engage community members on Clean Energy DC
and related topics, to ensure that the Plan represented and supported as broad a range of
voices and communities as possible. The team designed engagement opportunities to gather
feedback on each of the Plan’s key components, and refine its recommendations.
The Clean Energy DC team organized a series of a series of grassroots engagement efforts that
took place throughout the summer, including 20 total activations that ranged from canvassing
at supermarkets and Metro Stations to tabling at community events like the Beat the Streets
Festival and the H Street Festival. Grassroots canvassing was held in locations in all eight wards
of the city. During these events, members of the Clean Energy DC team distributed several
hundred flyers and conducted more than 300 short surveys to gauge attitudes and behaviors
on climate and energy.
At the same time, DOEE conducted a statistically significant survey of over 800 District residents,
focused on the Sustainable DC plan, but which contained several key energy-related questions
to help the District understand the views of citizens regarding energy efficiency and
renewable energy.
To complement grassroots outreach, the Clean Energy DC team hosted several community
meetings presented as highly interactive forums meant to bring energy to life in an engaging
way. The District-wide meetings were designed for a wide array of community members,
ranging from highly engaged climate champions to individuals with no prior knowledge of
the District’s sustainability efforts. The first event, Energy-Palooza, was a family-friendly event
with hands-on activities for attendees of all ages. Held at the Greater Washington Urban
League Building in Columbia Heights, participants learned how wind turbines work, built their
own solar matchbox cars, designed green homes with Lego bricks, and explored sustainable
transportation alternatives. The second event, Clean Energy Power Hour, placed a traditional
meeting format in a unique setting. Held at the Blue Jacket Brewery in Navy Yard, this event
offered a brewery tour and tasting followed by an overview of Clean Energy DC and small
group discussions. This was followed by Clean Energy Brown Bag, a more traditional public
meeting held at DOEE’s offices over lunchtime, featuring an overview of the plan followed by
group discussion. In total, approximately 100 people participated in these three events.

473 C
 lean Energy DC Supplement: Peer Review Report,” May 2017, https://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/page_content/attachments/Clean%20
Energy%20DC%20Supplement%20Comment%20Response%200517_0.pdf

238

CLEAN ENERGY DC



Alongside the public engagement, DOEE hosted individualized meetings with each key
stakeholder group. Specific meetings were held with environmental advocates, District
Government departments, Pepco, Washington Gas, DC Water, the Office of People’s Counsel,
the Public Service Commission, the DC Sustainable Energy Utility, the Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments, the Sustainable Energy Utility Advisory Board, and the Green Building
Advisory Council.

A2.1.4 ADDRESSING EQUITY
The Clean Energy DC team coordinated a series of interviews that focused on the intersection
of energy, environment, and social equity. The team invited local and national experts, leaders,
and organizations focused on local and national sustainability, social justice, policy advocacy,
and community development issues to review and critique the draft Plan’s recommended
actions. Representatives from the following organizations and businesses participated in
an interview:
• Anacostia Riverkeeper
• Children’s Environmental Health Network
• Grid Alternatives
• Groundswell
• Nspiregreen
• Provoc
• Sierra Club DC
• University of the District of Columbia
•
Beyond this, the Clean Energy DC team consulted with local and national equity experts
and advocates, to ensure its recommendations would not have unintended impacts on
communities.
• Andrew Brooks, Association for Energy Affordability
• Charlie Harak, National Consumer Law Center
• Stephanie Chan, Greenlining Institute
• Lindsay Robbins, National Resources Defense Council
• Lori Bamberger, Mills College
• Wayne Waite, California Housing Partnership Corporation
Working with these local and national experts, the Clean Energy DC team collaboratively
developed specific adjustments to the actions, which were included in the final plan. Chapter 3
provides further details on equity in Clean Energy DC, including how each action was adjusted
to better address equity concerns.

APPENDIX

239



A2.1.5 MAJOR UPDATES TO THE CLEAN ENERGY DC PLAN
The Clean Energy DC Team has made major updates to Clean Energy DC in response to public
comments. Every comment received, with a response from DOEE, is provided in a separate
supplement document, Appendix A3, published separately on DOEE’s website. At a high level,
these are the major changes to Clean Energy DC:
• Expanded introduction
• Improved community energy model
• More information about the sources of the District’s electricity
• New chapter on equity
• New action on equity (EQ.1)
• Revisions to 20 other actions in the plan to address equity
• Updated actions on energy codes and incentives for net-zero energy buildings (NC.1 & NC.2)
• Expanded discussion and improved actions related to deep energy retrofits
• Updated action on Building Energy Performance Standards (EB.5)
• New action on energy planning for District Government facilities (EB.10)
• Reorganized and consolidated section on Cross-Cutting Building Actions, with three new
actions that consolidate multiple actions from the draft plan (CCB.6, CCB.11, CCB.12)
• Updated actions related to the Sustainable Energy Utility (EB.2, CCB.1)
• Updated action on the Standard Offer Service (CRE.2)
• Updated actions related to local solar power (CRE.4, CRE.5, & CRE.6)
• Transit vehicle emissions modeling
• Background and two new actions on zero-emission transit vehicles (EV.7 & EV.8)
• Background and three new actions on anticipating autonomous ride-hailing vehicles (EV.9,
EV.10, & EV.11)

A2.2 PARTICIPATING GROUPS
The following organizations participated actively in the development and revision of Clean
Energy DC. DOEE appreciates each of them for their assistance and looks forward to continuing
to partner with them as this plan is implemented. (Peer reviewers are marked with a * icon.)
• Amalgamated Bank*
• Anacostia Riverkeeper
• Association for Energy Affordability
• Capital E
• Children’s Environmental Health Network
• ClearPath
• ClearRock
• Coalition for Green Capital
• DC Climate Action*
• DC Office of Planning (OP)*
• DC Sustainable Energy Utility (DCSEU)*
• DC Water*
• DC Public Schools (DCPS)*

240

CLEAN ENERGY DC



• Department of Consumer & Regulatory Affairs (DCRA)*
• Department of General Services (DGS)*
• Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD)*
• District Department of Transportation (DDOT)*
• Downtown DC Business Improvement District*
• Green Building Advisory Council (GBAC)*
• GRID 2.0*
• GRID Alternatives
• Greenlining Institute
• Groundswell*
• Hannon Armstrong Capital
• Housing Partnership Corporation
• Ipsun Power
• Johnson Controls
• Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments*
• National Consumer Law Center
• National Resources Defense Council
• Nspiregreen
• Office of People’s Counsel (OPC)*
• Oracle
• Pepco*
• Provoc
• Public Service Commission (PSC)*
• Sierra Club DC*
• Sparkfund
• Sustainable Community Initiatives
• Sustainable Energy Utility Advisory Board
• Solar United Neighborhoods of D.C. (D.C. SUN)*
• The George Washington University*
• U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)*
• University of the District of Columbia (UDC)
• Urban Ingenuity*
• Washington Gas*
• Wentworth Green Strategies*
• WGL*

APPENDIX

241



242

CLEAN ENERGY DC



APPENDIX

243

