Climate Framework for Delaware
Greenhouse
Gas
Mitigation

Climate
Framework
for Delaware
Adaptation
and
Resiliency

Flood
Avoidance

Summary of Recommendations
Prepared under Executive Order 41: Preparing Delaware for Emerging Climate
Impacts and Seizing Economic Opportunities from Reducing Emissions
December 31, 2014



Cover photo courtesy of Delaware State Parks



Climate Framework for Delaware
Executive Order 41
Summary of Recommendations

December 31, 2014



[This page intentionally left blank]







Climate Framework for Delaware
Executive Summary ......................................................................................... 1
Delaware’s Climate Story .............................................................................. 3





Climate Change in Delaware ....................................................................................3
Vulnerabilities to Climate Impacts ...........................................................................3
Efforts and Outcomes ..............................................................................................3
Next Steps.................................................................................................................6

Executive Order 41 .......................................................................................... 7





Background and Purpose .........................................................................................7
Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency ........................................................7
EO 41 Workgroups ...................................................................................................7
Climate Framework for Delaware ............................................................................8

Chapter 1: Mitigation Recommendations ................................................ 9






Background and Introduction ..................................................................................9
Objective ..................................................................................................................10
The Mitigation Workgroup and Methodology .........................................................10
Recommendation .....................................................................................................12
Next Steps.................................................................................................................12

Chapter 2: Adaptation Recommendations .............................................. 13










Background and Introduction ..................................................................................13
Objective ..................................................................................................................13
The Adaptation Workgroup and Methodology ........................................................14
Cross-Cutting Themes ..............................................................................................14
Interagency Coordination.........................................................................................15
Support for Local Governments ...............................................................................16
Outreach and Education to Public ............................................................................16
Agency Recommendation Summaries .....................................................................17
Next Steps.................................................................................................................17
o Dept. of Agriculture .......................................................................... 19
o Dept. of Education ........................................................................... 20
o Dept. of Health and Social Services—Division of Public Health ....... 21
o Dept. of Health and Social Services—Social Service Divisions.......... 23
o Dept. of Natural Resources and Environmental Control .................. 25
o Dept. of Safety and Homeland Security............................................ 29
o Dept. of State .................................................................................... 30
o Dept. of Transportation .................................................................... 32
o Delaware Economic Development Office ......................................... 34
o Delaware State Housing Authority ................................................... 36
o Delaware Office of Management and Budget .................................. 37
o Delaware Office of State Planning Coordination .............................. 38



Chapter 3: Flood Avoidance Recommendations.................................... 39





Background and Introduction ..................................................................................39
Objective ..................................................................................................................40
The Flood Avoidance Workgroup and Methodology ...............................................40
Next Steps ................................................................................................................42

Appendices





Appendix A—Executive Order 41 ................................................................................... A1
Appendix B—Executive Order 41 Workgroup Members ............................................... B1
Appendix C—Executive Order 41 GHG Mitigation Quantification and Assumptions .... C1
Appendix D—Executive Order 41 Agency Adaptation Recommendations .................... D1



Climate Framework for Delaware
Executive Summary
Executive Order 41
On September 12, 2013, Delaware Governor Jack Markell signed Executive Order 41: Preparing
Delaware for Emerging Climate Impacts and Seizing Economic Opportunities from Reducing
Emissions. Executive Order 41 directs agencies to address both the causes and consequences of
climate change by developing actionable recommendations to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions that contribute to climate change, increase resilience to climate impacts, and avoid and
minimize flood risks due to sea level rise.
Executive Order 41 calls for the creation of a cabinet-level committee to oversee the development
and implementation of recommendations under the order. The Cabinet Committee on Climate and
Resiliency (CCoCAR) consists of the secretaries and directors of 11 state agencies and departments.
The Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control serves as the
chair of the committee. Under the secretary’s direction, three workgroups were formed to develop
recommendations for actions that state agencies can take to meet the goals of Executive Order 41.

Climate Framework for Delaware
The Climate Framework for Delaware summarizes the work to date and recommendations from the
three workgroups formed under Executive Order 41: Mitigation, Adaptation, and Flood Avoidance.
The Climate Framework was approved on December 3, 2014, by the CCoCAR, for submission to the
governor by December 31, 2014, as required by the order.

Mitigation Workgroup
Under Executive Order 41, a technical workgroup was established to examine Delaware’s
greenhouse gas emissions, regulations, programs, and policies that influence greenhouse gas
emissions, use the best data available to establish a greenhouse gas mitigation target, and develop
an implementation plan to guide Delaware toward its goal.
On December 3, 2014, the CCoCAR approved the recommendation of the Mitigation Workgroup
that a mitigation target of 30 percent greenhouse gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030 be
adopted for the state of Delaware. The Department of Natural Resources and Environmental
Control will develop an implementation plan based on the approved mitigation target. The
implementation plan will be developed in 2015.

Adaptation Workgroup
Under Executive Order 41, a workgroup was formed with representatives from 11 state agencies
and departments to “develop agency-specific, actionable recommendations for improving
Delaware’s preparedness and resilience to climate impacts.” Delaware’s climate impacts include
increasing temperatures, more frequent extreme heat events, and increased flooding from extreme
precipitation and sea level rise. Adaptation Workgroup members led teams in each of their
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 1



agencies to complete a “rapid assessment” of vulnerabilities to climate impacts that may affect
their agencies. They developed proposed responses to adapt to and reduce the risk for each of the
vulnerabilities they identified. Proposed adaptation responses were evaluated and prioritized based
on the severity of the impacts, the urgency of the response, and the feasibility of implementation.
On December 3, 2014, the CCoCAR approved the recommendations of the Adaptation Workgroup.
The Climate Framework includes more than 150 recommendations for a wide range of actions that
address public health and safety needs, impacts to facilities and infrastructure, and capacity to
deliver services to constituents in Delaware. Some of these recommendations—in particular, the
“inward-facing” proposals that affect only the internal operations of state government and can be
implemented without additional budgetary or legislative authority—are amenable to immediate
action. However, many of the “outward-facing” recommendations will require additional discussion
and outreach with affected stakeholders and other interested parties.
In 2015, the state agencies represented on the CCoCAR will begin implementation of the “inwardfacing” recommendations that can be adopted within their respective departments without
additional budgetary or legislative authority. With respect to the “outward-facing”
recommendations, stakeholder engagement will be required before final decisions are made. To
that end, public outreach and communication events will be launched in 2015 to discuss these
recommendations in greater detail. Further opportunities to enhance outreach and technical
assistance to local governments will be targeted for action in 2015.

Flood Avoidance Workgroup
Under Executive Order 41, a technical workgroup was established to develop flood avoidance and
design guidance to “incorporate measures for adapting to increased flood heights and sea level rise
in the siting and design of projects for construction of new structures and reconstruction of
substantially damaged structures and infrastructure.” The workgroup is developing technical
guidance and tools for use by state agencies for the siting and design of structures and
infrastructure, with an emphasis on avoidance of current and future flood risk. These tools include
a Flood Risk Adaptation Map that depicts flood exposure from a combination of sea level rise and
coastal storms. In addition, the workgroup identified existing state programs, policies, and tools
that will help ensure compliance with guidelines.
The Flood Avoidance Workgroup will complete the Avoidance and Design Guidance document as a
technical guide, and will assist state agencies with implementation in 2015. The Climate Framework
includes 11 recommendations that can be used to institutionalize this guidance.

Conclusion
The state of Delaware is committed to moving toward a clean energy economy and a sustainable
natural and built environment. Executive Order 41 provides a framework for the state to make
choices about how we continue on that path forward. These choices can help make our state more
resilient to the changes we are already experiencing, prepare for future climate impacts, and
reduce the emissions of heat-trapping gases that are driving climate change.
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 2



Delaware’s Climate Story
Climate Change in Delaware
Climate change affects people, places, and resources we care about—our homes, neighborhoods,
and communities, as well as beaches, wetlands, forests, rivers, and streams. These resources
enhance our quality of life and support our economy. Higher temperatures, increasing rainfall, and
rising sea levels are already occurring. These changes are expected to continue—and become more
serious—in the coming years. Climate change is caused mainly by human activities, particularly the
burning of fossil fuels that release heat-trapping gases. This is a global challenge, but we can take
actions to lessen the impacts of climate change on our lives, communities, economy, and
ecosystems, now and in the future.

Vulnerabilities to Climate Impacts
As a low-lying coastal state with a significant population living along 381 miles of shoreline,
Delaware is vulnerable to coastal erosion, storm surge, saltwater intrusion, and tidal wetland
losses—all of which will be exacerbated by sea level rise. Intense rainfall and rising sea level also
contribute to flood risks across the state that threaten public safety and incur costly damage to
homes and businesses. Rising temperatures, and particularly extreme heat events, increase the risk
of serious illness, especially for vulnerable citizens—the elderly, young children, outdoor workers,
and people with underlying health conditions. Temperature and rainfall extremes pose serious
challenges for our agriculture and tourism economies, as well as imposing increasing costs for
maintaining and repairing critical infrastructure.

Efforts and Outcomes
Delaware has made significant strides to address both the causes and consequences of climate
change. These efforts focus on three key strategies:




Using the best available science to understand current and future impacts of climate
change;
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions (climate mitigation); and
Increasing Delaware’s resiliency to climate change (climate adaptation).

Using the best available science is a foundation of sound decision making. The state of Delaware
has conducted comprehensive assessments of the impacts to Delaware of sea level rise, and
changes in temperature and precipitation. Progress to date:




In May 2012, Preparing for Tomorrow’s High Tide: Sea Level Rise Vulnerability Assessment for
the State of Delaware was completed, outlining and gauging the extent to which the state will
be affected by sea level rise. This assessment includes an extensive mapping appendix depicting
the exposure of thirty-nine resources to sea level rise under three scenarios.
In February 2014, The Delaware Climate Change Impact Assessment was released, which
outlines the historic climate trends for the state of Delaware, as well as future projections for

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 3



temperatures and precipitation through the end of the century. The impact assessment also
analyzes what impact the future changes in temperature, precipitation, and sea level may have
on five key sectors in Delaware: public health, water resources, agriculture, ecosystems and
wildlife, and infrastructure.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions has been a key objective for the state of Delaware, using a
variety of strategies that promote energy efficiency and shifting to clean, renewable sources of
energy. Progress to date:







Delaware’s greenhouse gas emissions have decreased by more than any state in the nation (29.7
percent from 2000 to 2010).
As a result of programs and policies that support clean, renewable sources of energy, solar
photovoltaic capacity in Delaware has grown from 2.3 MW to 59.8 MW since 2008, a 2,500
percent increase in solar generation of electricity.
In February 2010, Governor Markell issued Executive Order 18 (EO 18), Leading by Example
towards a Clean Energy Economy & Sustainable Natural Environment, with the goal of making
Delaware state government a leader in clean energy and sustainability. EO 18 requires all
executive branch state agencies to reduce their environmental impacts and operating expenses
through actions in six areas:
1) Energy conservation and efficiency—As of September 2014 we have a 12.99 percent
reduction in energy use over the FY 2008 baseline.
2) Use of clean, renewable energy—The state’s latest reverse energy auction in May
2013 resulted in the purchase of Renewable Energy Credits totaling 30 percent of the
state’s energy procurement. In September 2014, Delaware ranked #64 on the EPA's
Top 100 Green Power Partner list, marking a 5th consecutive quarter in the national
top 100.
3) Recycling—As of September 2014, we have a 32 percent waste diversion rate.
4) Environmentally sensitive procurement (ESP) - The state’s ESP policy was drafted and
approved by the EO 18 Sustainability Managers Workgroup, Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC), and Office of Management and
Budget (OMB). The policy became a state regulation in April 2013.
5) Clean transportation—As of September 2014 we have reduced vehicle miles traveled
by 31.23 percent and have reduced traditional petroleum usage by 7.06 percent.
6) Environmentally responsible and energy-conscious construction—DNREC continues to
work on the LEED certification project for the Richardson & Robbins Building, resulting
in LEED principles being implemented at these sites and being added to existing state
contracts, such as for pest control and janitorial services.
Since 2005, the state of Delaware has been an active member of the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative, a market-based program to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the power sector.
In 2010, Delaware joined the Transportation Climate Initiative, a regional collaboration of twelve
Northeast and Mid-Atlantic jurisdictions that seeks to develop the clean energy economy and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the transportation sector.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 4







For 20 years the state of Delaware has been actively engaged in the U.S. Department of Energy’s
Clean Cities Program, which advances the national economic, environmental, and energy
security goals by supporting local actions to reduce petroleum use in transportation.
The Delaware Department of Transportation has actively recycled construction materials for
more than 20 years. DelDOT’s history has shown a significant economic benefit, and in-place
performance of our pavements and bridges has only reinforced the beneficial use of recycled
materials and industrial byproducts. To quantify the state’s efforts toward sustainability, DelDOT
used an evaluation tool to measure the benefits of its Pavement & Rehabilitation program,
which is responsible for pavement preservation through timely maintenance patching, overlays,
or other pavement preservation treatments. The Federal Highway Administration’s INVEST
(Infrastructure Voluntary Evaluation Sustainability Tool) was designed to provide information
and techniques to help transportation agencies integrate sustainability best practices into their
projects and programs and to provide guidance for practitioners to evaluate the sustainability of
their transportation projects and programs. The result of the evaluation was a high score for
DelDOT’s Pavement & Rehabilitation program—the equivalent of “platinum” in the INVEST
scoring criteria.

Increasing Delaware’s resiliency to climate change encompasses a wide range of strategies to
improve the state’s preparedness and ability to adapt to current and future climate impacts.
Progress to date:






To address statewide flooding risks, in 2011 Governor Markell signed into law Senate Bill 64,
which established a Floodplain and Drainage Advisory Committee to address the state’s
vulnerability to ongoing inland and coastal flooding and drainage issues. The committee
produced higher flood damage reduction standards for local land use and building code
departments to consider adopting. By late 2014 a large percentage of communities have
adopted many of these higher standards, which are voluntary. Buildings and developments
designed and built to these higher standards get lower-priced flood insurance, are far less likely
to be flooded, reduce flooding impacts on adjacent areas, and create less environmental
impacts to coastal and river floodplain habitats.
Recognizing Delaware’s vulnerability to sea level rise, in 2013 Delaware Coastal Programs
released Preparing for High Tide: Recommendations for Adapting to Sea Level Rise in Delaware,
based on DNREC’s work with a diverse stakeholder group, the Sea Level Rise Advisory
Committee. These recent efforts to address the risks of sea level rise build upon DNREC policy,
adopted in 2010, to “proactively consider and plan for the potential effects of coastal inundation
department-wide using scenarios based on the best available science.”
In 2014, DNREC’s Division of Waste and Hazardous Substances completed the Vulnerability
Assessment of Hazardous Materials Installations in Coastal Delaware. This study was conducted
to identify regulated facilities, including tanks, solid waste facilities, and contaminated sites, that
are at risk of impacts from sea level rise, storm surge, and coastal flooding. The assessment
created an inventory of facilities, including GIS data layers and photos from an aerial survey of
identified vulnerable facilities and low-angle aerial photography of selected sites. The project

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 5











also identified a high-risk facility, for which an action plan was developed to improve the site’s
resiliency to climate impacts.
The Delaware Department of Transportation manages a wide range of technologies for
monitoring traffic flow, road conditions, and potential hazards. Transportation engineers are
evaluating ways to expand the existing systems by adding sensors that measure water levels,
speed, and volumes, as well as reviewing the roadway weather information system parameters
and quality data to support climate analysis. By improving data collection and analysis, planners
will be able to make better predictions of flooding hazards and precipitation patterns, provide
early-warning information to local emergency managers, and prepare for adjustments to traffic
flows, such as detours and evacuation routes.
Increasing resiliency of Delaware’s transportation infrastructure is critical to the state’s
economy and to public safety. The Department of Transportation is working on multiple fronts
to apply a risk and resilience management approach to respond to current and upcoming
challenges from climate change. This includes improving capacity for data analysis, use of GIS
systems, and increasing the use of risk assessment tools. DelDOT provides staff training in the
use of HAZUS, a risk assessment tool supported by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
HAZUS is a system that uses models to assess damage and estimate losses from floods,
hurricanes, and disasters.
Delaware’s coastal resources are a focus of climate adaptation to increase resiliency of valuable
wetland habitats. Working with federal and nongovernmental organization partners, and other
Mid-Atlantic states, Delaware is developing an ecological management approach to “climatesmart coastal impoundments.” This innovative effort will create new coastal impoundments to
shift habitats inland in the face of rapid sea level rise. Two new projects currently underway at
the Ted Harvey Wildlife Refuge will replace the habitat functions and values at risk due to
projected inundation of existing impoundments. The project is an important component of the
Delaware Bayshore Initiative.
The state is currently developing the 2015 Delaware Wildlife Action Plan, a comprehensive plan
that assesses Delaware’s wildlife and natural landscape, identifies the challenges they face, and
outlines actions for conservation. The plan is updated every ten years, and in the current
process, planners and scientists are identifying the effects of climate change and sea level rise
on wildlife species and their habitats. The updated plan will include actions that help set the
stage for increasing climate change resiliency.

Next Steps
The state of Delaware is already committed to actions that are moving toward a clean energy
economy and a sustainable natural environment. These efforts can be further enhanced by
coordinated and cost-effective steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and address climate
change and rising sea levels. Executive Order 41 provides a framework for the state of Delaware to
make choices about how we continue on that path forward. These choices can help make our state
more resilient to the changes we are already experiencing, prepare for future climate impacts, and
reduce the emissions of heat-trapping gases that are driving climate change.
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 6



Executive Order 41
Background and Purpose
On September 12, 2013, Delaware Governor Jack Markell signed Executive Order 41: Preparing
Delaware for Emerging Climate Impacts and Seizing Economic Opportunities from Reducing
Emissions. Executive Order 41 directs the state to address both the causes and consequences of
climate change by developing recommendations to:


Reduce greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change (climate mitigation);



Increase resilience to climate impacts, including increasing temperatures, changes in
precipitation, and sea level rise (climate adaptation); and



Avoid and minimize flood risks that increase state liability and decrease public safety.

Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency
Executive Order 41 calls for the creation of a cabinet-level committee to oversee the development
and implementation of recommendations under the order. The Cabinet Committee on Climate and
Resiliency (CCoCAR) consists of the Secretaries of the Department of Agriculture (DDA),
Department of Education (DOE), Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS), Department of
Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC), Department of Safety and Homeland
Security (DSHS), Department of State (DOS), and Department of Transportation (DelDOT); and the
Directors of the Delaware Economic Development Office (DEDO), Delaware State Housing Authority
(DSHA), Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and Office of State Planning Coordination
(OSPC).

EO 41 Workgroups
The Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency (CCoCAR) members selected designated
representatives—the points of contact (POC)—for each of the 11 member agencies. The POCs serve
as liaisons for their respective departments and are responsible for representing the views and
priorities of the agency leadership. The POCs also coordinate with their internal agency teams and
draw upon agency expertise as needed to inform the development of recommendations.
To begin implementation of EO 41, three workgroups were formed to develop recommendations
for the key issues identified in the EO:


The Mitigation Workgroup is responsible for recommending a greenhouse gas mitigation
target to “maintain and build upon Delaware’s leadership in responsibly reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, including identifying appropriate interim goals” and to develop
an implementation plan to meet those goals. The Mitigation Workgroup is a technical
workgroup staffed with selected agency experts from DNREC (including the Divisions of
Energy and Climate, Solid and Hazardous Waste, and Air Quality), DDA, DHSS, DelDOT,
Delaware Solid Waste Authority (DSWA), DSHA, and OMB.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 7





The Adaptation Workgroup is responsible for developing “agency-specific actionable
recommendations for improving Delaware’s preparedness and resilience to climate
impacts.” The Adaptation Workgroup is staffed by designated representatives (the points of
contact, or POCs) for each of the 11 state agencies.



The Flood Avoidance Workgroup is responsible for developing guidance to “incorporate
measures for adapting to increased flood heights and sea level rise in the siting and design
of projects for construction of new structures and reconstruction of substantially damaged
structures and infrastructure.” The Flood Avoidance Workgroup is a technical workgroup
staffed with selected agency experts from DNREC, DOE, DelDOT, DSHA, OMB, and OSPC.

Climate Framework for Delaware
The Climate Framework for Delaware summarizes the work to date and recommendations from the
three workgroups formed under Executive Order 41: Mitigation, Adaptation, and Flood Avoidance.
The Climate Framework was approved on December 3, 2014, by the Cabinet Committee on Climate
and Resiliency, for submission to the governor by December 31, 2014, as required by the order.
The Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency will manage and track implementation of the
recommendations developed under this order. Implementation of the recommendations will begin
in 2015 and the committee will leverage the work of leading scientists and subject matter experts,
as well as any research, studies, workgroups, advisory councils, and committees as may be required
to complete the tasks outlined in the Climate Framework document.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 8



Chapter 1:

Mitigation Recommendations
Background and Introduction
Greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and chlorofluorocarbons,
contribute to climate change by allowing our planet to trap more heat radiated by the sun. Human
influences, including the burning of fossil fuels, are increasing the rate at which these heat-trapping
gases are being released into the atmosphere. As concentrations of greenhouse gases in the earth’s
atmosphere increase, reducing the amount of greenhouse gases emitted becomes a critical step in
mitigating the long-term impacts of climate change.
Delaware’s greenhouse gas emissions are released by seven major sectors: electrical power
generation, transportation, industrial, commercial, residential, agriculture, and waste. In 2010,
these sectors accounted for 12.48 MmtCO2e (million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent) of
greenhouse gas emissions for the state of Delaware. By way of percentages, the electric power
generation and transportation sectors accounted for the majority (65 percent) of Delaware’s
emissions. The chart below shows Delaware’s emissions by sector.

Delaware's Greenhouse Gas Emissions Portfolio
(2010)
Waste
1%

Agriculture
Residential
4%
8%
Commerical
6%

Electric Power
Generation
31%
Industrial
16%

Transportation
34%

Source: Delaware Greenhouse Gas Inventory, Division of Air Quality, 2014
Since 2008, Delaware has made significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. The state of
Delaware was one of the first states to join the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. This program,
through a “cap and invest” model, has helped to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and increase
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 9



deployment of green energy and energy efficiency throughout the region, including Delaware.
Emissions in the transportation sector have been reduced and will continue to go down because of
the adoption of the federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for both light- and
heavy-duty vehicles. Landfill gas collection systems, the universal recycling law, increases in energy
efficiency for Delaware households, forested buffers, and other policies and programs are also
reducing emissions in the state of Delaware. All of these policies, which Delaware has implemented
since 2008, are continuing to drive down emissions throughout the state.

Objective
Under the direction outlined by Executive Order 41, a technical workgroup was established to
examine Delaware greenhouse gas emissions, regulations, and policies that influence greenhouse
gas emissions, use the best data available to establish a greenhouse gas mitigation target, and
develop an implementation plan to guide Delaware toward its goal.

The Mitigation Workgroup and Methodology
Workgroup members include representatives from a wide variety of state agencies and
departments, as well as an outside organization. Departments and organizations represented on
the workgroup include:








Delaware Department of Agriculture;
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services;
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control;
Delaware Department of Transportation;
Delaware Office of Management and Budget;
Delaware Solid Waste Authority; and
Delaware State Housing Authority.

Between April and November 2014, the workgroup has met together nine times, along with
multiple one-on-one sector meetings. Workgroup members were asked to provide data associated
with programs that they defined with assistance from the DNREC Division of Air Quality and the
DNREC Division of Energy and Climate. The Division of Air Quality used the most applicable data
provided by the workgroup members and incorporated it into modeling that followed the principles
and guidelines as well as protocols for state greenhouse gas emissions inventories established by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO).
Secretary David Small of DNREC, chair of the Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency, asked
that the following targets be considered in the goal-setting process:




A 30 percent greenhouse gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030;
A 40 percent greenhouse gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030; and
A 50 percent greenhouse gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 10



Greenhouse gas reductions from various policies and programs were modeled by the DNREC
Division of Air Quality to illustrate a range of reduction pathways, and the results were provided to
the workgroup members and EO 41 points of contact. (See Appendix C for additional information.)
The target that has been recommended to the governor for approval is a 30 percent greenhouse
gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030. To account for the 2008–2010 economic downturn,
the model includes real data for that same time period. This allows the model to better project
emissions to 2030. This target assumes that the 2008 baseline starts at 16.64 MmtCO2e (million
metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent), so a 30 percent reduction in 2030 would equal 11.47
MmtCO2e—a difference of 5.17 MmtCO2e. That said, this gap becomes smaller based on emission
reduction policies, programs, and fuel switching implemented since 2008. Programs that were
included in the federal and state policies include policies such as the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative, the Universal Recycling Law, and transportation fuel efficiency standards, to name a few.
Staff was unable to model all of the data that were gathered in this process due to inconsistencies
in the data, incompatible units, etc. Therefore, the reductions shown in the existing federal and
state policies are conservative. When these programs are accounted for (4.02 MmtCO2e), the gap
to attain the reduction goal becomes 1.14 MmtCO2e. The graph below illustrates the baseline from
2008 (blue line) overlaid with the existing state and federal policies (red line) and the emissions
target of 30 percent in 2030.

Source: EO 41 Mitigation Implementation Plan, Forthcoming

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 11



Another way of looking at this graph is through percentages. The pie chart below shows that the
total reductions since 2008 have achieved 78 percent of the emissions needed to meet the 30
percent reduction in 2030. The remaining 22 percent would need to be achieved through
enhancements to existing policies, creation of new policies, advancements in technologies, and
better data collection. The workgroup has already started to investigate how to close the 22
percent gap. Enhancements in policies related to energy efficiency, forestation, and universal
recycling, as well as creation and adoption of transportation policies, will significantly close this gap.
This 15-year goal also allows for technologies and other advancements in greenhouse gas
mitigation and reductions.

Percent Gap in the Proposed 30% by 2030 Target
22%

Total reductions from 2008
(4.02 Mmt CO2e)

Short fall (1.14 Mmt CO2e)

78%

Source: EO41 Mitigation Implementation Plan, forthcoming

Recommendation
On December 3, 2014, the Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency approved the
recommendation of the Mitigation Workgroup that a mitigation target of 30 percent greenhouse
gas reduction from a 2008 baseline by 2030 be adopted for the state of Delaware.

Next Steps
The Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control will develop an implementation
plan based on the approved mitigation target. The implementation plan will be developed over the
first two quarters of 2015.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 12



Chapter 2:

Adaptation Recommendations
Background and Introduction
“Climate adaptation” and “resilience” are terms used throughout this Climate Framework
document. They are related concepts that highlight the need to identify and reduce vulnerabilities
to the current and future impacts of climate change. The Third National Climate Assessment1
provides these definitions:
Adaptation: Adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment that
exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects.
Resilience: A capability to anticipate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from significant multihazard threats with minimum damage to social well-being, the economy, and the environment.
Adaptation and mitigation are closely linked. Although mitigation addresses the need to curb
greenhouse gas emissions, which are the drivers of climate change, adaptation is also necessary to
improve the preparedness and resilience of our communities and resources. Indeed, it is widely
recognized that adaptation efforts will be more costly and more difficult if climate mitigation
actions are not taken.
In Delaware, many adaptation efforts are already underway to help increase resiliency to climate
impacts at both the state and local level. Some communities have begun to incorporate climate
change and sea level rise into local planning efforts, including comprehensive plans and local hazard
mitigation plans. Some state agencies are conducting vulnerability assessments and using asset
management approaches to address impacts to facilities and infrastructure. Improvements to
floodplain and drainage standards are widely being adopted. These and other efforts will continue
to strengthen resilience to climate change impacts now and in the future.

Objective
Executive Order 41 directs state agencies to “develop agency-specific actionable recommendations
for improving Delaware’s preparedness and resilience to climate impacts.” Recommendations shall
include, but not be limited to: (a) actions state agencies can take, both within their departments
and with assisting residents, to adapt to and prepare for more extreme storms and projected
temperature and precipitation variations; (b) actions local governments can take to improve
community resiliency; and (c) outreach strategies to inform and prepare Delaware's residents and
businesses about identified risks, vulnerabilities, adaptation strategies, and basics of climate change
and its causes, with particular attention to providing strategies to help protect at-risk populations.
1

Third National Climate Assessment (2014), produced by the U.S. Global Change Research Program, summarizes
the impacts of climate change on the United States, now and in the future. To view the report and its findings:
http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 13



The Adaptation Workgroup and Methodology
To achieve the second directive of Executive Order 41, a workgroup was established to develop
agency-specific recommendations for climate adaptation. Within this workgroup were the points of
contact (POCs) from each of the 11 agencies and departments involved in implementing Executive
Order 41. In early 2014, POCs formed internal teams within their agencies. Between January and
November 2014, the POCs met regularly as a workgroup to discuss climate adaptation and develop
recommendations. One of the first steps was a series of education sessions, hosted by DNREC, to
help state agency staff understand the impacts that climate change could have on state operations,
programs, facilities, and resources.
As a first step in the process, the POCs were asked to complete a “rapid assessment” of
vulnerabilities that their agencies may have to address in the face of climate change. Several
recurring themes identified by the POCs include impacts on their workforce, impacts to their
facilities and assets, impacts to services and public safety, economic impacts, and the need for
outreach and education. Upon completing the rapid assessment of vulnerabilities, the POCs
developed potential responses to adapt and mitigate the risk for each of the vulnerabilities they
identified. The POCs then evaluated and prioritized the proposed responses based on the severity
of the impacts, the urgency of the response, the feasibility and practicality of implementation, and
the co-benefits of the response. Responses that were deemed a high priority were drafted into
adaptation recommendations. The recommendations were finalized and vetted through the POCs
and are summarized in the next section, “Agency Recommendations Summaries." Full-text
recommendations can be found in Appendix D.
The progress to date in the Adaptation Workgroup has focused on agency-specific, “inward-facing”
recommendations that affect only the internal operations of state government. With respect to
those recommendations that would affect outside stakeholders (i.e., “outward-facing”
recommendations), stakeholder engagement will be required before final decisions are made. To
that end, further discussion and coordination will be required to discuss these recommendations in
greater detail. Implementation strategies for some of the overarching themes of EO 41 are
discussed briefly below, and include cross-cutting themes, interagency coordination, support for
local governments, and outreach and education to the public.

Cross-Cutting Themes
EO 41 directs state agencies to develop “agency-specific, actionable recommendations” for
increasing resiliency and adapting to climate change impacts. Many agencies identified similar or
related vulnerabilities to impacts from increasing temperatures, more frequent extreme heat
events, and increased flooding from extreme precipitation and sea level rise. In developing
recommendations to respond to these impacts, a number of cross-cutting themes emerge that are
shared across multiple agencies. Addressing challenges shared across many agencies will require
continued coordination and planning to implement adaptation actions in a cost-effective and
efficient way.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 14



Impacts to workforce: Worker health and safety is a particular concern for agencies with many
outdoor workers, such as the DelDOT, DNREC, and DSHS, which employ maintenance workers, field
staff, park rangers, state police, and emergency personnel. Extreme heat is considered a key risk;
safe travel and accessibility to work sites is also a concern during extreme precipitation and
flooding events. Agencies have identified responses that include specific discussions regarding
revised guidelines for safety training, improved protective equipment, alternative work schedules,
changes to uniform dress code, and fleet vehicles able to navigate through flood conditions.
Impacts to facilities, including critical infrastructure: Many agencies identified potential impacts to
state assets, including buildings, transportation and communication infrastructure, and historic and
cultural resources. Damage to state properties can incur significant costs for repair or replacement,
as well as lost productivity and interruption of services. Climate impacts can also impose higher
costs for operations and maintenance, such as higher energy costs for cooling, and more frequent
maintenance due to extreme weather conditions. Many agencies recommended incorporating
climate impact considerations into asset management practices and capital planning decision
making, as well as improvements in design manuals and building codes.
Impacts to services and public safety: Extreme weather events, including high-heat days and heavy
precipitation events, affect state agencies in several ways. Many agencies identified flooding as a
key threat to public safety, especially where evacuation routes are impaired or access to emergency
facilities and equipment is affected. Office closures due to extreme weather reduce the reliability
and efficiency of delivering services to the public. Climate change impacts may increase the
demand for services, such as emergency drainage and discharge permits. Existing programs and
services can be enhanced to prepare for these changes, with increased investment in planning and
building staff capacity.

Interagency Coordination
In addition to identifying cross-cutting themes, many state agencies recognized that their “agencyspecific” recommendations for climate adaptation will require coordination with other agencies.
Interagency coordination is not new, nor is it unique to addressing the impacts of climate change.
However, the implementation of these adaptation recommendations will require continuing or
even greater coordination and collaboration. Interagency coordination will continue to be a priority
for implementing adaptation measures, and will provide a forum for further discussion of climate
resilience issues of statewide concern.
For example, DEDO recommends coordination with DDA and the universities to develop
approaches to reduce the impacts of climate change on local farmers, crops, and production
facilities, and to expand the use of agriculture technology in Delaware. DelDOT highlights work with
DNREC and OSPC to review the state’s strategy for stormwater management with an eye to
improved resiliency. DelDOT and Homeland Security propose to reevaluate current long-term
strategies for response to significant catastrophic events, current short-term evacuation policies,
and detour/evacuation route management and implementation.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 15



To support ongoing improvement in interagency coordination, several recommendations reflect the
need to determine whether additional data management support and communication technology
improvements are appropriate (and when). These efforts not only strengthen coordination among
state agencies, but also improve coordination with local governments and other partners.

Support for Local Governments
Building resilience to climate impacts often requires climate adaptation measures to be
implemented at the local level. State agencies already have many roles and responsibilities for
providing services to the public by working in coordination with local governments. Executive Order
41 calls for the development of recommendations to support “actions local governments can take
to improve community resiliency, including assessment of infrastructure vulnerabilities, land use
policies, and other adaptation strategies.” To date, many of the climate adaptation
recommendations included in the Climate Framework reflect the shared responsibility between
state and local agencies for protecting public safety, providing services and infrastructure, and
supporting residents, visitors, and business communities. Additional opportunities to enhance
outreach and technical assistance to local governments will be identified and targeted for action as
implementation begins in 2015.
For example, DHSS provides many health and social services throughout Delaware communities.
Integrating climate change into local activities will strengthen the capacity to respond to increased
demand for services, changing needs in the community, and new health risks. OSPC plays a key role
in supporting local governments in updating Comprehensive Plans and providing technical
assistance. Local planning that considers future climate impacts can help improve community
resiliency to higher temperatures, changes in rainfall, and increasing sea level rise and flooding
risks.
State agencies can provide support and assistance in many ways. For example, DelDOT works with
OSPC and local governments to develop and share geospatial mapping and infrastructure
assessment tools to help inform communities about climate change impacts. DNREC provides
technical support to assist local governments with adaptation and climate resilience activities.
There are also grant and loan programs available to support local governments, such as planning
grants through Delaware Coastal Programs and DNREC’s Financial Assistance Branch.

Outreach and Education to the Public
The state of Delaware offers a wide range of education, outreach, and information services to the
public—both residents and visitors—to promote economic activities, ensure public safety, and
enhance the experience of visitors to the state’s public parks, beaches, and wildlife areas. Many
state agencies developed recommendations to incorporate information about climate impacts and
adaptation into their public outreach efforts. Recognizing that public input is essential to
implementation of adaptation strategies, outreach and communication events will be launched in
2015.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 16



For example, DNREC provides education and interpretive programs on its public lands; information
related to climate impacts to these natural areas can be important for the safe enjoyment of
recreational boating, hunting, fishing, and nature observation. DDA works with landowners and
agricultural operators to provide outreach on best practices for crop, livestock, and forestry
management; education materials and workshops can also include information to address climate
change, such as impacts of sea level rise on farmland and water supplies.
Providing education and outreach to targeted audiences is also integral to many state agencies. For
example, DSHA recommends providing information on climate resiliency to homebuyers.

Agency Recommendation Summaries
On December 3, 2014, the Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency approved the
recommendations of the Adaptation Workgroup. The Climate Framework includes more than 150
recommendations (see below) for a wide range of actions that address public health and safety
needs, impacts to facilities and infrastructure, and capacity to deliver services to Delaware’s
citizens, businesses, and communities.

Next Steps
The state agencies represented on the Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency will begin
implementation of adaptation recommendations in 2015. Next steps include:








With respect to the “inward-facing” recommendations that affect only the internal
operations of state government, the state agencies represented in the Cabinet Committee
on Climate and Resiliency will begin implementation in 2015. To the extent implementation
would have material budgetary impacts or would require legislation, agencies will quantify
such impacts and/or determine what legislative or regulatory changes are needed.
With respect to “outward-facing” recommendations that could affect stakeholders outside
of state government, stakeholder engagement will be required before final decisions are
made. To that end, public outreach and communication events will be launched in 2015 to
discuss these recommendations in greater detail.
Recommendations developed to date and additional opportunities to enhance outreach
and technical assistance to local governments will be targeted for action. Improving
community resiliency will build upon ongoing coordination with the Office of State Planning
Coordination and each agency’s programs that support local governments.
Interagency coordination will continue to be a priority for implementing adaptation
measures, and will provide a forum for further discussion of climate resilience issues of
statewide concern.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 17



[This page intentionally left blank]

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 18



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Agriculture
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Agriculture (DDA) is to sustain and promote the viability of
food, fiber, and agricultural industries in Delaware through quality services that protect and enhance the
environment, health, and welfare of the general public.

Climate impacts to agency
Changes in temperature and precipitation affect the management of forest lands and crop lands. Water
quality may be affected by fluctuations in total precipitation amounts and frequency. Plant health and
soil quality conditions may be affected, which in turn can influence water quality through increased
nutrients in runoff, as well as total runoff amounts. Sea level rise may lead to loss of farmland and/or
soil productivity. Changing temperatures may affect plant and animal health with increasing risks of
harmful insects, fungi, and molds. Climate change also poses economic impacts to the agricultural
sector, including costs related to increasing energy demands for cooling/heating and irrigation.

Adaptation responses
DDA identified internal policies that should be evaluated to consider climate impacts. Outreach and
education is also an important role for DDA, in coordination with the University of Delaware Cooperative
Extension and the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of Agriculture should:






Evaluate response to increased susceptibility to forest wildfires by evaluating policies related to
risk management, fire prevention, and fire management.
Evaluate policies related to nutrient management, pesticide application, risk assessment, and
cropping practices that may be affected by potential increases in the number of hot, dry days
per year.
Educate landowners and agricultural operators to address and mitigate loss of land due to sea
level rise.
Educate landowners and agricultural operators on the effects of saltwater intrusion resulting
from sea level rise.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 19



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Education
Agency mission
The mission of the Department of Education is to promote the highest quality education for every
Delaware student by providing visionary leadership and superior service.

Climate impacts to agency
Increasing risks of flooding due to extreme rainfall events and sea level rise pose threats to the safety of
students and faculty, and may increase frequency of school closures when safe access to schools is
impaired. Flooding can also increase costs for repair and maintenance of school buildings and
infrastructure. Increasing temperatures are expected to increase energy demands and costs for school
facilities. School transportation systems may also need upgrading to meet higher fuel efficiency
standards and decrease greenhouse gas emissions.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts include addressing the siting and design of school buildings and
infrastructure, and ensuring that energy efficiency and climate resiliency are incorporated into new
structures and renovations of existing structures.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of Education should:


Work with school districts, the Office of State Planning, and the Office of Management and
Budget to ensure that schools are not built on sites subject to flooding or sea level rise.



Work with Facilities Management (OMB) and the school districts to encourage LEED certification
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design), Green Ribbon standards, or other standards
to promote the most efficient design and construction for school buildings to reduce their
environmental footprint.



Continue to replace school buses with cleaner buses meeting the most recent EPA
requirements.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 20



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Health and Social
Services—Division of Public Health
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS) is to improve the quality
of life for Delaware's citizens by promoting health and well-being, fostering self-sufficiency, and
protecting vulnerable populations.

Climate impacts to agency
The impacts of climate change pose serious threats to human health and thus the services that the
agency provides. Increasing temperatures not only increase the susceptibility of citizens to heat-related
diseases, but may also result in rising incidence of certain infectious diseases and outbreaks of new
diseases not currently endemic to Delaware. Increased temperatures, paired with increased production
of ozone and other particulate matter, places citizens at increased risk of respiratory illnesses. Extreme
weather events and flooding also have detrimental impacts on human health, especially for vulnerable
populations.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts include improving the monitoring and surveillance capabilities of the
department to account for health-related impacts, expansion of data capabilities and storage on healthrelated impacts, and outreach and education to localities on the potential health impacts that may be
induced by climate change.

Agency recommendations—Division of Public Health
The Delaware Department of Health and Social Services—Division of Public Health recommendations fall
into the following categories:


To develop new or improve existing monitoring and surveillance, the department should:
o Advocate for an expansion of vector surveillance programs to identify new vectors and
monitor the size of vector populations.
o Support monitoring of new and emerging diseases resulting from climate change.
o Evaluate the specific benefits and costs of developing and maintaining an Environmental
Public Health Tracking System for the ongoing collection, integration, analysis,
interpretation, and dissemination of data from environmental hazard monitoring, and
from human exposure and health effects surveillance.
o Evaluate the feasibility of monitoring private well water quality in coastal areas for
saltwater intrusion and investigate the potential to connect to a public water source.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 21



o

o

Examine ways to track new and emerging diseases related to climate change, such as
Chikungunya fever, to respond to the influence that global climate change may have on
infectious disease dynamics.
Expand the list of reportable conditions to include those related to extreme or adverse
weather conditions (e.g., heat stroke and heat stress).



To enhance current data management practices, the department should evaluate the specific
benefits and costs of:
o Expanding and updating infrastructure and resources for data collection and analysis to
include climate change impacts.
o Developing geographic information system (GIS) mapping of vulnerable populations and
disease patterns to help identify specific populations and health outcomes affected by
climate change–related events.
o Consolidating DPH databases so climate change impacts to DPH can be tracked and
monitored.



To assist in outreach and education, the department should:
o Incorporate information on climate change impacts on health in DPH outreach materials
(web-based and printed materials).
o Update and develop new materials on climate change and health for outreach.
o Provide internal outreach, education, and training for the DPH staff on climate change
impacts and risks to health.



To accomplish other priorities, the department should:
o Review and update their programs to include climate change impacts.
o Develop a Health Impact Assessment (HIA) and other tools for assessing the health of a
community.
o Advocate for integrating climate change with local activities around sustainability and
mitigation to deal with water issues, heat island effects, land use and infrastructure
planning, building codes, promotion of green energy, and mass transit.
o Support and advocate expanding the air quality monitoring program of the Department
of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC).
o Identify and share possible climate change funding opportunities related to health
issues.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 22



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Health and Social
Services—Social Service Divisions
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS) is to improve the quality
of life for Delaware's citizens by promoting health and well-being, fostering self-sufficiency, and
protecting vulnerable populations.

Climate impacts to agency
The impacts of climate change pose serious threats to human health and thus the services that the
agency provides. Increasing temperatures, extreme weather events and flooding have detrimental
impacts on human health, especially for vulnerable populations. Access to and continued availability of
social services can also be affected during extreme weather events, adding to the vulnerability of DHSS
clients.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts include improvements to communication systems, actions to prepare for
emergencies and extreme weather events, and outreach and education to DHSS clients on adapting to
changing climate conditions.

Agency recommendations—Social Service Divisions
The Department of Health and Social Services—Social Service Divisions should:
 Establish communication link to Division of Developmental Disability clients who live on their
own, particularly those requiring respiratory assistance that will be particularly vulnerable
during a heat wave or power outage.
 Expand the refill window of certain medications (e.g., psychotropic medicine) for clients to
ensure availability of medications during emergency evacuations or extreme weather events.
 Implement a statewide Smart-911 system.
 Discuss with managed care organizations the feasibility of requiring contingency plans for
extreme weather.
 Remove potential hazards from low-lying areas near DHSS facilities to prevent damage during
flood events.
 Advocate for additional resources for Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
and increased flexibility in guidelines on how to use funds.
 Create a statewide education campaign to engage DHSS clients on climate change, resiliency,
and adaptation initiatives.
 Consider creating mobile State Service Centers to provide services to clients who are relocated
during emergency evacuations or extreme weather events.
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 23








Designate State Service Centers as critical facilities and provide the necessary infrastructure
(e.g., generators) to ensure continued availability of services during extreme weather events
and during power outages.
Provide training and education on climate preparedness and adaptation.
Identify sites to be used as designated cooling and heating centers during extreme weather
events.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 24



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) is to
protect and manage the state's vital natural resources, protect public health and safety, provide quality
outdoor recreation, and to serve and educate the citizens of the First State about the wise use,
conservation, and enhancement of Delaware's environment.

Climate impacts to agency
Climate change impacts the lands, waters, and resources that DNREC is responsible for managing and
protecting. Lands that DNREC manages and regulates, such as state parks and wildlife areas, are affected
by increasing temperatures, changing precipitation, and sea level rise. Public safety and access and
opportunities for public use and educational programs may be limited by increased flooding. Delaware’s
natural habitats, flora, and fauna will be affected by extreme temperatures and precipitation. Sea level
rise will affect beaches, dunes, and tidal streams by increased erosion and changes in salinity and water
temperature. The agency’s regulatory and permitting programs may face increasing demands for
service, and the agency will need to evaluate and modify current programs to address changing
environmental conditions.

Adaptation responses
DNREC’s responses to climate impacts fall into a number of department-wide priorities that address
managing resources and assets, supporting local governments, and integrating climate change into
operational and capital budget planning.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control recommendations fall into
the following categories:


To incorporate climate change into land management and stewardship decisions for DNRECowned lands, the department should:
o Design and implement restoration activities to slow the current loss of coastal beach,
marsh, and forest habitats.
o Discuss the expansion of invasive species control and consider establishing earlydetection and rapid management response teams in coordination with other land
management agencies and partners.
o Prepare to restore riparian buffers on wildlife areas, fishing and boating access areas,
and private lands through voluntary incentive programs.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 25



o
o
o
o
o
o

Prepare to restore adequate buffers around unique ephemeral wetlands, including
coastal plain seasonal ponds and vernal pools.
Prepare to manage a different group of important fish and wildlife species and habitat,
as geographic distributions shift with climate.
Evaluate strategies for increasing native pollinator habitat on state wildlife areas and
private lands.
Evaluate the need for revisions to technical specifications for vegetative practices, in
consideration of sea level rise and saltwater intrusion.
Incorporate climate change into land stewardship decisions at the Delaware National
Estuarine Research Reserve (DNERR).
Increase climate change–focused research and monitoring on DNERR land.



To incorporate climate change into asset management for hard and natural infrastructure, the
department should:
o Develop new standards for DNREC buildings in response to changing threats.
o Consider relocating Fish and Wildlife facilities, including offices, education centers, boat
ramps and equipment storage areas, and redesign or relocate facility access roads
already at risk from flooding and storm surge.
o Develop a climate change adaptation plan for the two DNERR properties in the state.
o Adapt coastal impoundments and ponds by stabilizing and increasing the resilience of
levees, water-control structures and dams, and implement water-level management
and restoration activities that will improve accretion and vegetative growth.
o Evaluate need for revisions to technical standards and specifications for stormwater
management.



To provide technical assistance to local governments, communities, and businesses, the
department should:
o Provide technical guidance and funding to encourage communities to plan for and
implement appropriate climate adaptation measures.
o Study how to prioritize funding to give preference to projects in areas that have taken
steps to adopt best practices and meaningful standards for drainage and floodplain
management.
o Provide technical support to local governments to enhance focus on climate impacts
and long-term sustainability in the Comprehensive Plan and in local ordinances.
o Work with county, municipal, and local governments to ensure the uniform training,
compliance, and enforcement of energy codes.
o Develop a model building code that could be adopted at the state or local level.
o Develop a model ordinance for local governments to use to require that home heating
oil tanks be secured to prevent detachment and release during a flooding event.
o Assist local governments in developing strategies to protect wastewater treatment
facilities from flooding.
o Assist suppliers of drinking water from surface water sources to develop strategies to
protect water intakes from flooding and salt water.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 26



o

Assist suppliers of drinking water from groundwater sources to develop strategies for
the protection of wells from flooding and salt water.



To integrate climate impacts into scientific study, regulation, and permitting decisions, the
department should:
o Evaluate the need for improving spill containment requirements for aboveground
storage tanks and hazardous waste storage areas, which are vulnerable to flooding and
storm surge impacts.
o Incorporate Executive Order 41 into the Federal Consistency Program’s enforceable
coastal management policies.
o Evaluate need for revisions to stormwater regulation.
o Evaluate potential changes to the methods of placement of wetland and water quality
monitoring stations and methods of research and data collection.
o Evaluate design specifications and maintenance practices to ensure that rain gardens
and other stormwater systems on state lands remain functional with increases in
extreme precipitation.
o Evaluate the adequacy of drainage infrastructure to address changes in precipitation
and sea level rise.
o Ensure that Delaware emissions of the precursors of ground-level ozone (SO2, NOx, and
VOCs) remain well controlled.
o Consider incorporating equipment siting requirements into the air permitting process.



To incorporate adaptation into operational budget and capital planning processes, the
department should:
o Increase involvement and activities associated with energy emergency planning.
o Increase support for shoreline management and protection for living shorelines.
o Plan for increasing needs, costs, and potential regulatory changes for shoreline
management and beach preservation.
o Evaluate needs for channel maintenance to maintain current levels of navigable
waterways, recreational boating and fishing amenities, and park use.
o Prepare to control mosquito populations nearly year-round to address increased
complaints and to reduce transmission of mosquito-borne diseases.
o Prepare to address an increase in nuisance wildlife complaints by increasing outreach
about best practices and services available.
o Prepare to handle an increased number of fish kills and harmful algal blooms.



To ensure protection of public health and safety, the department should:
o Develop a plan to provide alternative evacuation routes, access roads and trails, and to
ensure communication is available for emergency response.
o Issue emergency waivers for repairs to infrastructure, environmental resources, and
property resulting from storms and flooding events.
o Support the update of requirements in the Debris Management Section of the State
Emergency Operations Plan and ensure their implementation.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 27





To improve data and information available to the public, the department should:
o Update floodplain maps with consideration of climate change dynamics.
o Coordinate on the use of updated floodplain maps to assist with floodplain mitigation
activities.
o Update mapping of tidal wetland jurisdictional boundaries.
o Increase climate change content in educational and outreach programs.
o Develop educational materials on vector-borne diseases, prevention and treatment of
heat stroke and dehydration, and emergency response in extreme weather events.
o Build capacity to conduct air quality modeling to evaluate the impact of temperature
change on ozone levels and fine particulate matter.
o Increase climate change–focused research and modeling.



To address other department-wide priorities, the department should:
o Develop resiliency criteria for distribution of grant and contract funds based on the
flexibility and intent of the funding source.
o Support climate mitigation and adaptation policy in coordination with the Governor’s
Committee on Climate and Resiliency, convened under Executive Order 41.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 28



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland
Security
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security is to promote and protect the
safety of people and property in Delaware.

Climate impacts to agency
Increasing temperatures and extreme heat events/prolonged heat waves pose a significant threat to the
Department of Safety and Homeland Security, primarily due to the high number of outdoor workers the
agency employs. These high temperatures also place a burden on vehicles and facilities. Increased levels
of precipitation, paired with sea level rise, pose serious risks of flooding, which can damage critical
infrastructure, including facilities and roadways. This has the potential to not only place agency
employees at risk, but also the citizens that they seek to protect.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts include addressing the siting and design of facilities, ensuring the safety of
outdoor workers under scenarios of high heat, assessing the effects of climate change to agency assets,
and altering a number of policies to integrate climate adaptation and resilience into agency operations.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security should:






Develop operational plans to address the potential impacts of sea level rise.
Consider alterations to policies regarding worker safety in an increased temperature
environment.
Conduct additional research to provide accurate information on the effects of increased
temperatures and increased precipitation on buildings and vehicles, including the effects on
existing structures and vehicles.
Make programmatic adjustments to adapt to increasing levels of precipitation, flooding, and sea
level rise.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 29



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of State
Agency Mission
The Secretary of State (DOS) oversees an extremely diverse department with responsibilities in virtually
every aspect of state government: economic development, finance, transportation, housing, education,
culture, and quality-of-life issues. The Department’s mission is to:
 Promote Delaware's economy and generate state revenue;
 Manage and facilitate citizen access to governmental, educational and recreational information;
 Preserve and promote Delaware history, art and culture;
 Assist and provide direct services to Delaware veterans and their families;
 Promote equal opportunity and protection for all persons;
 Provide regulatory, licensing, investigative and consumer services to protect the public's health,
safety and economic welfare; and
 Administer the state’s public and merit employment relations laws and government ethics laws.
 Regulate investor-owned public utilities to ensure safe, reliable and reasonably priced cable,
electric, natural gas, wastewater, water and telecommunications services for Delaware
consumers.

Climate impacts to agency
Extreme temperatures, flooding and storms will impact workforce availability and health, particularly for
outdoor workers. Sea level rise and localized flooding pose direct threats to historic properties and
structures. Increasing temperatures and heavy precipitation will require more frequent maintenance
cycles due to increased wear and tear on buildings and equipment.

Adaptation responses
Climate change requires responses that reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well as increase
preparedness to climate impacts. Climate mitigation measures and climate adaptation
recommendations are identified as priorities for the Department of State.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of State recommendations fall into the following categories:
 To identify and support policy initiatives that reduce greenhouse gas emissions (climate
mitigation), the Department should:
o Review Public Service Commission options to help reduce greenhouse gases and
mitigate climate change.
o Broaden utility review of climate change initiatives to include non-regulated entities.
o Review utility tariff approaches to minimizing greenhouse gases.


To enhance utility infrastructure to ensure reliability of service, the Department should:
o Review potential for infrastructure enhancements that can help mitigate climate change
exposure.
o Consider a review of storm response procedures with all regulated utilities.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 30





To incorporate climate change into asset management and protection of historic and cultural
resources, the Department should:
o Increase preparedness for climate change events by completing mapping of all cultural
resources in the Cultural and Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS), a GISbased system.
o Conduct vulnerability assessments and scenario planning, to include evacuation and
triage procedures.
o Ensure preparedness for threatened sites.
o Evaluate the specific costs and benefits of creating a category of historic preservation
tax credits to offset the costs of adaptation and protection measures.
o Publish cultural resource management plans.



To incorporate climate change into asset management, the Department should:
o Identify all work locations vulnerable to flooding and mitigate impacts through
maintenance planning.
o Create baseline energy efficiency standards for all leased sites in the department.
o Create baseline energy efficiency for all office equipment and promote use of Energy
Star equipment where appropriate.
o Ensure all new Department of State buildings are in compliance with Executive Order
#18 for energy conservation and efficiency; use of clean, renewable energy; and
environmentally responsible construction.
o Ensure that all new buildings receiving funding from the state of Delaware through the
Department of State, are in compliance with Executive Order 18 for energy conservation
and efficiency; use of clean, renewable energy; and environmentally responsible
construction.



To ensure workforce safety and capacity to provide services, the Department should:
o Evaluate the need for increasing the number of technical staff to address the potential
increase in call volumes and more complex hearings.
o Develop a staff training program to promote personal energy use awareness.
o Establish protocols to protect employees working outside from adverse effects of
extreme temperature days.
o Evaluate specific workplace options for employees, such as video-conferencing
capability, ride-sharing, and flexible work schedules.



To ensure consumer protection, the Department should:
o Evaluate the need for alternate utility rate structures, with approval by the Public
Services Commission.
o Assess financial impact of any new rates in consideration of utility consumer interests.
o Enhance outreach to utility consumers on issues of climate change, mitigation, energy
efficiency, and any potential rate changes.
o Include protected classes and undocumented communities in outreach efforts to ensure
fairness and equity.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 31



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Department of Transportation
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Department of Transportation (DelDOT) is to ensure excellence in
transportation by striving to make every trip in Delaware safe, reliable, and convenient for people and
commerce, and by providing safe choices for travelers in Delaware to access roads, rails, buses, airways,
waterways, bike trails, and walking paths.

Climate impacts to agency
The long-term investments of transportation infrastructure will be affected by climate change in many
ways. Sea level rise, temperature extremes, flooding, and heavy precipitation will affect the condition,
operability, and life cycle of transportation assets. Impacts include damage to asphalt, corrosion,
contraction, and expansion of materials. Maintenance of stormwater management and vegetation along
roadways will also be affected. Design and construction of bridges, roadways, and other structures may
need to be revised, through updates to design manuals and to specific project designs.

Adaptation responses
DelDOT’s responses to climate impacts focus on improving asset management practices by
incorporating climate resiliency into design, materials, and siting guidelines for transportation
infrastructure. Coordination with other state agencies is also identified as key to addressing emergency
management and land use planning issues. Climate change requires responses that reduce greenhouse
gas emissions as well as increase preparedness to climate impacts. Climate mitigation measures and
climate adaptation recommendations are identified as priorities for the Department of Transportation.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Department of Transportation recommendations fall into the following categories:


To incorporate climate change into asset management, the department should:
o Continue development of geospatial data sets that can help identify vulnerable areas
and help estimate the impact of reasonably anticipated events (such as a Category 3
hurricane).
o Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the state’s roadways, bridges, and other
infrastructure to identify critical infrastructure that may be vulnerable to climate
impacts.
o Integrate climate resiliency into its bridge and highway design manuals strategies to
address climate impacts, including sea level rise, for short-term, medium-term, and
long-term anticipated effects.
o Build transportation enhancements (pathways, trails, roadscapes, etc.) to accommodate
impacts of climate change.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 32



o
o
o
o
o
o

Identify and assess existing chronic flooding and erosion problems that affect
transportation infrastructure.
Evaluate and qualify materials used to reduce the impacts of stormwater runoff.
Reevaluate stormwater management approaches for improved resiliency.
Evaluate new technologies in asphalt and concrete pavement composition to mitigate
melting of road surfaces or other damage.
Incorporate climate impacts into cost-effective investment in infrastructure.
Evaluate whether to obtain insurance to assist in recovery from catastrophic events.



To ensure workforce and public health and safety, the department should:
o Evaluate, and as necessary adjust, worker safety guidelines and train workers to identify
risks of exposure to high heat, extreme temperatures, and impacts to roadway and
project site conditions.
o Train workers utilizing materials for roadway maintenance to apply more resilient
materials in responsible ways.
o Evaluate the costs, benefits, and feasibility of driving restrictions for air quality events.
o Develop revised maintenance schedules in response to air quality.
o Adjust emergency response strategies to provide transit as necessary without
endangering drivers or passengers.
o Coordinate with the Department of Safety and Homeland Security on long-term
strategies for significant catastrophic events and in the determination of short-term
abandonment policies and evacuation routes.



To support climate resiliency in local communities, the department should:
o Work with local governments, in conjunction with the Office of State Planning
Coordination, on the development of geospatial mapping and infrastructure assessment
tools to help inform the municipalities and counties.



To identify and support policy initiatives that reduce greenhouse gas emissions (climate
mitigation), the department should:
o Purchase and deploy lower-emission light-duty vehicles as 10 percent of its fleet by
2020.
o Consider the deployment of more alternative energy technologies, namely energy
efficiency, and wind and solar technology in its administrative and operational buildings.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 33



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Economic Development Office
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Economic Development Office (DEDO) is to be responsible for attracting
new investors and business to the state, for promoting the expansion of existing industry, for assisting
small and minority-owned businesses, for promoting and developing tourism, and for creating new and
improved employment opportunities for all citizens in Delaware.

Climate impacts to agency
Climate change has the potential to disrupt significantly the economic integrity of the state of Delaware.
Increasing temperatures and alterations in precipitation can negatively affect the output of the
agriculture industry. Extreme weather events, sea level rise, and flooding place the Delaware coastline,
and therefore the tourism economy, at extreme risk.

Adaptation responses
Because DEDO does not have regulatory or enforcement or programmatic responsibilities that could be
modified to mitigate the impacts of climate change directly, the agency’s role in climate adaptation is
primarily one of collaboration with other agencies. In doing so, DEDO will strive toward maintaining the
economic integrity of the state while seeking ways to stimulate the economy through sustainable
practices and fostering resilience.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware Economic Development Office should:








Position itself as an advocate for the adoption of the state's recommendations for climate
change adaptation to the business and tourism communities.
Evaluate the possibility of establishing a joint marketing effort by state agencies working in
partnership to instill a deeper awareness of the public transportation services capable of
transporting travelers to Delaware's attractions.
Focus a Delaware Tourism Office outreach effort on realtors and rental agents at the Delaware
beaches to create awareness of the benefits of changing the current standard of what
constitutes a “weekly rental” of beach properties.
Target growth and expansion of clean/light industry statewide to the areas most resilient to the
impacts of climate change.
Work with the Department of Agriculture and universities to develop approaches to reduce the
impacts of climate change on local farmers, crops, and production facilities and to expand the
use of agricultural technology in Delaware.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 34







Utilize existing Business Retention Outreach efforts to educate existing business and industry on
the risks of climate change to their Delaware location(s) and develop approaches to mitigate
that risk.
Advocate for the reuse of existing industrial brownfield sites and support infrastructure
statewide to reduce the use of greenfield sites and the construction of new, duplicate
infrastructure.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 35



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware State Housing Authority
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware State Housing Authority (DSHA) is to efficiently provide, and assist others to
provide, quality, affordable housing opportunities and appropriate supportive services to low- and
moderate-income Delawareans.

Climate impacts to agency
Increasing temperatures result in an increased need for energy for cooling of housing structures.
Flooding as a result of increased precipitation and sea level rise can place housing structures at risk to
physical damage, while also impairing access. Impacts will be felt most severely in low income and other
vulnerable populations unless steps to proactively improve resiliency are taken.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts are targeted toward improving resilience in the housing sector through
improvements in energy efficiency and the siting and design of housing structures. Another important
component of the responses captures the need for outreach and education to constituents.

Agency recommendations
The Delaware State Housing Authority should:






Evaluate energy efficiency standards of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program.
Explore partnering on grants that address resiliency, such as the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development's National Disaster Resilience Competition.
Consider sea level rise impacts in its programs that facilitate new construction and or
rehabilitation.
Work with the 11 housing counseling agencies to incorporate awareness on sea level rise into
their prepurchase counseling.
Promote sustainable building practices in the Downtown Development District grant program.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 36



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Office of Management and Budget
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is to provide leadership,
partnerships, policy development, planning, and objective analysis to maximize the value of state assets,
including people, facilities, land, and financial resources.

Climate impacts to agency
The impacts of climate change, including increased temperatures, precipitation, and sea level rise, pose
risks to state facilities, the workers that the state employs, and all Delaware citizens.

Adaptation responses
Responses to climate impacts require actions to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and to promote
preparedness. OMB has identified responses that achieve both goals, through such areas as the
management of state facilities, state procurement, and human resource management.

Agency recommendations
The Office of Management and Budget should:










Advocate for changes to state building design practices and policies to promote environmentally
friendly design considerations for state facilities to minimize environmental impact.
Improve the resilience of state facilities and equipment to climate impacts.
Develop comprehensive guidelines to site state facilities that account for sea level rise and
flooding due to extreme rain events.
Review and revise Life Cycle Costing Analysis procedures to account for potential increased
precipitation, sea level rise, and extreme temperatures.
Evaluate maintenance schedules of buildings and grounds for potential climate change effects to
ensure acceptable performance during extreme events.
Investigate alternate work schedules as appropriate for outdoor workers.
Incorporate resilience into Government Support Services contracting by building heating/cooling
and weather-resistance requirements into contract specifications as necessary.
Incorporate resilience into messenger services to maintain contingency plans.
Offer employees training on the potential impacts that climate change may have on their
employment and their homes.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 37



Agency Recommendations for Climate Adaptation:
Delaware Office of State Planning Coordination
Agency mission
The mission of the Delaware Office of State Planning Coordination (OSPC) is the continuous
improvement of the coordination and effectiveness of land use decisions made by state, county, and
municipal governments while building and maintaining a high quality of life in the state of Delaware.

Climate impacts to agency
The impacts of climate change will be felt most significantly at the local level in communities. Many
communities within the state are extremely prone to flooding and sea level rise in the coming years,
placing citizens, infrastructure, and other resources at risk.

Adaptation responses
The Office of State Planning Coordination has identified responses that primarily deal with assisting local
governments and municipalities in proactively reducing their vulnerability to climate impacts through
incorporation of climate resilience in Comprehensive Plans.

Agency recommendations
The Office of State Planning Coordination should:







Revise the PLUS checklist used by local governments for preparation of their Comprehensive
Plans to “strongly encourage” the consideration of future climate impacts.
Examine ways to incorporate climate change and sea level rise impacts in the PLUS application
used by project applicants.
Provide technical support to local government to address climate change impacts in their
Comprehensive Plans and local ordinances.
Provide technical assistance to support integration of climate impacts and to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions through adaptation and mitigation at the local level.
Examine ways to incorporate climate change and sea level rise as factors in the next update to
State Strategies for Policies and Spending.
Establish and maintain GIS layers related to climate change and sea level rise impacts (i.e.,
FirstMap).

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 38



Chapter 3:

Flood Avoidance Recommendations
Background and Introduction
Increasing frequency and intensity of flood events is a primary impact of climate change and one
that is particularly significant for the state of Delaware. The state’s low average elevation,
population density, and dependence upon coastal and riverine resources for jobs, tourism, and
recreation make it particularly vulnerable to the impacts of flooding. Flood impacts will be
exacerbated by climate change in two primary ways: increased frequency of extreme precipitation
events and sea level rise.
Historic weather data and climate change projections both show trends toward an increase in
precipitation falling in heavy downpours.2 Heavy rain events often result in local flooding and, when
combined with high tides, can overwhelm the capacity of stormwater and wastewater systems and
cause extensive damage to homes and infrastructure.
Rising sea levels will also increase the likelihood of flooding and damage during coastal storm
events. Sea level rise can be defined as an increase in average tide levels over time and is caused by
a combination of subsidence of land and global climate change. The sea level trend as measured by
the tide gauge in Lewes operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has
recently been revised upward from 3.20 to 3.39 millimeters per year. This is equivalent to a change
of 1.11 feet (0.34 meter) over 100 years.3 The existing rate of sea level rise is increasing and
expected to accelerate in the coming decades as a result of climate change. The state of Delaware
is currently planning for an increase in average sea level of 1.5 to 4.9 feet (0.5–1.5 meters) by the
year 2100.
Increased frequency and severity of flooding impacts are already being seen and felt today in
Delaware’s coastal communities. These effects have been substantiated by a recent National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration report showing that the number of nuisance flooding
events has increased 300 percent since the 1950s.4 Impacts include temporary flooding or
permanent inundation of wetlands and dry land, saltwater intrusion into freshwater supplies, and
rising water tables. The impacts of flooding are felt statewide, and sea level rise will increase these
impacts in coastal areas.

2

National Climate Assessment (http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/our-changing-climate/heavy-downpoursincreasing)
3
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration – tide gauge data for Lewes, DE
(http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/sltrends/sltrends_station.shtml?stnid=8557380).
4
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Technical Report NOS CO-OPS 073
(http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/NOAA_Technical_Report_NOS_COOPS_073.pdf)

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 39



Objective
Executive Order 41 directs state agencies to “incorporate measures for adapting to increased flood
heights and sea level rise in the siting and design of projects for construction of new structures and
reconstruction of substantially damaged structures and infrastructure.” It calls for avoidance of new
structures in flood-prone areas and special design standards for structures where avoidance is not
practicable.

The Flood Avoidance Workgroup and Methodology
Under the direction of Executive Order 41, a technical workgroup was established to develop flood
avoidance guidance for state agencies. The Flood Avoidance Workgroup (FAW) is led jointly by the
DNREC Division of Watershed Stewardship and the Delaware Coastal Programs Office. Departments
represented in the workgroup include:







Delaware Department of Education
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control
Delaware Department of Transportation
Delaware Office of Management and Budget
Delaware Office of State Planning Coordination
Delaware State Housing Authority

The FAW met regularly between April and November 2014 to pursue the completion of five tasks:
1. Develop a new set of maps and tools for use by state agencies in implementing the guidance.
2. Develop guidance for use by state agencies for the siting and design of structures and
infrastructures, with an emphasis on avoidance of current and future flood risk.
3. Identify the programs and processes that will help ensure compliance with guidelines. Work
with them as needed to incorporate guidance into their policies/checklists.
4. Develop guidance for the use of natural systems and green infrastructure in state projects.
5. Coordinate development of tools and guidance with other EO 41 groups, including the points of
contact and the Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency.
Maps
The Flood Insurance Rate Maps produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
are the most frequently used mapping tool to estimate potential flood risk on a particular parcel of
land. However, these maps do not take future sea levels and precipitation patterns into
consideration; they utilize historic data and current conditions to depict flood risk, while flood risks
are increasing over time.
Maps depicting potential areas of inundation from sea level rise were developed by the DNREC
Delaware Coastal Programs Office in 2009 and are widely used to understand potential impacts of
sea level rise. However, these maps depict only where the higher mean high tide line could be in
the future and do not depict the additional impact of either storm surge or rainfall.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 40



Because of the shortcomings of the existing mapping products available for decision making, the
Division of Watershed Stewardship contracted with a consulting firm to develop a statewide map
that depicts the combined risk of sea level rise and coastal storms. This combined map, the Flood
Risk Adaptation Map, depicts the extent of flooding that could occur during a 1 percent-chance
flood event5 if mean sea levels are 3 feet (0.9 meter) higher than they are today. Only one sea level
rise scenario (a 3-foot increase in mean sea levels) was modeled due to funding limitations. This
selection was recommended by the FAW technical experts as a reasonable compromise that allows
users to visualize storm impacts late century at moderate levels of sea level rise, and mid-century
should sea levels rise at a more rapid rate (closer to the high scenario of 4.9 feet [1.5-meters] ).
These maps do not depict increased risks associated with changes in coastal landforms, increased
wave heights associated with deeper coastal flooding, and other secondary hazards.
The Flood Risk Adaptation Map will be made available to state agencies as a GIS layer through the
state’s FirstMap system. If funding and resources can be obtained, the map can also be used to
create an interactive and easy-to-use tool for all state agencies to quickly and easily understand
whether their project could be subject to the flood avoidance and design provisions of EO 41.
Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance
To accompany the Flood Risk Adaptation Map, a Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance document is
under development. The guidance document is envisioned to be an easy-to-use resource for all
state agency employees involved in a capital project, from site-selection to construction. It will step
users through the process of using the Flood Risk Adaptation Map to avoid construction of new
structures and infrastructure in flood-prone areas. If avoidance is not feasible, the guidance
document also helps a user find and select the appropriate flood level and adaptation strategies.
The guidance is currently in draft form and under review and discussion by FAW members. It is on
track to be completed during the first quarter of 2015.
Programs and Processes (Recommendations)
In addition to the mapping and guidance tools, the FAW has begun to identify those programs and
policies that are essential to ensuring widespread adoption and compliance with the flooding and
sea level rise provisions of EO 41. The FAW has developed a list of 11 recommendations for
institutionalizing the EO 41 Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance. These recommendations were
developed by FAW members specifically to capture programs and policies most likely to help
ensure that other programs throughout the state are incorporating EO 41 into their capital projects.
They were developed separately from the recommendations developed through the Adaptation
Workgroup, but should be implemented similarly.
The FAW recommendations for institutionalizing the flooding and sea level rise provisions of EO 41
by agency are as follows:
5

The 1% annual exceedance probability (AEP) flood is the basis for the National Flood Insurance Program. This
level of flood risk has a 1-in-100 chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and is often referred to as
the “100-year flood,” (http://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/106/).

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 41



Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control Recommendations
 Modify the Preliminary Engineering Report Guidance Document required for Water Pollution
Control Revolving Fund applications to incorporate the provisions of EO 41.
 Modify the Water Pollution Control Revolving Fund Project Priority List criteria to incorporate
the provisions of EO 41.
 Modify Delaware Coastal Management Policies to incorporate the provisions of EO 41.
Department of Transportation Recommendations
 Modify the DelDOT Development Coordination Manual to incorporate the provisions of EO 41.
 Modify the DelDOT Bridge Design Manual to incorporate the provisions of EO 41.
 Modify the DelDOT Road Design Manual to incorporate the provisions of EO 41.
Office of Management and Budget Recommendations
 Modify the final design review checklist used by Facilities Management to incorporate the
provisions of EO 41.
 Modify the Preliminary Review Checklist for State Clearinghouse to incorporate the provisions
of EO 41.
 Consider carrying flood insurance for critical state properties in areas identified through the
Flood Risk Adaptation Map.
Office of State Planning Coordination Recommendations
 Modify the Preliminary Land Use Service Applicant Checklist to incorporate questions regarding
sea level rise and combined flooding impacts.
 Modify the Strategies for State Policies and Spending to incorporate the Flood Risk Adaptation
Map.
Green Infrastructure Guidance
Executive Order 41 calls for measures to improve resiliency to flooding by “using natural systems or
green infrastructure to improve resiliency wherever practical and effective.” The Flood Avoidance
Workgroup has begun background research to develop a guidance document to help define green
infrastructure and provide examples of where these practices can be used to reduce flood impacts.
Coordination
Throughout the process, FAW members have coordinated on the development of tools and
guidance with the points of contact and attended POC meetings to share information and progress.
Coordination with the Adaptation Workgroup has also been important to the process, as flood
avoidance is closely linked to many of the adaptation recommendations.

Next Steps
The Flood Avoidance Workgroup will complete the Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance
document as a technical guide, and will assist state agencies with implementation in 2015. The
Climate Framework includes 11 recommendations that can be used to institutionalize the Flood
Avoidance and Design Guidance. Successful incorporation of the Flood Risk Adaptation Map and
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 42



Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance into state agency procedures and processes will take
additional coordination and technical assistance. Next steps include:







The Flood Avoidance Workgroup will complete the Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance
document as a technical guide to assist state agencies in implementing Executive Order 41.
The document is expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2015.
The Flood Risk Adaptation Map will be made available to state agencies as a GIS layer
through the state’s FirstMap system during the first quarter of 2015.
The Flood Avoidance Workgroup proposes to establish a Flood Risk Adaptation Technical
Team composed of experts from a variety of state agencies to provide assistance to state
agencies in meeting the requirements of EO 41.
The Flood Avoidance Workgroup also proposes to develop a web mapping application for
use by state agencies that would provide quick and simple access to the Flood Risk
Adaptation Map to determine whether a project requires an additional level of design
consideration.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 43



[This page intentionally left blank]

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page 44



Climate Framework for Delaware
Executive Order 41
Appendices

December 31, 2014

Appendix A: Executive Order 41
Appendix B: Executive Order 41 Workgroup Members
Appendix C: Executive Order 41 GHG Mitigation Quantifications and Assumptions
Appendix D: Executive Order 41 Agency Adaptation Recommendations

Climate Framework for Delaware



[This page intentionally left blank]

Climate Framework for Delaware



Climate Framework for Delaware
Appendix A
Executive Order 41

December 31, 2014

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A1



EXECUTIVE ORDER
NUMBER FORTY-ONE
TO:

HEADS OF ALL STATE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

RE:

PREPARING DELAWARE FOR EMERGING CLIMATE IMPACTS AND SEIZING
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES FROM REDUCING EMISSIONS

WHEREAS, burning fossil fuels causes the release of heat-trapping greenhouse gases that
contribute to a changing climate, which presents both economic opportunities for new jobs and
industries, as well as challenges to protecting public health and safety, supporting a vibrant
economy, and conserving natural resources; and
WHEREAS, Delaware’s greenhouse gas emissions have decreased by more than any state
in the nation (29.7% from 2000 to 2010) and recent investments to modernize our energy system
and efforts by several of Delaware's major employers and institutions of higher learning will result in
significant additional reduction, however more must be done; and
WHEREAS, initiatives to responsibly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and prepare Delaware
for climate impacts present significant economic development and employment opportunities in
infrastructure construction, energy efficiency, clean energy, and advanced transportation; and
WHEREAS, as a low-lying coastal state with the lowest average land elevation in the
United States and significant population living along 381 miles of shoreline, Delaware is vulnerable
to coastal erosion, storm surge, flooding, saltwater intrusion, and tidal wetland losses, all of which
will be exacerbated by sea-level rise; and
WHEREAS, Delaware’s critical infrastructure, including roads, bridges, dams, dikes,
impoundments, energy distribution systems, emergency services, outdoor recreation facilities,
drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities, industrial sites, and landfills are at-risk to
climate change impacts; and
WHEREAS, Delaware's Bayshore and Inland Bays communities have experienced saltwater
intrusion into drinking water supplies and irrigation systems, and climate impacts could negatively
affect the availability and reliability of the groundwater aquifers that provide water to many
municipalities, residents, and farmers; and
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A2



WHEREAS, agriculture in Delaware is an $8 billion industry which could be
significantly impacted by increasingly variable temperatures, precipitation, extreme weather events,
and droughts; and
WHEREAS, tourism in Delaware is an $6 billion industry supported by world-class
beaches, parks, wildlife areas, cultural assets, and recreational waterways, all of which are
vulnerable to more extreme storms and sea-level rise; and
WHEREAS, the State of Delaware was an original signatory to the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative and is working in collaboration with other states to reduce regional greenhouse gas
emissions from power plants by more than 30% compared to 2008; and
WHEREAS, to coordinate the efforts of state agencies to create a clean energy economy and
a sustainable natural environment, I signed Executive Order No. 18 on February 17, 2010; and
WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 18, the State of Delaware, under the direction of and
coordination by the Cabinet Committee on Energy, has reduced the number of state vehicle miles
traveled by 25%; has increased its use of clean, renewable energy to 30% of its overall annual
electric energy demand; and has taken important steps to reduce energy consumption, lower gas
consumption and emissions from state vehicles, increase recycling, and implement
environmentally-friendly procurement and building practices, resulting in millions of dollars of
savings; and
WHEREAS, the State of Delaware, through the Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control (DNREC), has developed a sea level rise adaptation policy that serves as a
pilot for further statewide application; and
WHEREAS, a variety of entities—including, among others, the Floodplain and Drainage
Advisory Committee, the Bay Beaches Working Group, the Wetlands Advisory Committee, the State
Sea Level Rise Advisory Committee, and the Delaware Climate Change Steering Committee—
have developed or are developing policies and recommendations to address various discrete issues
related to our changing climate and rising sea levels; and
WHEREAS, it is important for the State of Delaware to continue to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions cost-effectively, while preparing for current and emerging climate risks; and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the State of Delaware to address climate change and
rising sea levels in a coordinated and cost-effective manner, at the highest levels of government,
using a structure similar to the one that has been employed so successfully in connection with
Executive Order No. 18.
NOW THEREFORE, I, JACK A. MARKELL, by virtue of the authority vested in me as
Governor of the State of Delaware, do hereby DECLARE and ORDER the following

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A3



1. There is hereby created a Governor’s Committee on Climate and Resiliency (the
“Committee”), which shall be comprised of the following members:
a. Each of the members of the Cabinet Committee on Energy as set forth in 29
Del.C. § 8054, including the Secretaries of the Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control, Department of Agriculture, Department of Transportation, Department
of Health and Social Services, Department of Safety and Homeland Security, and Department of
State; the Director of the Delaware Economic Development Office; and the Director of the
Office of Management and Budget;
b. The Director of the Delaware State Housing Authority;
c. The Director of the Office of State Planning Coordination; and
d. Such other persons as the Governor may from time to time appoint.
2. The Committee shall oversee development of an implementation plan to maintain and
build upon Delaware’s leadership in responsibly reducing greenhouse gas emissions, including
identifying appropriate interim goals. The plan shall ensure that efforts have a positive effect on
the State's economy, including advancing the strategy of securing cleaner, cheaper, and more
reliable energy, improving public health outcomes, increasing employment in Delaware,
strengthening Delaware's manufacturing capabilities, and enhancing Delaware’s overall
competitiveness. The Committee shall report to the Governor on the completed plan by
December 31, 2014, and annually thereafter.
3. The Committee shall develop agency-specific actionable recommendations for improving
Delaware’s preparedness and resiliency to climate impacts on public health and safety, public
infrastructure and facilities, water resources, natural ecosystems, agriculture, tourism, and other
industries. The recommendations shall prioritize the use of natural systems or green
infrastructure as the preferred means to improve resiliency. Recommendations shall be
submitted to the Governor by December 31, 2014 and shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Actions state agencies can take both within their departments and with assisting
residents to adapt to and prepare for more extreme storms and projected temperature and
precipitation variations expected over the next several decades, based upon research conducted
through the Delaware Climate Change Steering Committee;
b. Actions local governments can take to improve community resiliency, including
assessment of infrastructure vulnerabilities, land use policies, and other adaptation strategies that
may be integrated into Comprehensive Land Use Plans in coordination with the Office of State
Planning Coordination; and
c. Outreach strategies to inform and prepare Delaware’s residents and businesses
about identified risks, vulnerabilities, adaptation strategies, and basics of climate change and its
causes, with particular attention to providing strategies to help protect at-risk populations.
4. In addition to the foregoing, all state agencies shall adhere to the following requirements
related to flood hazard mitigation and sea level rise:
a. All state agencies shall incorporate measures for adapting to increased flood
heights and sea level rise in the siting and design of projects for construction of new structures
and reconstruction of substantially damaged structures and infrastructure. Such projects shall be
sited to avoid and minimize flood risks that would unnecessarily increase state liability and
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A4



decrease public safety. Construction projects shall also incorporate measures to improve
resiliency to flood heights, erosion, and sea level rise using natural systems or green
infrastructure to improve resiliency wherever practical and effective;
b. Where avoidance is not practicable, structures within a Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) designated Special Flood Hazard Area shall be designed and
constructed with habitable space at least 18 inches above current base flood elevation on a
foundation appropriate for anticipated flood risk factors. If the structures are within an area
mapped by DNREC as vulnerable to sea level rise inundation the projects shall be designed and
constructed to account for sea level changes anticipated during the lifespan of the structure, in
addition to FEMA flood levels; and

c. All state agencies shall consider and incorporate the sea level rise scenarios set
forth by the DNREC Sea Level Rise Technical Committee into appropriate long-range plans for
infrastructure, facilities, land management, land-use, and capital spending. DNREC shall
periodically update the scenarios with the best scientific data available and distribute new
guidance to state agencies.
5. The Secretary of Natural Resources and Environmental Control shall serve as chair of the
Committee and, with the cooperation of other state agencies, is responsible for managing and
tracking implementation of this Order. In connection therewith, the chair and the Committee
shall leverage the work of leading scientists and subject matter experts, as well as any research,
studies, work groups, advisory councils, and committees as may be required to complete the
tasks outlined herein. DNREC shall provide support to state agencies to meet the requirements
of this Order, including the development of maps illustrating areas of combined flooding and sea
level rise.
6. No provision of this Order shall create any individual right or cause of action that does
not currently exist under state or federal law.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A5



[This page intentionally left blank]

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page A6



Climate Framework for Delaware
Appendix B
Executive Order 41 Workgroup Members
December 31, 2014

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page B1



Executive Order 41
Committee and Workgroup Members
Cabinet Committee on Climate and Resiliency (CCoCAR)
Delaware Department of Agriculture – Secretary Edwin Kee
Delaware Department of Education – Secretary Mark Murphy
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services – Secretary Rita Landgraf
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control – Secretary David Small
Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security – Secretary Lewis Schiliro
Delaware Department of State – Secretary Jeffrey Bullock
Delaware Department of Transportation – Secretary Shailen Bhatt
Delaware Economic Development Office –Director Alan Levin
Delaware State Housing Authority –Director Anas Ben Addi
Office of Management and Budget –Director Ann Visalli
Office of State Planning Coordination – Director Connie Holland

Points of Contact (Representatives of the CCoCAR Members)
Delaware Department of Agriculture – Mark Davis
Delaware Department of Education – Karen Field Rogers
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services – Stephen King and Richard Perkins
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control – Neelam Patel
Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security – Terry Pepper
Delaware Department of State – Timothy Slavin
Delaware Department of Transportation – Brett Taylor
Delaware Economic Development Office – Jeff Stone
Delaware State Housing Authority – Karen Horton
Office of Management and Budget –Robert Scoglietti
Office of State Planning Coordination – Connie Holland

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page B2



Mitigation Workgroup
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control – Morgan Ellis, Valerie Gray,
Devin Gladden, Tunde Asere, Bryan Ashby, Lindsay Hall, Bill Miller, Brad Richardson, Ed Synoski, Bahareh
Van Boekhold
Delaware Department of Agriculture – Mark Davis, Lauren Torres, Michael Valenti
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services – Stephen King
Delaware Department of Transportation – Michael Kirkpatrick, Jim Pappas, Ralph Reeb, Brett
Taylor, Anne Brown, Mike DuRoss, Silvana Croope
Delaware Economic Development Office – Jeff Stone
Delaware State Housing Authority – Matt Heckles
Delaware Solid Waste Authority – Angela Marconi, Logan Miller, Mike Parkowski
Office of Management and Budget – Mark DeVore, Ruth Jones, Beth Neeman

Adaptation Workgroup
Members are the Points of Contact

Flood Avoidance Workgroup
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control – Susan Love, Michael Powell
(co-leads), Molly Ellwood, Greg Pope, Matthew Chesser, Jennifer de Mooy
Delaware Department of Education – Despina Wilson
Delaware Department of Transportation – Barry Benton, Jason Hastings, Mark Tudor, Michael Balbierer,
Mike Simmons, Brian McIlvaine
Delaware State Housing Authority – Karen Horton
Office of Management and Budget – Mark DeVore, Vicki Ford
Office of State Planning Coordination – Steve Bayer

EO41 Coordination – DNREC Division of Energy and Climate
Phil Cherry, Neelam Patel, Morgan Ellis, Jennifer de Mooy, Ryan Gergely, Devin Gladden

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page B3



[This page intentionally left blank]

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page B4



Climate Framework for Delaware
Appendix C
Executive Order 41 GHG Mitigation Quantifications
and Assumptions

December 31, 2014

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C1



FINAL SUMMARY OF EO 41 GHG MITIGATION
QUANTIFICATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS

PREPARED BY:

DIVISION OF AIR QUALITY
NOVEMBER 2014

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C2



1.0

PURPOSE

Delaware’s Executive Order 41 (EO 41), which was signed by Governor Jack Markell, required
that mitigation strategies for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions be developed for the
state. The executive order states, “… it is important for the State of Delaware to continue to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions cost-effectively, while preparing for current and emerging
climate risks.”

In line with this directive, the Division of Air Quality (DAQ) has quantified current and potential
GHG emission reductions as a result of existing federal, regional, and state policies. DAQ
collected GHG-related data from respective state agencies regarding policies that guide their
organizational objectives and activities. The analyses presented in this report were instrumental
in the selection of a GHG mitigation target, as well as strategies that will be employed to achieve
the target.
Using DAQ-approved methods and modeling, the collected data was used to estimate annual
GHG emission reductions in conjunction with Delaware’s 2010 GHG emissions inventory,
which provided baseline emissions from 1990 through 2030 for the purpose of comparing
achievable reductions. To analyze potential reduction targets, 2008 GHG emissions were used
as reference points for comparing the quantified GHG emission reductions and defining potential
reduction targets. Existing policies were categorized into two types:


federal/regional policies



state policies.

Baseline emissions, as well as achievable GHG reductions due to existing policies, are
summarized in the following sections.
2.0

BASELINE EMISSIONS

Delaware’s GHG emissions from the 2010 GHG inventory6 were used as baseline for the
emission reduction because they represent Delaware’s latest GHG emission profile. The baseline
emissions in the 2010 GHG inventory were developed using EPA’s State Inventory Tool, which
6

DNREC-DAQ 2014. Delaware’s 2010 GHG Emissions Inventory
Report:http://www.dnrec.delaware.gov/Air/Documents/2010%20GHG_Inventory%20Final%20Report.pdf

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C3



projected GHG emissions to 2030. The projections were based on the Energy Information
Administration (EIA)’s Annual Energy Outlook 2009 (AEO2009). Emissions data was collected
from all sources of GHGs and categorized into the economic sectors of Delaware. The total
annual GHG emissions from each sector were added together to estimate total GHG emissions
for the state. Figure 1 summarizes projected baseline emissions (in MmtCO2e) for GHG from
2008 to 2030.
FIGURE 1. DELAWARE’S BASELINE GHG EMISSIONS FROM 2008 TO 2030
18.00
16.00

MmtCO2e

14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

-

Year
The GHG emissions presented in Figure 1 are based on both actual and projected data. Emissions
from 2008 to 2010 were estimated based on actual data from all GHG sources of Delaware’s
economic sectors. Projected GHG emissions from 2011 to 2030 were estimated mainly from the
energy outlook information provided by the AEO2009. As Figure 1 shows, one key factor that
drives growth in both total energy consumption and GHG emissions is the rate of overall
economic growth. As Delaware’s economy declined between 2008 and 2009, GHG emissions
also declined significantly from the 2008 reference point of 16.64 MmtCO2e to 12.43 MmtCO2e
in 2009.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C4



However, GHG emissions slightly increased to 12.48 MmtCO2e in 2010, as Figure 1 shows, and
are projected to increase steadily to 14.25 MmtCO2e by 2030.7 Delaware’s per-capita GHG
emissions are projected to increase from 13.89 metric tons in 2010 to 15.18 metric tons in 2030.

Key Assumptions: Several assumptions were factored into the development of the baseline
emissions. Historical GHG emissions were developed mostly from a top-down approach.
Primary sources of data for this approach were activities that involved energy consumption,
industrial processes, waste management, and agricultural activities. The emissions were
calculated by multiplying energy or fuel consumed by emissions factors. Emissions from other
activities, including biogenic and chemical processes, were also quantified using various
methodologies, and the results were included in the baseline emissions.

To develop projections, the impact of existing regulations and policies had to be defined. Those
impacts were then used in the modeling of future emissions. The National Emissions Modeling
System (NEMS) was the tool used by the EPA to project emissions up to 2030. The NEMS
utilized assumptions derived from the AEO2009 report. However, for the purpose of
summarizing the EO 41 quantifications, this report used the following key assumptions and
policies to develop Delaware’s baseline GHG emissions:


Slower Growth in Overall Energy Consumption/Demand: The combination of recently
enacted energy efficiency policies and rising energy prices in the AEO2009 report slows
the growth of future energy consumption relative to history. When slower demand
growth is combined with increased use of renewables and a reduction in additions of new
coal-fired conventional power plants, growth in energy-related GHG emission also
declines. Energy-related GHG emissions in Delaware is projected to grow at
approximately 0.7% per year from 2009 to 2030, which is higher than the national growth
rate of 0.3% per year for the same period according to the AEO2009 report.

7

DNREC-DAQ 2014. Delaware’s 2010 GHG Emissions Inventory
Report:http://www.dnrec.delaware.gov/Air/Documents/2010%20GHG_Inventory%20Final%20Report.pdf

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C5





National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) CAFE standard: The CAFE
standards are federal standard first enacted by the U.S. Congress in 1975, intended to
improve the average fuel economy of cars and light trucks (trucks, vans, and sport utility
vehicles) sold in the United States. In 2009, NHTSA proposed a revised CAFE standard
to raise the minimum fuel economy requirements for passenger cars and light trucks for
model year (MY) 2012–2016.8 This proposal was included in the Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007 (EIAS2007), and the path forward for implementing the CAFE
standard was represented in the AEO2009 in terms of fuel consumption in Delaware.



Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS): Delaware’s RPS requires that the electricity mix
sold in Delaware consist of 25% renewable generation by compliance year 2025. In
addition, a minimum technology requirement that 3.5% solar generation be achieved by
compliance year 2025 was included in the RPS. The AEO2009 included RPS
requirements in the projections for energy consumption in Delaware.



Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI): Regulation 1147 establishes Delaware's
portion of a multistate CO2 cap-and-trade program developed by the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), which is a cooperative effort among a number of
northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states. RGGI states include Delaware, Connecticut, Maine,
New Hampshire, New York, Vermont, Maryland, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island.. The
program was designed to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from power plants in
the region. RGGI was accounted for in the AEO2009. However, the effect was minimal
in the early years, given the over allocation of CO2 allowances in the first control period,
which began in 2009.9

3.0

FEDERAL/REGIONAL POLICIES

Some relevant policies were implemented on a national or regional scale, with GHG reduction
impacts beyond Delaware’s borders. The following section summarizes the achievable GHG
emission reductions due to existing policies.
8

The impact of the new CAFE rule for model years 2017 to 2025 was not included in the AEO2009.
The impact of the change in the CO2 allowance cap from 165 million to 91 million was not included in the
AEO2009.
9

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C6



3.1

REGIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INITIATIVE MODIFICATIONS

In 2012 a program review was performed with the aim of strengthening RGGI by
modifying key elements of the program. The outcomes of the program review process
included a reduction in the CO2 allowance cap from 165 million to 91 million starting in
2014. This report includes the impact of the cap change on GHG reductions in
Delaware’s power sector.

Figure 2 presents achievable GHG reductions in Delaware due to RGGI modifications.
As the chart shows, GHG reductions from 2008 to 2013 were zero because the cap
change started in 2014. This analysis presents GHG reductions due only to the cap
change. Figure 2 also shows that achievable reductions are projected to be negative
between 2014 and 2021. This indicates that the estimated power-sector emissions due to
the RGGI cap change will exceed the baseline emissions. This is because the baseline
emissions were projected from 2010 based on modeling assumptions that may not reflect
reality. Achievable reductions are expected to increase from 0.004 MmtCO2e in 2021 to
0.194 MmtCO2e in 2030. This will be an increase of approximately 4,750%.

FIGURE 2. ACHIEVABLE GHG REDUCTION FROM RGGI
0.400

0.000
-0.200

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

Reduction in MmtCO2e

0.200

-0.400
-0.600
-0.800
-1.000

Climate Framework for Delaware

Year

Page C7



Key Assumptions: The latest GHG inventory shows that GHG emission from Delaware’s
power plants totaled 3.81 MmtCO2e in 2011. Based on best professional judgment, DAQ
believes that the RGGI program, in conjunction with other factors such as fuel switching
and the retirement of existing power plants, will maintain power-sector GHG emissions
at 3.81 MmtCO2e going forward through 2030.
THE NEW CORPORATE AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD

3.2

The EO 41 quantifications included the analysis of two new CAFE rules as they apply
to Delaware’s transportation sector emissions:


Light-duty vehicle (LDV), which includes passenger cars and light-duty trucks for
MYs 2017–2025. In 2011, the Obama administration announced an agreement
with the auto industry to increase fuel economy to 54.5 miles per gallon for cars
and light-duty trucks by model year 2025. The agreement resulted in new CAFE
regulations, which were finalized in 2012.



Heavy-duty vehicle (HDV), which includes all heavy-duty trucks for MYs 2014–
2018. This rule was jointly developed by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). The
NHTSA developed fuel consumption standards under the authority of the 2007
Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA), while the EPA developed a GHG
emissions program under the Clean Air Act. The GHG program includes CO2
emission standards, as well as emission standards for N2O and CH4, and
provisions to control hydro fluorocarbon leaks from air conditioning systems.

Achievable GHG reductions from the new LDV and HDV CAFE rules were estimated by
distributing Delaware’s portion of projected national GHG emission savings from both
rules over the lifetime of the respective MYs of the vehicles. For MYs 2017–2025, the
new LDV CAFE rule is projected to save approximately 4 billion barrels of oil and

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C8



reduce GHG emissions by 2 billion metric tons, based on EPA’s regulatory
announcement.10 The new HDV rule affecting MYs 2014–2018 is expected to save
530 million barrels of fuel and reduce GHG emissions by 270 million metric tons over
the lifetime of the model years, based on EPA’s regulatory announcement11.
Figure 3 presents achievable GHG reductions as a result of the LDV CAFE rule. Annual
reductions in GHG emissions are expected to increase into the future. Starting in 2017,
annual GHG emission reduction in Delaware is projected to be 0.006 MmtCO2e. The
reductions are expected to increase annually to 0.656 MmtCO2e in 2030 at a rate of
0.0297 MmtCO2e per year. There are no reductions between 2008 and 2016 because the
implementation of the rule occurs in 2017.

FIGURE 3. POTENTIAL GHG REDUCTIONS FROM LDV CAFE RULE
0.700

0.500
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100

0.000
-0.100

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

Reduction in MmtCO2e

0.600

-0.200

Year

10

EPA and NHTSA Set Standards to Reduce Greenhouse Gases and Improve Fuel Economy for Model Years 2017–
2025 Cars and Light Trucks: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/documents/420f12051.pdf
11

EPA and NHTSA Adopt First-Ever Program to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Improve Fuel Efficiency
of Medium-and Heavy-Duty Vehicles:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/documents/420f11031.pdf

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C9



Figure 4 presents projected potential GHG emissions reduction as a result of the new
HDV CAFE rule. GHG reductions are observed in the implementation year of 2014
(0.010 MmtCO2e). Reductions grow annually to 0.154 MmtCO2e at a rate of 0.0083
MmtCO2e per year.
FIGURE 4. POTENTIAL GHG REDUCTIONS FROM HDV CAFE RULE

0.150

0.100

0.050

0.000
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

Reductions in MmtCO2e

0.200

-0.050

Year

Key Assumptions: Achievable GHG reductions from the new LDV and HDV CAFE rules
were estimated by distributing projected GHG emissions reductions over the lifetime of
the vehicles. Delaware’s portion of national GHG emissions was estimated to be
approximated 0.25%. We assumed that estimate is maintained and calculated Delaware’s
GHG savings by multiplying the percentage by the national GHG savings. The result was
then multiplied by annual distribution factors for each MY. The distribution factors were
based on the EPA’s Regulatory Impact Assessment12 for the new CAFE rules, using
12

Proposed Rulemaking for 2017–2025 Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate

Average Fuel Economy Standards; http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/regs-light-duty.htm.
Proposed Rulemaking for 2017–2025 Heavy-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate
Average Fuel Economy Standards: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/regs-heavy-duty.htm.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C10



projected vehicle miles traveled and age distribution of each of the MYs over their
lifetime.
LANDFILL GAS COLLECTION SYSTEMS

3.3

Landfill gas (LFG) collection systems in Delaware are located at three active landfills in
New Castle (Cherry Island Landfill), Kent (Central Solid Waste Management Center),
and Sussex (Southern Solid Waste Management Center) Counties. LFG is made up of
50% methane (CH4), which is a GHG. The recovery of CH4 through LFG collection
systems is done in two ways:


Flaring



Landfill gas conversion to energy (LFGTE)

LFGTE projects are present at the three active municipal landfills in Delaware. These
projects have been successful in supplying green power either to the grid or to industrial
end users. The use of landfill gas from Delaware Solid Waste Authority (DSWA)
facilities has displaced electricity generated by coal, oil, and natural gas. The emissions
reductions realized from Delaware’s LFGTE projects are included in the baseline
emissions. Flaring has also led to reduction in CH4 emissions because the LFG is
destroyed in the process. However, there is a potential to further increase Delaware’s
LFGTE by flaring less LFG and converting most of the LFG to energy. Achievable GHG
reductions from LFG systems were estimated by multiplying tons of flared LFG by
EPA’s emission factors.
Figure 5 present’s potential GHG reductions from LFG systems derived from EPA’s
State Inventory Tool estimates, which were based in Delaware on LFG flaring data from
DSWA. Reductions are projected to increase from 0.13 MmtCO2e in 2011 to 0.27
MmtCO2e at the rate of 0.0063 mmtCO2e per year. This will be an increase of
approximately 107%. The potential reductions from 2011 to 2030 indicate projected
GHG reductions that are achievable as a result of converting flared landfill gas to
LFGTE.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C11



FIGURE 5. ACHIEVABLE GHG REDUCTIONS FROM LANDFILL GAS COLLECTION SYSTEMS

Reductions in MmtCO2e

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

0.00

Year
Key Assumptions: Based on the assumption that (i) Delaware’s LFG collection systems
will continue to expand in the future as population grows and (ii) waste steam
composition remains the same, more of Delaware’s LFG is projected to be converted for
beneficial use. The LFG conversions will displace more fossil fuel–fired generation in the
power sector, with resulting GHG reductions.
The projected GHG reductions from annual LFGTE were based on Delaware’s GHG
emissions from the 2010 GHG inventory. Based on historical data, LFG collection at
DSWA facilities is predicted to increase over time, which will contribute to increasing
LFGTE. This trend was further supported by projected increases in Delaware’s
population, which is directly proportional to increasing waste disposal and subsequently
LFG collection. Based on this information, DAQ is confident that the achievable GHG
emission reductions from LFGTE presented in this section are realistic.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C12



4.0

STATE POLICIES

Below we summarize relevant policies that were signed into law by the governor and
implemented on the state level.
UNIVERSAL RECYCLING LAW

4.1

Achievable GHG reductions from Delaware’s waste management sector were estimated
from data provided in the 2012 Recycling Public Advisory Council (RPAC) report.13 The
RPAC report was mandated by Delaware’s Universal Recycling Law, and provided data
from 2008 to 2012. The achievable reductions were estimated by categorizing two types
of recyclable waste streams:


Organic waste included food-related materials and yard waste. These waste
materials are diverted to composting facilities, thereby displacing potential CH4
emissions at the landfills due to decomposition over time.



Mixed recyclables included plastics, paper, glass, and metals. These waste
materials are diverted to recycling facilities, thereby displacing potential GHG
emissions due to their carbon footprint at the landfills.

The results of the achievable GHG reductions from the mixed recycling categories were
added to the achievable GHG reductions due to organic waste recycling. Figure 6
summarizes the results. Achievable GHG reductions are projected to increase from 0.004
MmtCO2e in 2008 to 0.167 MmtCO2e in 2030 at the rate of 0.007 MmtCO2e per year.
Achievable GHG reductions from the mixed materials waste recycling were developed
by multiplying the tons of recyclables by EPA’s emissions factor14. The results indicated
a linear trend in achievable reduction. Based on the observed linear trend, achievable
GHG reductions were projected to 2030.

13
14

DNREC 2013.State of Delaware Assessment of Municipal Solid Waste Recycling for Calendar Year 2012 report.
U.S EPA, Calculations and references: http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/refs.html

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C13



FIGURE 6. ACHIEVABLE GHG REDUCTION FROM RECYCLABLES

Reductions in MmtCO2e

0.180
0.160

0.140
0.120
0.100
0.080
0.060
0.040
0.020
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

0.000

Year

Key Assumptions: DAQ assumed that the avoided CH4 emissions due to organic waste
diversion were equal in amount to the potential CH4 emissions that would be generated if
the organic waste were disposed at the landfill. Potential CH4 emissions generated were
estimated using EPA’s first-order decay formula15, and the results were set equal to
achievable GHG reductions. The first-order decay formula estimated achievable
reductions for CH4 from 2008 to 2030.

4.2

ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENT FUND

The Energy Efficiency Investment Fund (EEIF) was designed to improve energy
efficiency in the commercial and industrial sector by replacing aging,
inefficient equipment and systems with energy-efficient alternatives. GHG reductions
from the EEIF were developed by analyzing the GHG emission savings data submitted
by the DNREC Division of Energy and Climate (DEC). DEC provided a spreadsheet with

15

U.S.EPA 2012. USER’S GUIDE FOR ESTIMATING EMISSIONS FROM MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE USING THE

STATE INVENTORY TOOL: http://epa.gov/statelocalclimate/resources/tool.html

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C14



all the completed EEIF projects from 2012 to 2014, and their respective GHG reductions
per year. The projects were categorized mainly into lighting; heating, ventilating, and air
conditioning (HVAC); combined heat and power (CHP); windows; and building
envelope.

Figure 7 shows the achievable GHG reductions from the EEIF program. Based on the
lifespan of each project, achievable GHG reductions are expected to stay flat at 0.112
MmtCO2e from 2019 to 2030, while most of the achievable reductions appear to be
realized in the early years of the program. This is because shorter lifespan projects, such
as lighting, stop achieving GHG reductions in the early years of the time frame, while
longer lifespan projects, such as HVAC, continue to achieve GHG reductions in the longterm. However, GHG reductions are expected to increase as more EEIF projects are
completed.
FIGURE 7. POTENTIAL GHG REDUCTIONS FROM THE EEIF PROGRAM.
0.140

Reductions inMmtCO2e

0.120
0.100
0.080
0.060
0.040
0.020

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

0.000

Year

Key Assumptions: Each project had an approximate life span in terms of energy savings:


Lighting–5 years



HVAC–20 years



Heating–20 years

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C15





CHP–20 years



Window film–10 years



Building envelope–8 to 10 years

Each project was categorized by life span, and the annual GHG emissions savings was
distributed across the lifetime of the project. The resulting achievable reductions were
then added together.
4.3

SENATE BILL 160

Senate Bill 160, Delmarva Poultry Industry, was signed in 2012. It was designed to
increase the gross vehicle weight of poultry trucks. The poultry industry will have less of
a carbon footprint in Delaware if the number of trips live-haul trucks make to and from
the plant and farm is reduced. The senate bill was projected to reduce fuel consumption
by 160,000 gallons annually. This is equivalent to 1.422 metric tons of CO2e.
Key Assumptions: The estimated 1.422 mtCO2e in GHG reduction was held constant
from 2012 to 2030.

4.4

FOREST BUFFERS

Support for establishing or protecting forest buffers is included in reforestation programs
of the Delaware Department of Agriculture (DDA). These programs, including forest
stewardship as well as urban and community reforestation programs are based on
voluntary participation and cost sharing. The pine and yellow-poplar tree conservation
and reforestation (Title 3, Chapter 10, subchapter V) program requires that if a harvest of
pine or yellow-poplar occurs on land that will remain forested, the landowner must
ensure adequate regeneration of these species.
Through the process of photosynthesis, trees remove CO2 from the atmosphere and store
it as cellulose and other compounds. The rate of accumulation is equal to growth minus
removals (i.e., harvest for the production of paper and wood) minus decomposition.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C16



DDA provided DAQ with data on the number and acreage of trees planted from 2008 to
2014 in Delaware as a result of the reforestation programs.
Figure 8 presents GHG emissions reductions from 2008 to 2030 attributable to the DDA
reforestation programs. GHG reductions are projected to grow from 0.001MmtCO2e in
2008 to 0.01 in 2030 MmtCO2e with a linear trend. Achievable GHG reductions from
DDA’s reforestation programs will grow at the rate of 0.0004 MmtCO2e per year.
Key Assumptions: The reforestation data used in this analysis were based on new trees
planted in Delaware. It does not consider trees planted to replace harvested trees. The
replacement of harvested trees was factored into the baseline emissions derived from the
2010 GHG emissions inventory. The forest buffer analysis also disregards the difference
between natural and manmade forest regeneration. It simply focuses on new trees planted
as a result of Delaware’s reforestation programs. GHG reductions were estimated by
multiplying total acres of trees planted as a result of Delaware’s reforestation programs
by EPA’s carbon sequestration factor of 1.22 metric tons per acres per year for an
average U.S. forest. The EPA determined the sequestration factor16 by determining the
annual net change in carbon stocks per acre. This was estimated by dividing the carbon
stock change in U.S. forests by the total area of U.S. forests.. Overall change in forest
carbon stocks takes into consideration changes in number of trees. In most U.S. forests,
growth exceeds removals and decomposition, so the amount of carbon stored nationally
is increasing overall.
Applying these calculations to data developed by the USDA Forest Service for the
Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–201017 yields a result of
150 metric tons of carbon per hectare (or 61 metric tons of carbon per acre) for the
carbon stock density of U.S. forests in 2010, with an annual net change in carbon stock
per area in 2010 of 0.82 metric tons of carbon sequestered per hectare per year (or 0.33

16

U.S EPA, Calculations and references: http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/refs.html
U.S. EPA 2012, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2010, EPA 430-R-12-001:
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads/ghgemissions/US-GHG-Inventory-2012-Main-Text.pdf
17

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C17



metric tons of carbon sequestered per acre per year). The 0.33 metric tons of carbon was
then multiplied by a factor of 44 units of CO2/12 units of C to convert it to 1.22 metric
tons of CO2 sequestered per acre per year by an average U.S. forest.
To estimate potential CO2 sequestration by Delaware’s reforestation program, DAQ
multiplied EPA’s sequestration factor by the cumulative acres of trees planted each year,
assuming the number of trees planted have a high growth and survival rate.
FIGURE 8. POTENTIAL GHG REDUCTIONS FROM DDA’S REFORESTATION PROGRAMS

Reductions in MmtCO2e

0.012
0.010
0.008

0.006
0.004
0.002

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

0.000

Year

4.5

CROP MANAGEMENT

Crop management in relation to GHG reduction includes farming practices such as cover
crop planting, crop rotation, and no-till. Due to the availability of data, the GHG
reduction analysis focused on cover crops. Cover crops are planted primarily to manage
soil erosion, soil fertility, soil quality, water, weeds, pests, diseases, and biodiversity.
Cover crops play a role in sustainability by helping to fix the nitrogen in the soil, thereby
preventing it from volatilizing into N2O.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C18



Figure 9 presents achievable GHG reductions due to cover crops. GHG reductions
fluctuated from 0.04 MmtCO2e in 2008 to 0.02 MmtCO2e in 2011, with a peak of 0.05
MmtCO2e in 2010. In our model, the reductions remain flat at 0.02 MmtCO2e from 2011
to 2030.
Key Assumption: Data were available from 2008 to 2011. GHG reductions from 2012
were kept constant at 0.02 MmtCO2e (2011) based on DDA’s professional judgment.

FIGURE 9. GHG REDUCTIONS FROM COVER CROPS

Reductions in MmtCO2e

0.060
0.050
0.040

0.030
0.020
0.010

2028

2027

2026

2025

2024

2023

2022

2021

2020

2019

2018

2017

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

0.000

Year

4.6

SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY

The DNREC Division of Energy and Climate submitted data consisting of completed
sustainable energy utility (SEU) projects in 2013 and their corresponding GHG savings.
Delaware’s GHG savings as a result of SEU projects totaled 52,354 metric tons in 2013.
Key Assumption: The 2013 GHG reduction estimate was kept constant from 2013 to
2030.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C19



5.0

GHG EMISSION TRENDS AND TARGETS

As a result of the above GHG reduction analyses, DAQ was able to develop a policy-driven
GHG emission trend for Delaware. The “policy emissions” takes into account existing federal,
regional, and state policies that contribute to GHG reductions in the state, as summarized in
sections 3.0 and 4.0. In addition, DAQ developed potential mitigation targets for GHG
emissions.

Figure 10 presents the results of the analyses. The baseline emission trend is based on the 2010
GHG emissions inventory. Baseline emissions are discussed in section 2.0. The policy emissions
describes Delaware’s GHG emissions outlook if the existing policies achieve their GHG
reduction potential.

FIGURE 10. GHG EMISSION TRENDS AND TARGETS
18.00

MmtCO2e

16.00

Baseline
Emissions

14.00
Policy Emissions
30% by 2030
40% by 2030

12.00
10.00

50% by 2030

8.00

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030

6.00

Year

As observed in Figure 10, in the early years of the time frame, the policy emissions are slightly
less than baseline emissions. However, in 2014, the policy emission (13.05 MmtCO2e) is
projected to be higher than the baseline emission (12.66 MmtCO2). This can be attributed to the
DAQ’s assumption that power-sector emissions are expected to be stagnant at the 2011 level of
Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C20



3.81 MmtCO2e, based on RGGI and other factors limiting GHG emissions in the power sector.
However, the projected baseline emission for 2011 was lower than the policy emission in 2014,
leading to a negative GHG reduction.
The difference between the two trends is expected to widen from 2015 to 2030, as observed in
Figure 10. Baseline emission is projected to be 14.25 MmtCO2 in 2030, , with a rate of increase
of approximately 0.0543 MmtCO2e per year from 2015. The policy emission is projected to be
12.61 MmtCO2e, with a rate of decrease of approximately 0.0529 MmtCO2e per year from 2015.
The dashed lines in Figure 10 indicate potential targets for mitigation strategies. The goal is to
present a list of potential targets based on their varying degree of achievability. The percentages
indicate reductions from the reference point of 2008, which helps to define the reduction target
by 2030. A 30% by 2030 target indicates that a 30 percent reduction from the 2008 baseline
emission of 16.64 MmtCO2e will be achieved by 2030. The analyses presented in this report
demonstrate that the 30% reduction by 2030 is the most achievable potential target, followed by
40% and 50%.
Based on the results of the EO 41 mitigation quantifications, a GHG reduction target of 30% by
2030 was selected. The next step in the process is to develop mitigation strategies that
incorporate existing and future policies in order to achieve the selected target.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C21



REFERENCES
DNREC-DAQ 2014. Delaware’s 2010 GHG Emissions Inventory Report:
http://www.dnrec.delaware.gov/Air/Documents/2010%20GHG_Inventory%20Final%20Report.pdf

DNREC 2013. State of Delaware Assessment of Municipal Solid Waste Recycling for Calendar
Year 2012 report.
DOE/EIA-0383 2009. Annual Energy Outlook with Projections 2009 (AEO2009):
http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/aeo/pdf/0383(2009).pdf

One Hundred Tenth Congress of the United Stets of America, 2007. Energy Independence and
Security Act of 2007 (EISA2007).
U.S. EPA and NHTSA Adopt First-Ever Program to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
Improve Fuel Efficiency of Medium-and Heavy-Duty Vehicles:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/documents/420f11031.pdf

U.S. EPA Regulatory Announcement: EPA and NHTSA Set Standards to Reduce Greenhouse
Gases and Improve Fuel Economy for Model Years 2017–2025 Cars and Light Trucks:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/documents/420f12051.pdf

U.S. EPA 2012, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2010, EPA 430R-12-001: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads/ghgemissions/US-GHG-Inventory-2012-Main-Text.pdf
U.S. EPA Proposed Rulemaking for 2017–2025 Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission
Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/regslight-duty.htm.

U.S EPA Calculations and references: http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energyresources/refs.html

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page C22



Climate Framework for Delaware
Appendix D
Executive Order 41 Agency Adaptation Recommendations
December 31, 2014

The adaptation recommendations from each agency can be found on the following pages:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Delaware Department of Agriculture .............................................................................Page D2
Delaware Department of Education ...............................................................................Page D3
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services—Division of Public Health ..........Pages D4-D6
Delaware Department of Health and Social Services—Social Service Divisions.............Pages D7-D8
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control .....................Pages D9-D16
Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security...............................................Page D17
Delaware Department of State .......................................................................................Page D18-D19
Delaware Department of Transportation .......................................................................Page D20-D22
Delaware Economic Development Office .......................................................................Page D23
Delaware State Housing Authority .................................................................................Page D24
Office of Management and Budget ................................................................................Page D25
Office of State Planning Coordination ............................................................................Page D26

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D1



Recommendation Title

Delaware Department of Agriculture - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Summary

Evaluate response to increased
susceptibility of forest wildfires

The Department of Agriculture should evaluate adjustments to internal policies related to risk management, fire prevention, and management
for forests. In partnership with Extension Service/USDA/Dept. of Interior, DDA would develop and distribute educational materials related to
risk management and fire prevention. This recommendation anticipates increased potential government cost to prevent/mitigate/respond to
drought and increased local temperatures. Will require collaboration with DEDO, DNREC, and USDA.

Evaluate nutrient management,
pesticide application, risk assessment,
fire prevention and management, and
cropping practices policies that may be
impacted by potential increases in the
number of hot dry days per year

The Department of Agriculture should evaluate adjustments to internal policies related to nutrient management, pesticide application, risk
management, fire prevention and management, and cropping practices. In partnership with Extension Service, DDA would develop and
distribute educational materials related to risk management. This recommendation anticipates increased potential government cost to
prevent/mitigate/respond to drought and increased local temperatures. Will require collaboration with DEDO, DNREC, and USDA.

Educate landowners and agricultural
operators on the possibility of, and how
best to address and mitigate, loss of
land due to sea level rise

The Department of Agriculture should create and distribute educational materials concerning effects of sea level rise, conduct workshops with
producers in possible affected areas, and work closely with Extension Service on education/outreach, as well as research efforts. Will require
collaboration with DNREC and OSPC.

Educate landowners and agricultural
operators on the effects of salt water
intrusion through sea level rise

The Department of Agriculture should create and distribute educational materials concerning effects of sea level rise, conduct workshops with
producers in possible affected areas, and work closely with Extension Service on education/outreach, as well as research efforts. Will require
collaboration with DNREC and OSPC.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D2



Delaware Department of Education - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title

Recommendation Summary

Improve guidelines for siting of school
facilities

DOE should work with the districts, State Planning Office, and the Office of Management and Budget under its authority as part of Title 29
§7525 to ensure that new school buildings are not built on sites subject to flooding by sea level rise. DOE’s approval of siting new buildings
complements the state’s PLUS process. By reducing the risk for flooding at new school buildings, they may be used as shelters, if needed.

Promote LEED certification or Green
Ribbon school designs

DOE should work with Facilities Management/OMB and the districts to encourage LEED certification, Green Ribbon standards, or any other
standards to promote the most efficient design and construction for school buildings that reduces the environmental footprint. The state
approves all major capital school plans and will support the use of third-party standards that guide design for capital school projects.

Promote the incorporation of cleaner
school buses

DOE, when it purchases new buses, should continue to replace buses with cleaner buses meeting the most recent EPA requirements. DOE will
also promote a pilot program for alternative fuel buses that produce fewer emissions, subject to the availability of alternative fueling locations,
as well as a network of service providers to work on these vehicles.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D3



Delaware Department of Health and Social Services - Division of Public Health - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
To develop new or improve existing monitoring and surveillance:

Advocate for an expansion of vector
surveillance programs

The DHSS Division of Public Health should advocate for an expansion of vector surveillance programs to identify new vectors and monitor the
size of vector populations (e.g., ticks and mosquitoes). Increasing temperatures and rainfall may increase the incidence of vector-borne
diseases. DPH will assist DNREC in determining the vectors of interest. This response could change the existing programs at DNREC, in particular
the mosquito control program. It may require the establishment of a tick surveillance program. DNREC is or would be the lead agency for these
surveillance programs with assistance from DPH.

Monitor new and emerging diseases
related to climate change

The DHSS Division of Public Health should support monitoring new and emerging diseases resulting from climate change. The proposed
response would require periodic meetings between DPH and DNREC to keep abreast of zoonotic, waterborne, and vector-borne diseases
resulting from climate change. The information could be used to update surveillance programs to account for the new diseases. This response
would require interaction between DPH and DNREC to cooperate and meet periodically to discuss new and emerging diseases due to climate
change.

Evaluate benefits and costs of
developing environmental public health
tracking system

The DHSS Division of Public Health should evaluate the specific benefits and costs of developing and maintaining an environmental public health
tracking system for the ongoing collection, integration, analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of data from environmental hazard
monitoring, and from human exposure and health effects surveillance. Climate change–related data will be included in the tracking network
database. The desired outcome from this response will be an environmental tracking network that is easily accessible by DPH staff, other state
agencies, and the public. The adaptation response will require existing public health programs to collaborate with the Data and Informatics and
Health Systems Protection sections. At this time it is believed that existing staff will be able to handle the increased workload; however, it may
require full time staff to support the program. DNREC’s involvement would be needed to provide environmental data, such as air quality, sea
level rise, or mosquito populations to support the tracking network. The Department of Agriculture may also have environmental data (e.g.,
pesticide use data) that could be useful for environmental tracking.

Evaluate feasibility of monitoring
private coastal drinking water wells for
salt water intrusion

The DHSS Division of Public Health should evaluate the feasibility of monitoring private well water quality in coastal areas for salt water
intrusion and investigate the potential to connect to a public water source. Salt water intrusion into drinking well water may result from sea
level rise caused by climate change. This response would require changes to the Office of Drinking Water’s policies and may require legislative
changes to the Delaware Code. Collaboration with DNREC may be necessary. DPH would be the lead agency with assistance from DNREC.
Working with local public water utilities may also be needed.

Examine ways to track new and
emerging diseases

The DHSS Division of Public Health should examine ways to track new and emerging diseases related to climate change, such as Chikungunya
fever, to respond to the influence that global climate change may have on infectious disease dynamics. Tracking of these diseases will provide
evidence as to whether changes in disease patterns are occurring. Monitoring diseases is an important part of protecting the health of the
public. The adaptation response may require public health program(s) to make changes to its existing program(s) to include the influence of
global climate change on infectious disease dynamics. The reporting of new diseases may require policy and/or legislative changes. The Public
Health laboratory may need to develop new protocols to identify new causative agents.

Expand List of Reportable Conditions

The DHSS Division of Public Health should expand the list of reportable conditions to include those related to extreme or adverse weather
conditions, for example, heat stroke and heat stress. The reportable list should also be updated to include diseases related to climate change.
The adaptation response may require public health program(s) to make changes to its existing program(s) to include conditions related to
extreme or adverse weather events. At this time, it is believed that existing staff will be able to handle the increased workload.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D4



Evaluate public health infrastructure
and resources for data collection and
analysis

Evaluate GIS mapping of vulnerable
populations and disease patterns

Evaluate integration of DPH data
sources

Incorporate climate change impacts
information in DPH outreach materials

Develop outreach materials on climate
change and health

Provide training for DPH staff on
climate change impacts and risks to
health

Review and update DPH programs for
climate change impacts

Develop health impact assessment
tools

Climate Framework for Delaware

To enhance current data management practices:
The DHSS Division of Public Health should evaluate the specific costs and benefits of expanding and updating infrastructure and resources for
data collection and analysis to include climate change impacts. The updated DPH databases should allow DPH climate change impacts to be
included. The Data and Informatics section will take the lead. The desired outcome from this response will be a DPH database that is easily
accessible by DPH staff and other state agency staff. The adaptation response will require existing public health programs to collaborate with
the Data and Informatics section to expand and update the public health infrastructure and resources for data collection and analysis.
The DHSS Division of Public Health should evaluate the specific costs and benefits of developing geographic information system (GIS) mapping
of vulnerable populations and disease patterns to help identify specific populations and health outcomes impacted by climate change–related
events. This would improve DPH’s ability to locate areas impacted by climate change and to assist the vulnerable populations. The GIS maps
would be made available to the general public. GIS mapping of vulnerable populations and disease patterns in response to climate change–
related events will require modest changes to existing programs within DPH. At this time, it is believed that existing staff will be able to handle
the increased workload. The possible involvement of DNREC would be to provide environmental data, such as air quality, sea level rise, or
mosquito populations, to support the GIS mapping. The Department of Agriculture may also have data (e.g., pesticide use data) that could be
useful for GIS mapping.
The DHSS Division of Public Health should evaluate the specific costs and benefits of consolidating DPH databases so climate change impacts to
DPH can be tracked and monitored. The Data and Informatics section will take the lead. The desired outcome from this response will be a DPH
database that is easily accessible by DPH staff and other state agency staff. The adaptation response will require existing public health programs
to collaborate with the Data and Informatics section.
To assist in outreach and education:
The DHSS Division of Public Health should incorporate information on climate change impacts on health in DPH outreach materials (web-based
and printed materials). The inclusion of climate change information will assist in educating the public on the health impacts caused by global
climate changes. The adaptation response will require public health programs to make changes to existing outreach materials to include climate
change impact on health.
The DHSS Division of Public Health should update and develop new materials on climate change and health for outreach. The response will
include printed materials, web-based materials, and media communications. The initial foci could be on heat-related issues, vector-borne
diseases, vulnerable populations, and mental health impacts related to climate change. An educated public is an informed public, and this is the
goal of this adaption recommendation. The response will require DPH programs to include climate change information in their outreach
materials. It may also require the development of new media communication and materials for public education.
The DHSS Division of Public Health should provide internal outreach, education, and training for the DPH staff on climate change impacts and
risks to health. This response’s desired outcome is to have a well-educated DPH staff pertaining to the impacts and risks of climate change on
the health of the public. This response will require a new DPH training program on climate change impacts to health to be presented to DPH
staff.
To accomplish other Department priorities:
The DHSS Division of Public Health should review and update their programs to include climate change impacts. The DPH adaptation response
will include reviewing and improving methods and response plans to protect vulnerable population from extreme weather events, heat events,
and other climate emergencies. DPH will also review and develop communication strategies for at-risk groups. Additionally, DPH will review and
improve planning for response capacity, for those with chronic health conditions such as transportation to cooling centers.
The DHSS Division of Public Health should develop a health impact assessment (HIA) and other tools for assessing the health of a community.
HIA is a process that helps evaluate the potential health effects of a plan, project, or policy before it is built or implemented. An HIA can provide
recommendations to increase positive health outcomes and minimize adverse health outcomes. HIA brings potential public health impacts and
considerations to the decision-making process for plans, projects, and policies that fall outside the traditional public health arenas, such as
transportation and land use.

Page D5



Advocate integrating climate change
with local activities

The DHSS Division of Public Health should advocate integrating climate change with local activities around sustainability and mitigation to deal
with water issues, heat island effects, land use and infrastructure planning, building codes, and promotion of green energy and mass transit.
This response would require the director’s office to take an active role advocating for integrating potential climate change impacts into
planning, codes, land use, etc. This adaptation response would require assistance and collaboration between DPH and other jurisdictions. The
jurisdiction with regulatory authority would take the lead; however, DPH would support and advocate for changes in response to climate
change impacts.

Advocate for an expansion of air quality
monitoring

The DHSS Division of Public Health should support and advocate expanding DNREC’s air quality monitoring program. DNREC is lead agency for
air quality monitoring in the state of Delaware. Because of the potential for increased air pollution as a result of climate change, DPH will
support and advocate for the expansion monitoring of air quality by the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control. This
adaptation response would require changes to the DNREC air quality program by expanding the monitoring.

Identify funding opportunities for
climate change and public health

The DHSS Division of Public Health should identify and share possible climate change funding opportunities related to health issues. Funds
could be used for the development of a variety of program needs, such as an environmental public health tracking network, updating data
infrastructure, GIS mapping, etc. The adaptation response would require existing public health programs to identify and share possible climate
change funding opportunities with the rest of DPH.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D6



Delaware Department of Health and Social Services – Social Service Divisions – FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
Establish communication link to DDDS
clients who live on their own

Expand medicine refill window

Implement a statewide Smart-911
system
Discuss feasibility of requiring
contingency plans from managed care
organizations (MCOs)
Remove potential hazards from lowlying areas prior to a major event

Advocate for additional resources for
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance
Program (LIHEAP)

Create a statewide climate resiliency
educational campaign

Consider creating mobile State Service
Centers

Climate Framework for Delaware

DHSS should establish a communication link to Division of Developmental Disabilities Services (DDDS) clients who live on their own, particularly
those requiring respiratory assistance, who will be vulnerable during a heat wave or power outage. DDDS currently has a way to communicate
to provider agencies about possible heat waves or power outages to see if assistance with clients is needed. However, there is no link
established for reaching out or providing warnings to those families or individuals supported who live on their own. Social media networks are a
possible option.
DHSS should expand the medicine refill window to ensure availability of medications during emergency evacuations or extreme weather events.
Current law prohibits the refill of certain medications (psychotropic) to within three days of expiration. This 3-day window is sometimes not
enough for a client to get a refill ahead of an extreme weather event. If an area of the state is forced into evacuation ahead of an event, it could
be several days before a client is allowed to return, which could be after their medication runs out. The Division of Medicaid and Medical
Assistance (DMMA) currently regulates the 3-day window.
DHSS should implement a statewide Smart-911 system. Climate change will have an effect on the amount of calls in to first responders. First
responders do not always have the details on the place or people they are responding to. A statewide Smart-911 system would contain all the
relevant details first responders would need when responding.
DHSS should discuss with managed care organizations (MCOs) the feasibility of requiring contingency plans for extreme weather. MCOs are the
main point of contact for individuals who receive assistance from DMMA. MCOs should be responsible for developing contingency plans for the
clients they serve. These individuals are more vulnerable to the effects of climate change than the average citizen in the state.
DHSS should remove potential hazards from low-lying areas near DHSS facilities to prevent damage during flood events. Vehicles and other
objects in parking lots (e.g., dumpsters) and on building grounds can become buoyant and damage buildings during periods of extreme
precipitation. These objects should either be moved to higher ground or secured in place.
DHSS should advocate for additional resources for the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). LIHEAP provides outreach
activities and assistance to low-income households in meeting their home energy costs, particularly to those with the lowest incomes that pay a
high portion of household income for home energy. Low-income individuals spend a larger share of their budgets on energy costs and are more
likely to be living in poorly insulated homes with older, less energy-efficient appliances. The State of Delaware should advocate for an increase
in LIHEAP funds as part of their climate resiliency and adaptation strategy, because this federal grant reaches millions of households that are
vulnerable to potential higher costs arising from climate change. The State of Delaware should advocate for additional flexibility to utilize
LIHEAP funds to not only provide low-income clients with assistance in energy costs associated with their current household/dwelling, but also
additional benefit assistance and education around other consumer-related costs impacted by climate change.
DHSS should create a statewide educational campaign to engage DHSS clients on climate change, resiliency, and adaptation initiatives. DHSS
clients and vulnerable populations may not be prepared or have easy access to adaptation tools and strategies that mitigate the effects of
climate change. Community Services Block Grant, LIHEAP, United Way 211, and other public and private stakeholders could work together to
implement an educational campaign focused on engaging consumers/clients on climate change and adaptation initiatives.
DHSS should consider creating mobile State Service Centers to provide access to services to clients during emergency evacuations or extreme
weather events. For the purposes of climate adaptation and emergency preparedness, mobile State Service Centers can be developed and
equipped with private offices, desks, computer system, kitchen, restrooms, and more to effectively engage, connect, and serve Delaware
communities in place. These mobile centers could be utilized during winter storms, periods of extreme heat, or as alternative sites in the event
of coastal storms that may force clients to relocate (evacuate) on a temporary or permanent basis. By creating mobile service centers, the
division can bring the services to clients. Best case scenario for this recommendation would be to fund the purchase of 3 service center vehicles
(one per county) and retrofit the vehicles with the equipment, office supplies, and wireless technology needed to access DHSS benefit systems
and records and by so doing provide site-specific/community-based services.

Page D7



Designate State Service Centers as
critical facilities

Provide training and education on
climate preparedness and adaptation

Identify sites to be used as designated
cooling and heating centers

Climate Framework for Delaware

DHSS should designate State Service Centers as critical facilities to ensure continued availability of services during extreme weather events and
during power outages. DHSS, through its Division of State Service Centers, oversees 15 multiservice facilities in which over 160 health and social
service–related public and private agencies and/or programs are co-located. The goal of the centers is to promote convenient access to
Delaware's health and human services system. The effects of climate change combined with the steady increase in Delaware’s population could
result in increased client flow to these centers due to increased demand for socioeconomic resources from our already vulnerable populations.
In the event of weather-related emergencies (e.g., floods), high demand on the electrical grid during a heat wave, and/or other extreme
weather event, the clients of the programs housed in the State Service Centers could be unable to receive the critical assistance on which they
depend. By designating these Centers as critical and providing the necessary infrastructure (e.g., emergency generators), the Centers can
continue to function at all times.
DHSS should convene health and social service providers from multiple sectors, including state and local agencies, and experts who are
developing mitigation and adaptation strategies and other information, to train/educate the state on best practices for community climate
resiliency. As part of training, DHSS agencies and partners representing the health and social services sector could use these opportunities to
review current climate preparedness, assess additional risks to services and clients, identify strategies, and establish guidance necessary to
become more prepared and resilient to climate change. There is a clear need for better communication of information to support different
groups, especially the disadvantaged, to adapt effectively to current and impending impacts of climate change. Knowledge, tools, and strategies
that aid in preparedness and behavioral change are important for individuals, families, and communities to adapt to and combat the effects of
climate change.
DHSS should identify sites to be used as designated cooling and heating centers. Climate change is expected to increase the frequency of
extreme events, which includes high heat days and low temperature days. This may place a higher need for and demand on social net programs.
Consequently, this would negatively affect vulnerable populations, who may not have adequate resources to cool or heat themselves within
their environs during the hottest and coldest hours of the day. During stretches of extreme high heat or extreme cold days/nights, when many
of the vulnerable populations have no means to heat or cool their homes, DHSS along with the Division of State Service Centers can work with
the Delaware Emergency Management Agency (DEMA), local governments, faith-based, and other community partners to ensure that the state
has adequate shelters and other resources for the homeless and other vulnerable populations. With additional resources, partnerships, and
support, additional cooling or heating centers could be developed.

Page D8



Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
To incorporate climate change into land management and stewardship decisions:
DNREC should incorporate the expected impacts from climate change into our management and stewardship plans for DNREC-owned lands, making cost-effective decisions for climate
resilient management of all such property. DNREC owns or manages over 100,000 acres of land through simple ownership, through conservation easements, and other means, largely
through our Divisions of Parks and Recreation and Fish and Wildlife and the Delaware Coastal Program office. Sea level rise, flooding, invasive species, species extinction and migration,
and other impacts from climate change will all impact how we manage public lands into the future, and DNREC must begin planning for those eventualities now.
Design and implement restoration
activities to slow loss of coastal habitats

Discuss expansion of invasive species
control

Prepare to restore riparian buffers

Prepare to restore ecological integrity
of unique ephemeral wetlands

Prepare to manage different fish and
wildlife species and habitat

Evaluate strategies for increasing native
pollinator habitat on public and private
lands
Evaluate need for revisions to technical
specifications for vegetative practices

Climate Framework for Delaware

DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should design and plan to implement restoration activities to slow the current loss of coastal beach, marsh,
and forest habitats in the near term; identify and secure opportunities for beach and marsh transgression and afforestation in the mid- to longterm; and begin on-the-ground restoration actions to replace future loss of coastal habitat. Extensive loss of coastal habitats will result in loss of
revenue from hunting, angling, boating, wildlife viewing, and tourism, as well as impacts to farmland from increased inundation and salinity.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to discuss expansion of invasive species control work and consider establishing earlydetection and rapid management response teams in coordination with other land management agencies and partners. Problems with existing
invasive species are expected to worsen, and the introduction of new and more aggressive species is anticipated. Revisions of regulations or
flexibility provisions in regulations may be needed to support rapid response for controlling emerging invasive species problems.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to restore riparian buffers on wildlife areas, fishing and boating-access areas, and on
private lands by planting native vegetation buffers and developing incentive programs for private landowners. Highest priority restoration sites
and improved incentives for private landowners will need to be identified.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to restore adequate buffers around coastal plain seasonal ponds and other vernal pools,
remove invasive vegetation in and around these freshwater wetlands, and evaluate the impact of groundwater withdrawals on these habitats
on state wildlife areas and in cooperation with other land-managing agencies and partners, as well as with private landowners. Changing
drought periods affecting these unique freshwater habitats will impact plant, invertebrate and amphibian species adapted to current average
annual rainfall and drying periods. Incentive programs may need to be re-evaluated to entice private landowners to participate in restoration. In
order to do so, the Division may need additional resources for analysis to identify highest priority restoration sites and for improved incentives
for private landowners.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to manage a different group of important fish and wildlife species and habitats (e.g., a
northward shift of some fish species that support important commercial and recreational fisheries, a northward shift in more southern pine
forest habitat). More specific guidance regarding species and habitats expected to shift ranges will be provided by the updated Delaware
Wildlife Action Plan. Technical assistance and training will be needed with biologists and managers across the southeastern U.S. to help adapt
local practices. Changes in species populations that are hunted, trapped, fished, and viewed may result in increased complaints from user
groups and constituents who may not understand lasting climate change impacts and adaptation needs. Additional resources may be needed,
as well as outreach to help the public understand lasting changes to local habitats and species and agency adaptation responses.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should evaluate strategies for increasing native pollinator habitat on state wildlife areas and private lands,
minimize use of insecticide use on wildlife areas, and encourage private landowners to minimize insecticide use. Increasing temperatures and
longer growing seasons may impact pollinator species that are critical for native plant species and agricultural crops.
DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate the need for revisions to technical specifications for vegetative practices in
consideration of sea level rise and saltwater intrusion. Sea level rise impacts may also affect maintenance schedules as existing management
facilities are subjected to changes in salinity. Some of these vegetative practices are developed by NRCS and other technical recommendations
not initiated at the state level.

Page D9



Incorporate climate change into land
stewardship decisions at the Delaware
National Estuarine Research Reserve

DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should incorporate climate change into land stewardship decisions at the Delaware National Estuarine
Research Reserve properties. The DNERR Stewardship Program provides long-term protection of natural resources associated with the Reserve
and serves to model responsible management practices to other organizations and individuals in nearby coastal communities. The Stewardship
Program works on land acquisition, habitat mapping, ecological restoration, invasive species monitoring, and creating demonstration areas.
Climate change adaptations should be incorporated into all aspects of the Stewardship Program, including but not limited to new management
techniques, mapping needs, demonstration areas, and land acquisition.

Increase climate change–focused
research and monitoring on DNERR land

DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should increase climate change–focused research on Delaware National Estuarine Research Reserve
properties. DNERR research staff support and conduct research with a focus on NOAA’s mission to protect, restore, and manage use of coastal
and ocean resources through an ecosystem approach to management. The DNERR serves as a platform for long-term research and monitoring
related to climate change.
To incorporate climate change into asset management for hard and natural infrastructure:

DNREC should apply an asset management approach when addressing climate risk to building facilities, other structures, and natural infrastructure. The elements of an asset
management approach—monitoring of asset quality, risk analysis of climate science and impacts, and options for addressing vulnerabilities based on cost and budget—can improve
long-term decision making and minimize future costs to maintain infrastructure. DNREC programs should integrate relevant elements into existing asset systems used for planning to
preserve invested dollars over the expected life cycle of the asset/infrastructure.
DNREC (Division of Parks and Recreation) should develop new standards for buildings in response to changing threats. Evaluate vulnerable
Adapt building processes
facilities, decide which to abandon and which to rehabilitate to new standards, and transition facilities to new locations at the end of their “life
cycle.”
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should consider relocating facilities, including offices, education centers, boat ramps, and equipment
storage areas, and redesign or relocate facility access roads already at risk from flooding and storm surge. Several coastal public-access areas
managed by DFW are already prone to flooding caused by extreme tides and storm surge. Other facilities will be at greater risk as sea levels rise
Consider relocating Division of Fish and
and more frequent extreme storms impact coastal areas. An interruption in outdoor recreation and education services is already occurring at
Wildlife facilities
facilities due to flooding, and personnel have not been able to reach offices as a result of flooding during storms and extreme high tides. Loss of
license revenue will result if access to wildlife areas and boat ramps is prevented by persistent flooding, and loss of productivity will result if
personnel cannot reach assigned work locations. DelDOT will need to be involved regarding flooded and damaged public roads that lead to DFW
facilities.
DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should develop a climate change adaptation plan for the two Delaware National Estuarine Research
Reserve properties in the state—St. Jones Reserve and Blackbird Creek Reserve. This plan will provide ways to incorporate sea level rise
Develop a climate change adaptation
considerations into land acquisition activities; develop a framework for decision making regarding land protection and restoration strategies
plan for the Delaware National
based on habitat vulnerability; and develop wetland protection, restoration, and retreat strategies in response to sea level rise. Additionally, the
Estuarine Research Reserve
plan will also provide land managers and farmers with guidance on ways to manage lands and habitats affected by sea level rise and on
preparing a description of best management practices and considerations for adaptation.
DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should adapt coastal impoundments and ponds by stabilizing and increasing the resiliency of levees, watercontrol structures, and dams, and implement water-level management and restoration activities that will improve accretion and vegetation
Adapt coastal impoundments and
growth. Adaptation plans should be developed to slow the pace of current impacts and to mitigate for current and future loss of habitat
ponds
functions and values for wildlife and fish as well as mosquito and flood control functions. Failure to address stabilization, restoration, and
retreat can result in catastrophic and rapid loss of hundreds of acres of protective coastal wetland impoundments to open water, which will be
far more costly to recover, if recovery is possible at all. DelDOT will need to be involved for road and levee repairs under their ownership.
DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate the need for revisions to technical standards and specifications for stormwater
Evaluate need for revisions to technical
management. Stormwater requirements are subject to criteria that are modeled. Predictive models use surface water elevations that will be
standards and specifications for
impacted by sea level rise. Future conditions will also require more frequent stormwater maintenance schedules as existing management
stormwater management
facilities are subjected to backwater conditions and other impacts.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D10



To provide technical assistance to local governments, communities, and businesses:
DNREC should integrate actions to address climate change impacts as part of technical assistance provided to local governments and businesses. Multiple DNREC programs offer
guidance to local governments and businesses. Assistance to local governments can include adding climate change impacts analysis and response strategies into hazard mitigation
planning, feedback on land use decisions (PLUS), and economic development planning occurring at the local level; developing model ordinances to reduce the risk of climate impacts on
infrastructure (e.g., secure heating oil and propane tanks); and developing climate adaptation projects for communities.
DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should provide technical guidance and funding to encourage communities to plan for and implement
Provide technical assistance to
appropriate climate change adaptation measures. The Coastal Management Program’s Coastal Management Assistance Grants provide grant
Delaware communities for climate
funding to support projects and activities that improve local and regional capacity to conserve, manage, and promote the incorporation of
change adaptation projects
coastal management issues into local planning and implementation activities.
DNREC should study how to prioritize funding to give preference to projects in communities that have taken effective steps to adopt best
Study how to prioritize funding options
practices and standards for drainage and floodplain management. The Floodplain and Drainage Advisory Committee formed under Senate Bill
to give preference to areas with
64 identified recommendations to reduce vulnerability to ongoing inland and coastal flooding and drainage challenges, coastal storms and other
effective practices for drainage and
extreme weather events, and rising sea level. Working with local and county jurisdictions, current practices and future needs should be
floodplain management
reviewed to identify options to fund projects in jurisdictions where policies that continue to reduce risk from flooding are in place.
DNREC (Division of Energy and Climate) should provide technical support to local governments, in coordination with OSPC, to enhance focus on
climate impacts (including the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions) and long-term sustainability (through adaptation and mitigation) in the
Aid local governments in planning for
comprehensive plan and in implementing ordinances. Improving community resiliency is best accomplished by local governments through their
climate change
Comprehensive Land Use Plans. The majority of local governments in Delaware do not have the resources (e.g., staff/expertise/finances/time)
to adequately address climate change, thereby improving their community’s preparedness and resiliency. DEC can assist the OSPC by ensuring
that revised plan guidelines and checklists include consideration of future climate impacts.
DNREC (Division of Energy and Climate) should work with county, municipal, and local governments to ensure the uniform training, compliance,
and enforcement of energy codes. New energy code requirements are driving the need for additional highly specialized training and compliance
Ensure effective energy code
inspection methods that arguably need to be standardized across the state. Energy codes are critical to ensure that the buildings being built
compliance
today meet modern conservation and efficiency standards. Having an up-to-date, progressive, and well enforced energy code can do much to
lessen energy demands over the long term, ensure a reliable energy grid, and save consumers money in the long run. DNREC should work with
affected stakeholders to evaluate ways to ensure that new energy code requirements are uniformly and successfully implemented.
DNREC (Division of Energy and Climate [DEC]) should develop a model building code that could be adopted at the state or local level. Various
groups, including local governments, the Home Builder Association of Delaware, and Delaware AIA, have expressed strong interest and
Develop model building code
acknowledged benefits of a model code. DEC can facilitate a dialogue between responsible and affected parties to support improved building
codes that improve resilience to climate impacts in the building sector.
DNREC (Division of Waste and Hazardous Substances' Tank Management Section) should develop a model ordinance for local governments to
use to require that home heating oil tanks, both propane and oil, be strapped down or otherwise secured to prevent detachment and release
during a flooding event. Propane tanks for home heating and gas grills routinely become detached during flood events, creating hazards to
property and emergency responders as they can become like torpedoes until the gas is spent. Home heating oil tanks can also become
disconnected and release their contents. Several propane companies in coastal areas are now requiring that their home heating propane tanks
Develop model ordinance to secure
be strapped down.
home heating oil and propane tanks
From the Accidental Release Prevention Program (ARPP) viewpoint, the outreach to the owners of the large, ASME propane tanks regulated by
the ARPP, which may be located in the flood/storm surge zones, can be made through ARPP itself. ARPP can notify and verify that the owners
ensure that their tanks are securely anchored to prevent both floatation and inversion (tank rotation that severs the piping connections). The
outreach to the owners of the propane tanks and DOT cylinders that fall outside of the ARPP inclusion would need to be conducted with
coordination with other Divisions and Departments.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D11



DNREC (Division of Water's Surface Water Discharges Section) should develop a strategy to assist local governments in protecting wastewater
treatment facilities from flooding and inundation from sea level rise. Wastewater treatment plants are often located near sea level in Delaware
and thus are subject to periodic flooding events and may be subject to more long-term flooding influenced by sea level rise. Impacts include
increases in spill incidence responses, plant capacity or engineering modifications, and increased field inspections. Increased frequency of
flooding may require more dramatic responses, including facility relocation or increasing the elevation of vulnerable facility infrastructure.
DNREC (Division of Water's Water Supply Section) should develop a strategy to assist suppliers of potable water from surface water intakes to
develop strategies to protect water intakes from flooding and salt water. The contamination of public water intakes from flooding or salt water
Assist suppliers of potable water (from
due to sea level rise will require several likely responses depending on the local situation, including the following: more extensive treatment of
surface water intakes) in developing
surface water; abandonment/relocation of the intake; interconnection with other public water systems; and switching to groundwater where
strategies to protect water intakes from
available. There are only a limited number of fresh surface water intakes in Delaware, but they serve a large percentage of the population of
flooding and salt water
northern New Castle County. Hydrologic modeling studies should be conducted to provide better estimates on the need to protect existing
intakes, the siting of new intakes, and projected time needed to respond.
DNREC (Division of Water's Water Supply Section) should develop a strategy to assist suppliers and users of potable water from wells to develop
strategies to protect wells from flooding and salt water. The contamination of public and private wells from flooding or salt water due to sea
level rise or inundation of low-lying wells will require several likely responses depending on the local situation, including the following:
Assist suppliers and users of potable
treatment or reconditioning of the well; reconstruction of the well with a depth change or relocation; abandonment/relocation of the well; and
water (from wells) to develop strategies
interconnection with other systems. The increasing use of a limited and possibly shrinking fresh groundwater resource will challenge the general
for protection of wells from flooding
rules for fair distribution of this resource as users compete for the resource. Protection programs will become more important as the resource
and salt water
becomes more limited, particularly in coastal areas. Hydrologic modeling studies should be conducted to provide better estimates on the need
to protect existing wells and for the siting of new wells. In addition, more comprehensive monitoring for salt water in coastal aquifers will
improve our predictive ability.
To integrate climate impacts into scientific study, regulation, and permitting decisions:
To the extent it is practicable and appropriate, DNREC should work to integrate anticipated climate impacts into the Department’s permitting decisions. DNREC has more permitting
programs and issues more permits to individual Delawareans than any other state agency. Permits are issued for myriad activities, including well and septic system permits for
homeowners, air discharge permits for commercial and industrial sectors, stormwater and erosion control permits in the building sector, and dozens of other permits and approvals for
activities that may have a detrimental effect on our land, air, water, or ecological resources, or which are otherwise required by statute to be approved by a government agency. In
many cases, anticipated climate change impacts are not authorized as criteria that can be applied in deciding to approve, deny, or approve with conditions permit applications before
the agency. In such cases, regulatory or statutory modifications may be necessary to allow use of those criteria in making permitting decisions on applications before DNREC.
DNREC (Division of Waste and Hazardous Substances) should evaluate the need for improving spill containment requirements for Above Ground
Storage Tanks and hazardous waste storage areas, which are vulnerable to flooding and storm surge impacts. The Accidental Release Prevention
Program (ARPP), the Above Ground Storage Tank Program, the Hazardous Waste Program, and the Local Emergency Planning Committees can
begin looking for necessary containment to cover storm surge heights, but only the ARPP has the regulatory authority to require increased
Evaluate need for improving spill
containment wall height. The other programs can make recommendations. The state has requirements for adequate spill containment for
containment requirements for
contents of an Above Ground Storage Tank (AST) and hazardous waste, but this containment is based on the amount of material stored in the
hazardous materials
tank or containment area and not on storm surge height. Furthermore, if liquid raw materials or intermediate/finished products are not stored
in regulated ASTs, then the state has no requirements for spill containment unless they are considered extremely hazardous substances and fall
under the state’s Extremely Hazardous Substances Act. There are also no containment requirements for hazardous raw materials or
intermediate/finished products in a solid state. During a storm surge, such materials may dissolve in the floodwaters and be moved off site.
Incorporate Executive Order 41 in the
DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should incorporate Executive Order 41 into its enforceable coastal management policies through the
Federal Consistency Program’s
Coastal Zone Federal Consistency Certification Program. Consistency certification is a process that requires federal agencies to follow state
enforceable coastal management
coastal management policies when conducting a project or issuing a permit that could affect coastal resources, and will encourage better
policies
climate adaptation throughout the state.
Assist local governments in developing
strategies to protect wastewater
treatment facilities from flooding

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D12



Evaluate need for revisions to
stormwater regulation

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate need for revisions to stormwater regulation. Changes in magnitude and frequency
of precipitation may require regulatory revisions based on updated weather data. May also require more frequent maintenance schedules as
existing management facilities are subjected to these larger, more frequent events. The information that the Stormwater Program uses to base
regulatory requirements upon is not developed at the state level but by federal and national data sets.

Evaluate changes to wetland and water
quality monitoring

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate potential changes to the methods of placement of wetland and water quality
monitoring stations, methods of research and data collection, and possible redirection of research priorities in regard to changing conditions.
Possible adaptation response would include moving monitoring stations to more secure sites, purchasing more rigorous equipment, changing
monitoring parameters for climate change–related metrics, and either abandoning monitoring sites or establishing new sites. This adaptability
would be necessary to continue to collect data to develop reports to agencies and the general public in regard to restoration success, wetland
health and level of function, and water quality changes. Additionally, DNREC is required to report this data to EPA. Outreach would remain the
same but would be changed to add more emphasis on monitoring and assessment in regard to changing climate. There already exists
collaboration on monitoring with various agencies, such as USGS, Delaware Geological Survey, and intra-DNREC programs. Adaptation would be
coordinated on a project-specific basis with other partners. The lead on the project again is project specific, and those that are the lead now
would likely be the lead for adaptation response.

Evaluate design specifications and
maintenance practices for rain gardens
and other small-scale stormwater
systems

Evaluate the adequacy of drainage
infrastructure

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate design specifications and maintenance practices to ensure that rain gardens and
other stormwater systems on state lands remain functional with increases in extreme precipitation. Rain gardens and other stormwater
practices using micro-topography may help offset the effects of more intense storms, so more promotion of their benefits would be beneficial.
Small-scale stormwater best management practices (BMPs) can redirect a large amount of rainwater in a short period of time (< 48 hours) when
properly designed and installed. With more intense storms and an increased amount of rainwater, a higher stormwater runoff coefficient may
be necessary to properly design the size of these structures. The runoff coefficient is used to determine the most suitable size of the BMP and
the amount of rainwater that the system can handle and infiltrate. If the amount of water is too much for the BMP structure to handle, they
should be designed such that larger storm events bypass the system into a separate facility where site conditions allow. Routine maintenance of
these small BMPs is critical to their function. The Division of Facilities Management within the Office of Management and Budget may see an
increased need for their support in order to properly maintain on-site BMPs at state agency locations. Collaboration with the Department of
Education may also be required because rain gardens have been installed as an educational component at a number of schools within the state.
DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate the adequacy of drainage infrastructure to address changes in precipitation and
sea level rise. Climate change dynamics such as sea level rise and increased storm activity and precipitation will create the need for increased
drainage services, and will stress already inadequate drainage infrastructure. Demand for new drainage infrastructure and service costs will
increase where precipitation rates increase or sea level rise prevents adequate outlets to tidal waters. There are many densely developed parts
of the state where a 2-foot rise in sea level will create major drainage issues. Land use decisions will be impacted as drainage infrastructure is
incorporated into new development projects, which will be a challenge in many locations. DelDOT will face many of the same issues, and
collaboration will be required between agencies.

Evaluate voluntary and regulatory
strategies to ensure that Delaware
emission sources are well controlled

DNREC (Division of Air Quality) should ensure that Delaware’s emission sources of SO2, NOx, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) remain well
controlled. DE currently has issues with the attainment and maintenance of ozone and fine particulate matter, which are health-based air
quality standards. Ambient concentrations of these pollutants are temperature-dependent, and increased temperature will exacerbate the
problems. DE sources of these pollutants are generally well controlled, but as technology advances, additional control opportunities become
available.

Consider incorporating equipment
siting requirements into air permitting
process

DNREC (Division of Air Quality [DAQ]) should consider a policy to require new permit applicants to consider inundation and sea level rise. Air
emissions sources and emission control equipment may become at risk to flooding as more frequent extreme storms impact the state. DAQ
should evaluate requiring as part of the existing permitting process that new sources of air emissions evaluate and appropriately site new
equipment.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D13



To incorporate adaptation into operational budget and capital planning processes:
DNREC should integrate climate change into budget planning process and the long-range capital planning activities. Planning for and investing in infrastructure projects that improve
Delaware’s resiliency are possible when consistent and dedicated funds are available. Integrating climate adaptation strategies directly into the operating and capital budget planning
process will help institutionalize discussions about future resiliency needs and investment into natural and hard infrastructure projects. DNREC should consider climate change impacts
when reviewing proposed projects and suggest climate-related metrics for capital budget spending.
DNREC (Division of Energy and Climate) should increase involvement and activities associated with energy emergency planning. DEC currently
has direct involvement in Emergency Management response activities for energy-related events associated with state weather and other
Improve energy reliability and response
emergencies. As we prepare for more drastic weather and climate events, DEC expects to increase its Energy Assurance planning efforts and
to emergency events
involvement with DEMA and preparedness for statewide Emergency Management activities and/or events, which may require additional
resources for the Division.
DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should be the lead on shoreline management and protection for living shorelines. Assistance and
collaboration with other state partners will be needed, because increased funding, more staffing resources, and collaboration with additional
partners may be required. The increased use of mechanisms such as living shorelines to protect natural and human-made infrastructure will be
Discuss additional support for living
crucial in regard to climate change. Adaptation to existing living shoreline methods and strategic placement for infrastructure protection is
shorelines to support shoreline
highly important so that sea level rise and climate change is planned for and counteracted well in advance. Responses would include ensuring
management and protection
the vitality and function of existing living shoreline projects. This could require more staffing, changes to policy, increased research, and more
outreach. Climate change could also develop a response to increase the amount and scale of living shoreline projects, or conversely cause living
shorelines to become obsolete due to increased sea level rise and shoreline energy, which would lead to increased erosion and/or the use of
hardened/armored structures.

Plan for increasing demands for
shoreline management and beach
preservation

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should plan for increasing needs, costs, and potential regulatory changes for shoreline
management and beach preservation. The Division should monitor rates of coastal change, erosion, beach widths, storm damage, dune
deterioration, and the cost of shoreline maintenance. Staff should consider the costs and benefits of project upgrades, which will likely be
needed to maintain current levels of recreational beach amenities, park infrastructure, dune dimensions, and levels of coastal storm protection.
Climate change dynamics such as sea level rise and increased storm activity could put additional stress on shoreline management and dune
preservation/enhancement. Additional sand resources will be needed; more frequent and robust shoreline maintenance activities will be
increasingly costly. Staffing increases could be needed if current service levels are maintained in the face of more frequent damage to beaches
and dunes/dune crossovers. Regulatory changes to the Beach Use Regulations may be needed to maintain current levels of dune
preservation/protection as sea levels increase and damages worsen. The Beach Preservation building line may not be appropriate in its current
location to protect dunes as shoreline migration continues. The State Park system along the coast will be impacted by these changes. The major
park infrastructure along the ocean and bay shorelines will be stressed by these increased risk factors.

Evaluate needs for channel
maintenance

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should evaluate needs for channel maintenance to maintain current levels of navigable waterways,
recreational boating and fishing amenities, and park use. Climate change dynamics such as sea level rise, increased storm activity, and
precipitation runoff could put additional stress on the Division’s channel maintenance responsibilities. Increased storm activity and sediment
accumulation could make channel maintenance activities increasingly costly. Staffing and contractual project increases could be needed if
current or increasing service levels are required in the face of higher boating use and more frequent damage to channels by storm and tidedriven material. Major park infrastructure along the Delaware Bay and Inland Bays is linked to recreational and commercial boat use that
depends on channel maintenance.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D14



Prepare for expanded mosquito
production season

DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to control mosquito populations nearly year-round to address increased complaints and to
reduce transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, including maximizing use of non-insecticidal source reduction methods (e.g., open marsh
water management, impoundment water-level management, fish stocking); expanding public education and outreach efforts to increase
participation in water sanitation to decrease mosquito-breeding habitats; and exploring new regulatory tools to increase compliance. Increased
mosquito population and mosquito-borne disease surveillance and monitoring will also be needed, as well as an increase in use of larvicides and
adulticides as warranted to meet the public's needs, demands, and expectations.

Prepare for increased nuisance wildlife
complaints

DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to address an increase in nuisance wildlife complaints by increasing outreach about best
practices and services offered by commercial operators and volunteer organizations. Increased complaints are expected as suitable habitat for
some species shrinks and wildlife move closer to residential and urban areas. An increased demand for assistance with sick or injured wildlife
after extreme storm/flooding rain events is also anticipated. Permitting of commercial operators and volunteer rehabilitation organizations
needs to be updated and refined.

Prepare for increased number of fish
kills and harmful algal blooms

DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to handle an increased number of fish kills and harmful algal blooms. Increased fish kills
will result from decreased holding capacity for dissolved oxygen in water. Increased need for response may require additional resources.

Develop plan for access

To ensure protection of public health and safety:
DNREC (Division of Parks and Recreation) should develop a plan to provide alternative evacuation routes, access roads, and trails and ensure
that communication would be available in the event of an emergency. DelDOT and DEMA should be involved, as they address roadways and
emergency response.

Issue emergency waivers for repairs to
infrastructure, environmental
resources, and property resulting from
storms and flooding events

DNREC (Division of Water's Wetlands and Subaqueous Lands Section) should issue emergency waivers for repairs to infrastructure,
environmental resources, and property resulting from storms and flooding events. This adaptation would allow applicants to obtain expedited
authorizations for repair and replacement activities in waters of the state and would reduce staff review time during these times of high permit
demands. This adaptation has been important for the repair/replacement of roadways and bridges and for the repair/replacement of docks,
piers. and shoreline stabilization on public and private properties. This adaptation has allowed the prompt allocation and utilization of federal
funds for the nourishment of damaged beaches and the repair of damaged earthen dams.

Update and implement Debris
Management Section of the State
Emergency Operations Plan

DNREC (Division of Waste and Hazardous Substances) should work with DEMA to support the update of requirements in the Debris
Management Section of the State Emergency Operations Plan and ensure their implementation. Many requirements were never funded and
therefore never implemented. The plan requires updating before a storm hits that requires the plan’s implementation. This recommendation
requires DEMA leadership.

Update floodplain maps with
consideration of climate change
dynamics

Climate Framework for Delaware

To improve data and information available to the public:
DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should update floodplain maps with consideration of climate change dynamics. As flood risk factors
increase, there will be an ongoing need to update these maps frequently and potentially to produce maps that are future-risk-based. Demand
for updated floodplain maps and forward-looking study methodology is likely as flood and coastal storm risks are impacted by climate change.
Climate change dynamics such as sea level rise, increased storm activity, and precipitation runoff will likely drive the need for updates to
floodplain maps to reflect changing flood risk. Current federal policy and modeling practices intentionally do not factor future changes in sea
level and precipitation into 100-year floodplain maps. In part this is due to federal insurance requirements that these maps reflect current risk,
not future risk. Also, the hydrology and hydraulics practices for calculating flood levels and flood risk maps are driven by historical and current
data and lack proven guidance for performing these studies for future conditions.

Page D15



Coordinate on the use of updated
floodplain maps to assist with flood
mitigation activities

Update mapping of tidal wetland
jurisdictional boundaries

Increase educational awareness of
climate change in Delaware

Educate staff and the public
Build capacity to conduct climate
change–focused air quality modeling
Increase climate change–focused
research and modeling

Develop and apply resiliency
compliance criteria for distributing
state and federal funds

Support long-term climate resilience
through Cabinet Committee on Climate
Resiliency

Climate Framework for Delaware

DNREC (Division of Watershed Stewardship) should coordinate with DEMA on the use of updated floodplain maps to assist with flood mitigation
activities. Climate change dynamics such as sea level rise and increased storm activity and precipitation will create the need for updated
floodplain mapping and higher floodplain standards for keeping development safe. The cycle at which floodplain maps are updated is currently
inadequate, but is becoming more manageable as technologic advances lower the cost of flood studies. Floodplain mapping updates and
floodplain development standards that account for rising sea level and increased flood risk will be needed. Ideally these programs become more
“forward-looking” instead of being tied to historic data, stream flows, coastal storms of record, and models. The outcome should be flood risk
maps that depict future risk factors, floodplain development standards to guide development away from current and future flood risk areas, and
new standards that look at future risks. Because DEMA will be similarly faced with increased pressure to provide assistance for flood mitigation
activities, a shared collaborative approach will be needed.
DNREC (Division of Water's Wetlands and Subaqueous Lands Section) should update the existing tidal wetland jurisdictional boundary maps to
more accurately identify the limits of the state’s jurisdiction over tidal wetlands and develop a protocol for future updates. Sea level rise is
resulting in the landward migration of tidal wetlands, which is not being depicted in the existing maps that are static and last updated in 1988.
This adaptation will minimize impacts to tidal wetlands that result from unpermitted excavation, filling, and construction activities and provide
guidance for the siting of infrastructure and structures vulnerable to sea level rise.
DNREC (Delaware Coastal Programs) should increase climate change content in educational and outreach programs that promote a better
understanding of Delaware’s estuarine and coastal areas and promote informed coastal decision making. DNERR offers education and training
programs for a range of audiences, including students, teachers, and families, as well as state and local government leaders and other coastal
decision makers. The goal of the program is to improve environmental literacy in our communities to enable environmentally sustainable
decision making. Pertinent climate change information can be included in curricula that have been developed for the various education and
outreach programs: Coastal Training Program, Community Programs, School Programs, Teacher Professional Development, and through Thank
You, Delaware Bay.
DNREC (Division of Parks and Recreation) should educate staff and develop educational brochures for constituents on vector-borne diseases,
prevention and treatment of heatstroke and dehydration, and what to do in the event of extreme weather events. They should also consider
changes in timing and duration of public programs and fee season.
DNREC (Division of Air Quality) should conduct regional-scale modeling with CMAQ and CAMx. These regional-scale models are necessary to
evaluate the impact of temperature change on ozone levels and fine particulate matter in DE.
DNREC (Division of Air Quality) should conduct additional research/modeling to better understand the impacts of increased temperature on
ozone concentrations. Ozone formation is highly temperature dependent, and increased temperatures will increase the number of days that
ozone levels are unhealthy and the level of ozone concentrations on those days. Research and modeling is needed to relate the increased ozone
levels to the national ambient air quality standards, the quantity of NOX and VOC emissions in DE, and the relative impact of ozone and ozone
precursor emissions transported into DE from upwind states.
To address other Department-wide priorities:
DNREC should develop resiliency principles, incentive structures, and/or eligibility criteria for grant and contract funds based on the
flexibility and intent of the funding source. When distributing funds to contractors, businesses, and communities, DNREC should ensure to
the maximum extent possible that funds are used in ways that minimize risk from climate impacts (e.g., higher temperatures, increased
precipitation, sea level rise, and greater risk of flooding) and that safeguard communities from preventable loss.
DNREC should continue to support climate mitigation and adaptation policy in coordination with the Governor's Committee on Climate and
Resiliency, convened under Executive Order 41. DNREC recommends that the Committee continue operating over the long term, and that the
Division of Energy and Climate (DEC) provide annual updates to them on changes in our understanding of the effects of climate change on
Delaware and its residents. Climate change will continue for decades, and our understanding of the science of greenhouse gas effects on the
planet will continue to evolve. DEC needs to stay abreast of changing science and policy developments and continuously apply those changes to
Delaware’s climate adaptation and mitigation responses.

Page D16



Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
Develop operational plans to adapt to
sea level rise

DSHS should develop operational plans to address the potential impacts of sea level rise. These operational plans may also include measures to
ensure that new facilities are not constructed in lower elevation areas, so as to mitigate flooding impacts.

Consider alterations to policies
regarding worker safety in an increased
temperature environment

DSHS should consider alterations to policies regarding worker safety in an increased temperature environment. Necessary policy changes may
include additional training on the risks of extreme heat to outdoor workers, changes to uniform dress code under certain circumstances, and
alterations in scheduling during extreme heat events. Increased temperatures affect all state agencies, but especially those whose employees
work outside for extended periods of time, such as Delaware State Police, DelDOT, DNREC, etc. There will need to be collaboration among these
and other state partners to address this issue. The lead should come from state agencies with the most employees affected by increased
temperatures, along with guidance concerning heat-related illnesses from the Division of Public Health.

Conduct research on the potential
effects of climate change on structures
and vehicles

DSHS should conduct additional research to provide accurate information on the effects of increased temperatures and increased precipitation
on buildings and vehicles, including the effects on existing structures and vehicles. A potential focus for the research could be to gauge the
effects of increased temperatures and prolonged heat waves on state buildings and vehicles to ascertain if the current cooling systems in state
buildings and vehicles are robust enough to handle the additional stress that will be placed upon them in the future. Additional research should
be conducted to gauge the vulnerability of the state's communication infrastructure to ensure the reliability of this vital resource in the face of
climate change. Based on the outcome of the research, action plans can be developed and implemented.

Make programmatic adjustments to
adapt to increasing levels of
precipitation, flooding, and sea level
rise

DSHS should make programmatic adjustments to adapt to increasing levels of precipitation, flooding, and sea level rise. These programmatic
adjustments can be tailored specifically to Divisions within DSHS based on need. For example, DEMA may need to have staff and Emergency
Service Coordinators (ESCs) report to the Emergency Operations Center earlier in an event and also readjust timelines for evacuation of citizens
from vulnerable communities. In addition, DEMA will need to expand its outreach and education to the local governments and the public
concerning building in flood-prone areas and floodplains, and programs available through DEMA to assist with mitigating vulnerable properties.
The Division of Communications (DivComm) may need to reevaluate the lightning suppression equipment to include the grounding of internal
and external equipment that is currently in place at the state’s radio communications sites to ensure its compliance with industry guidelines.
DivComm may also need to reconfigure current or install new lightning suppression equipment and grounding systems where needed to ensure
uninterrupted radio communications for the various agencies throughout the state, including the Delaware State Police, municipal police, fire
departments, Department of Corrections, and DelDOT. Also, DivComm may need to reevaluate the ability to properly protect the state radio
communications site shelters and auxiliary power generators from any potential sea level rise and should consider the feasibility of installing
drainage culverts or water barriers around the sites to divert water away.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D17



Recommendation Title
Review Commission options to help
reduce greenhouse gases and mitigate
climate change
Broaden utility review of climate
change initiatives to include nonregulated entities

Review utility tariff approaches to
minimizing greenhouse gases

Review potential for infrastructure
enhancements that can help mitigate
climate change exposure

Coordinate review of storm response
procedures with all regulated utilities

Delaware Department of State - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Summary
To identify and support policy initiatives that reduce greenhouse gas emissions (climate mitigation):
DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should take the opportunity to chair an orderly, task force focused approach to review existing and
potential utility actions to help mitigate climate change and reduce greenhouse gases with consideration for customer rate impact. The PSC
should assign a Review Manager to coordinate and manage the task force process and to prepare a “Findings and Recommendations” report to
the Commission.
DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should broaden the review by inviting participation unregulated and municipal public utilities as members
of the task force and establish a proposed schedule of work leading to a final report within 12 months. As the PSC only regulates investor-owned
utilities, participation and cooperation of unregulated utilities would be on a voluntary basis.
DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should broaden the review to include various tariff approaches that could help reduce energy use and
related greenhouse gases, while minimizing customer rate impact. The review should include:
a. Tariffs that encourage conservation of resources and stimulate growth of distributed resources;
b. Tariffs that recognize the benefits of energy efficiency and the direct use of natural gas;
c. Tariffs that improve customer choice and produce savings through dynamic or off peak energy use;
d. The impacts made by peak demand costs, net metering limitations and other tariff issues.
To enhance utility infrastructure to ensure reliability of service:
DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should utilize the existing task force to also review the following key issues on which actions could be
taken to help mitigate climate change. The review should consider rate impact and supplement the “Findings and Recommendations” Report to
the Commission:
a. Major utility areas at risk from climate change and sea level rise;
b. Discussions with utilities relating to their plans for infrastructure resiliency investment and where that might help to mitigate the impact of
climate change;
c. Potential mechanisms, including securitization of asset upgrades, to reduce ratepayer mitigation costs;
d. Utility actions and monitoring/reporting requirements.
DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should consider a review of current utility policies related to storm response encompassing a wide range
of response procedures currently in place to ensure public safety and address potential public health concerns related to climate change.

To incorporate climate change into asset management and protection of historic and cultural resources:
DOS (Historical & Cultural Affairs) should increase readiness (preparedness) for climate change events by completing mapping of all cultural
Complete mapping of cultural resources resources in the Cultural and Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS), a GIS-based system. This will allow for broader planning related
into GIS-based system
to the risk to cultural resources and provide for expedited review in all federal undertakings requiring such review by the National
Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) and/or the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
DOS (Historical & Cultural Affairs) should conduct vulnerability assessments and scenario planning, to include evacuation and triage procedures.
Historical & Cultural Affairs will enhance adaptation/preparedness by developing risk criteria, assessing and characterizing the vulnerability of
Conduct vulnerability assessments
state assets (facilities and cultural resources), and providing scenario planning guidance and training to include evacuation and triage
procedures.
DOS (Historical & Cultural Affairs) should document underground utilities, underground storage tanks, septic systems, and other infrastructure
Ensure preparedness for threatened
of vulnerable assets, maintain site and floor plans, identify utility shut-off valves and exit routes, and maintain documentation in readily
sites
accessible formats.
Evaluate costs and benefits of creating
DOS (Historical & Cultural Affairs) should evaluate the specific costs and benefits of creating a category of historic preservation tax credits that
historic preservation tax credit for
eligible property owners can apply for to offset the costs of adaptation and protection measures.
adaptation and resiliency

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D18



Publish cultural resource management
plans

Mitigate below-grade facilities

Create energy baseline for leased sites
Create energy baseline for office
equipment
Ensure new building compliance

Ensure financed building compliance

Increase amount of technical staff
Promote personal energy use
awareness
Establish protocols to protect outdoor
workers
Evaluate and promote workplace
options for employees

DOS (Historical & Cultural Affairs) should increase readiness (preparedness) for climate change events by: (1) developing and implementing
cultural resource management plans that identify significant buildings and archaeological sites, and documenting and/or recovering information
as indicated; (2) providing adequate facilities to protect curated artifact collections and associated documentation.
To incorporate climate change into asset management:
DOS should identify all work locations considered to be “below grade” and vulnerable to increased frequency of flooding and mitigate potential
adverse effects by incorporating into maintenance plans regular inspections of drainage systems, ventilation, and entry and passageways, and
by implementing corrections. Evaluate feasibility and incorporate into long-range planning relocation of these operations to less vulnerable
sites.
DOS should create baseline energy efficiency standards for all leased sites in the department, to include baseline energy consumption, tenantavailable monitoring of energy usage, use of passive ventilation, and use of renewable energy sources.
DOS should create baseline energy efficiency standards for all office equipment and promote the use of Energy Star equipment where
appropriate.
DOS should ensure that all new buildings built by the Department of State shall be in compliance with Executive Order 18, especially in the
categories of energy conservation and efficiency; use of clean, renewable energy; and environmentally responsible and energy conscious
construction.
DOS should ensure that all new buildings receiving funding from the State of Delaware through the Department of State shall be in compliance
with Executive Order 18, especially in the categories of energy conservation and efficiency; use of clean, renewable energy; and environmentally
responsible and energy conscious construction.
To ensure workforce safety and capacity to provide services:
DOS (Public Advocate) should address the need for additional technical staff to address the potential increase in call volumes and more complex
hearings (where climate change mitigation costs may be built into rates).
DOS should enhance workforce climate literacy by developing a training program to ensure that all employees are aware of their personal
energy use and ways to use energy more efficiently.
DOS should increase workplace safety by establishing protocols to protect employees working outside from adverse effects of extreme
temperature days.
DOS should evaluate and promote the use of videoconferencing capability for all agencies, especially those with public hearing functions; a ride
sharing program to allow for sharing of vehicles across agency lines; telecommuting options; and flexible work and leave schedules during
weather events that result in disruption, where feasible and desirable.
To ensure consumer protection:

Evaluate alternate utility rate structures
Assess financial impact of any new
rates
Enhance outreach to utility consumers
Include protected classes and
undocumented communities in
outreach efforts

Climate Framework for Delaware

DOS (Public Service Commission staff) should, upon approval by the Public Services Commission, collaborate with utility companies, the Public
Advocate, and various stakeholders to design measures that would be suitable to address climate change initiatives with reasonable attainable
goals, reasonable costs, and reasonable expectations.
DOS (Public Advocate) should work to ensure that the financial impact of any potential new rates includes consideration of the utility consumer
interests.
DOS (Public Advocate) should enhance outreach to utility consumers on the issues of climate change, mitigation, energy efficiency, and any
potential rate changes.
DOS (Human Relations Commission) should establish public information protocols to ensure fairness and equity in the dissemination of
information related to Executive Order 41 implementation and ensure that any relevant plans, programs, services, incentives, and relief include
protected classes and undocumented communities.

Page D19



Delaware Department of Transportation - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
To incorporate climate change into asset management:
Continue development of geospatial
data sets that can help identify
vulnerable areas and help estimate the
impact of reasonably anticipated events
(such as a Category 3 hurricane)

Conduct comprehensive assessment of
state roadway risks and assets

Integrate climate resiliency into project
development, traffic, bridge, and
highway design

Build transportation enhancements
(pathways, trails, roadscapes, etc.) to
accommodate impacts of climate
change
Identify and assess existing chronic
flooding and erosion problems caused
by sea level rise, frequent storms, tidal
forces, subsidence, and aging
infrastructure
Evaluate materials used to reduce the
impacts of stormwater runoff

Reevaluate stormwater management
approaches

Climate Framework for Delaware

DelDOT should work with outside agencies to review and revise current rainfall curves and to develop comprehensive and dynamic rainfall and
maximum likely storm surge models to assess impacts to infrastructure (not just transportation) in vulnerable areas. Current models and
geospatial data capture only a partial view of the effects of climate change, mostly from a static viewpoint, and not from the effects of major
storm surge, periods of heavy rainfall, or other major catastrophic events. Updates to geospatial forecasts incorporating these scenarios will
help suggest where to place investments to improve the resilience of our communities (e.g., bury utilities, build sea walls, reinforce dams, etc.)
These data will then be used by local jurisdictions to determine land use in comprehensive plans. DelDOT will use previous storm data (i.e., from
Superstorm Sandy) as scenario planning data for development of potential risks in these geographically vulnerable areas.
DelDOT proposes to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the state’s roadways, bridges, and other infrastructure (stormwater ponds, dams, and
dikes) to identify those elements or portions of the transportation system that provide access to essential services, such as hospitals and
emergency shelters, and that could be vulnerable to climate change impacts such as flooding. The purpose of this analysis will be to create a
plan to improve the resiliency of the transportation system by rendering these essential elements as reliably and predictably available for use in
emergency situations as possible given our current knowledge and understanding of the maximum likely events such as extreme weather.
DelDOT should integrate into its bridge and highway design manuals strategies for improving the resiliency of the transportation system
(including against sea level rise) for short-term, medium-term, and long-term anticipated effects. Current projects are developed with an eye
toward present and future traffic flows, safety improvements, and maximum lifecycle value of the asset. New designs will also take into account
short-term, medium-term, and long-term effects of climate change, based on geospatial information, to accommodate these effects over the
lifecycle of the asset. Project development will assess the potential cost impacts of these adjustments to determine the efficacy of building to
adapt to anticipated climate change impacts. For example, traffic safety and management will evaluate the need to increase and improve
roadway messaging, lighting, and retro-reflectivity in their design manuals to accommodate the greater anticipated frequency and severity of
rain events.
DelDOT should incorporate accommodations in its Transportation Alternatives Program to provide resiliency for extreme heat, drought, heavy
rainfall, or extreme cold and prolonged freezing. Current Transportation Alternatives projects strive for minimum of maintenance and contextsensitive design. Future designs should include noninvasive resilient plants and should deliberately minimize stormwater runoff impacts.
DelDOT should coordinate with DNREC (Divisions of Fish and Wildlife, Watershed Stewardship, and Water) to identify and assess existing
chronic flooding and erosion caused by sea level rise, frequent storms, tidal forces, subsidence, and aging infrastructure (e.g., water-control
structures, levees, culverts, and roadside shoulder erosion).
DelDOT should evaluate and qualify materials used to treat roads to meet standards for environmental impacts to vegetation, rivers, streams,
etc. As greater moisture events (heavy rainfall, snow) occur due to climate change, use of chemicals for snowmelt plays a part in the impact of
stormwater on roadside vegetation, wildlife and fish, and other aquatic species. Development of new designs with stormwater management
alternatives and use of low impact chemicals (or no chemicals at all) will reduce these impacts.
DelDOT should work with DNREC and the Office of State Planning Coordination to review the state’s strategy for stormwater management with
an eye to improved resiliency. Special attention should be paid to striking the right balance between deliberately retaining stormwater in an
effort to enhance groundwater recharge and accommodating efficient drainage. Currently, stormwater management designs focus on volume
and location. Alternative designs for stormwater management and advanced techniques to capture runoff and pollutant discharge will be
explored. If appropriate, changes should be made in our design standards and in our regulatory requirements for subdivisions.

Page D20



Explore new pavement technology

Incorporate climate impacts into costeffective investment in infrastructure

Evaluate obtaining insurance to assist in
recovery from catastrophic events

DelDOT should explore the deployment of new technologies in asphalt and concrete pavement composition to mitigate melting of road surfaces
or other damage. Currently, asphalt pavements are impacted by prolonged heat and other environmental effects (water, salt, etc.). Alternative
materials and substrates will be explored to prevent climate change–related failures and lengthen the lifecycle of paved surfaces to withstand
extreme temperature changes and moisture impacts.
DelDOT should reevaluate the process by which projects are prioritized into the Capital Improvement Program to ensure that the process
adequately reflects the strategies contained in currently adopted comprehensive land use plans. Currently, investments are made primarily for
improving safety, accommodating greater traffic volumes, and maximizing the lifecycle value. As climate changes the variables for design (e.g.,
more right-of-way needed for a higher bridge), greater funding in the Capital Improvement Program will be needed to accommodate costs of
longer and larger bridges (and subsequent increased maintenance costs). DelDOT will evaluate how best to include in the decision-making
process the cost/benefit of building to accommodate potential vulnerabilities weighed against the financial means to build them.
DelDOT should work with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Insurance Coverage Office to assess the efficacy of obtaining
some sort of insurance that could help provide the funds necessary to recover from catastrophic and prolonged loss of major elements
(roadways, bridges, and equipment) within the transportation system.
Because the state self-insures, DelDOT is concerned that a catastrophic event involving either Delaware’s roadways or DelDOT equipment and
the revenue generated by opening the state to interstate commerce will put the state finances at risk, particularly if there was a significant loss
of economic activity during this time.
To ensure workforce and public health and safety:

Evaluate and adjust worker safety
guidelines

DelDOT should evaluate, and as necessary, adjust guidelines addressing worker safety and train workers to identify risks of exposure to high
heat, extreme temperatures, and impacts to roadway and project site conditions. Currently, DelDOT monitors extreme events and adjusts work
schedules accordingly. DelDOT should review and adjust its safety guidelines to accommodate for higher temperatures, impaired air quality, and
extreme site conditions. It should encourage its contractors to do the same for its workers.

Provide training to improve worker
knowledge

DelDOT should train workers utilizing materials for roadway maintenance to apply more resilient materials in responsible ways. Contractors
currently do not undergo DelDOT training programs on state-of-the-art materials science or application. DelDOT should develop a best practice
training program for approved construction firms.

Evaluate driving restrictions for air
quality events

In conjunction with the Governor’s Office, DNREC, and DHSS, DelDOT should evaluate the costs, benefits, and feasibility of “reduced driving
days” when atmospheric conditions are such that air quality is a significant health risk. Currently, air quality is assessed and advisory warnings
are issued for certain segments of the population (aged, young, those with health conditions). As the temperatures begin to increase over
historical averages, ever-greater numbers of citizens may be impacted. The state should develop policies for addressing advisory and required
compliance for public safety to a greater number of people who previously would not have been impacted.

Develop revised maintenance schedules
in response to air quality

DelDOT should develop revised maintenance schedules in response to air quality and climate conditions. During poor air quality days, less
mowing and reduced work during the day will reduce our pollution footprint. Electrification of vehicle work areas should be considered for
needed idling to maintain air conditioning in vehicles. Decisions to reduce workdays will be balanced against higher costs, nuisance issues (e.g.,
work at night), and lengthening of projects.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D21



Adjust transit service in emergencies

DelDOT should build into its emergency response strategies to provide transit as necessary without endangering drivers or passengers. DelDOT
currently weighs its transit deployment based on extreme weather events. As the intensity of these events grows, alternative deployment
strategies should be considered. For instance, vehicles will be redistributed to more localized service routes based on density to avoid
impassable roads to reach passengers in need. Also, transit vehicles will be taken out of service if imminent danger is posed to drivers and
potential passengers. DelDOT will provide more maintenance and alternative vehicle types with longer life spans, and accommodate worker
conditions as temperatures increase. In addition, both DelDOT and Delaware Transit Fleet vehicles will have location options for storage at
higher elevations at times of flooding. Lastly, more shelters for passengers to protect them from the elements (rain, cold, and heat) will be
evaluated.

Reevaluate emergency response
protocols

DelDOT and Homeland Security will reevaluate our current long-term strategies for response to significant catastrophic events and our current
short-term evacuation policies, and detour/evacuation route management and implementation. Currently, the Transportation Management
Center, in conjunction with DEMA, provides coordination of emergency events ranging from 72 hours to two weeks in duration. If a catastrophic
emergency hits Delaware, DelDOT and Homeland Security will assist in the long-term recovery process. It is recommended that a full-scale
emergency response exercise occur with participation from all state departments and programs.
To support climate resiliency in local communities:

Support local governments with land
use assessment tools

DelDOT will continue to work with the Office of State Planning, the municipalities, and the counties on the development of geospatial mapping
and infrastructure assessment tools to help inform the municipalities and counties about the potential impacts of climate change and assist in
developing strategies for enhanced resilience. Currently, comprehensive land use plans vary with respect to their treatment of resilience and do
not account for greater rainfall, sea level rise, or dynamic events such as storm surge, drought, increased summer temperatures, etc. Adaptation
of comprehensive plans to address these vulnerabilities will allow governments to do more to protect the long-term health and safety of
residents.
To identify and support policy initiatives that reduce greenhouse gas emissions (climate mitigation):

Evaluate low-emission vehicle
deployment

DelDOT should purchase and deploy lower emission light-duty vehicles equal to 10% of its fleet by 2020. Currently, DelDOT does not purchase
lower emission/no-emission vehicles due to the high cost, maintenance requirements, and state bidding rules. DelDOT will re-evaluate the
purchase of these vehicles and will coordinate efforts with the Office of Management and Budget. Until government provides a catalyst for the
purchase of the vehicles, the cost will not decrease for the market in general. DelDOT will perform a life cycle cost analysis to determine the
financial efficacy of various types of alternative vehicles. This analysis does not preclude the adoption of the vehicles, but rather will inform
what types of vehicles may be more cost-effective and evaluate the economic benefits in stimulating the market for these types of vehicles.

Evaluate alternative energy technology
in facilities

DelDOT will consider the deployment of more alternative energy technologies, namely energy efficiency and wind and solar technology, in its
administrative and operational buildings. Currently, only one facility has solar installed. DelDOT will evaluate these programs for all new and
renovated facilities for life cycle cost/benefit.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D22



Delaware Economic Development Office - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title

Recommendation Summary

Advocate for adoption of state
recommendations for climate change
adaptation

DEDO should position itself as an advocate for the adoption of the state's recommendations for climate change adaptation to the business and
tourism communities. DEDO should further educate these interest groups on the vulnerabilities the state faces from climate change to further
support the adoption of the adaptation recommendations. In doing so, DEDO will foster resilience to the business and tourism sectors, thus
ensuring economic prosperity and longevity.

Provide and market public
transportation to attractions
throughout the state

DEDO should evaluate the possibility of establishing a joint marketing effort by state agencies working in partnership to instill a deeper
awareness of the public transportation services capable of transporting travelers to Delaware's attractions. This strategy has the potential to
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions by reducing the number of vehicles on the road due to increased use of public transportation.

Alter the standard for weekly rentals

DEDO should focus a Delaware Tourism Office outreach effort on realtors and rental agents at the Delaware beaches to create awareness of the
benefits of changing the current standard of what constitutes a “weekly rental” of beach properties. Brokers/owners would be asked to work
toward a system wherein rental changeover days and times would be staggered through the week, thus reducing the simultaneous influx and
outflow of vacationers on specific weekend days only. This strategy would help reduce greenhouse gas emissions from traffic congestion, while
also benefitting residents, tourists, and local businesses.

Promote economic growth and
development in climate-resilient
locations

DEDO should target growth and expansion of clean/light industry statewide to the areas most resilient to the impacts of climate change. This
strategy has the potential to spur new jobs in sustainable industries while also ensuring the longevity of these structures.

Assist in bolstering resilience in the
agriculture sector

DEDO should work with the Department of Agriculture and universities to develop approaches that reduce the impacts of climate change on
local farmers, crops, and production facilities and to expand the use of agricultural technology in Delaware. This strategy will help improve the
resilience of one of the major sectors contributing to Delaware's economy, while also having the potential to mitigate greenhouse gases through
the use of more efficient technology.

Educate and assist businesses and
industry in adapting to climate change

DEDO should utilize existing business retention outreach efforts to educate existing business and industry on the risks of climate change to their
Delaware location(s) and develop approaches to mitigate that risk. This strategy will help ensure the resilience of the business and industrial
sectors in Delaware, both of which contribute heavily to the state's economy.

Advocate for the reuse of existing
industrial brownfield sites

DEDO should advocate for the reuse of existing industrial brownfield sites and support infrastructure statewide to reduce the use of greenfield
sites and the construction of new, duplicate infrastructure. This strategy would allow for future development, while maintaining greenfields
throughout the state.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D23



Recommendation Title

Delaware State Housing Authority - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Summary

Evaluate energy-efficiency standards of
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC) program

The Delaware State Housing Authority (DSHA) should review the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program to identify areas for improvement so that
current energy standards will be exceeded. As weather and climate change, buildings may not be sufficient from an energy-efficiency standpoint.
Incorporating increased standards will ensure that developers design and construct energy-efficient buildings and therefore alleviate health and safety
concerns from excessive heat. DSHA is the allocating and monitoring agency for the LIHTC program for Delaware. The program was developed to
stimulate production and preservation of low-income housing. Each state is given the responsibility of allocating credits to qualified projects in an
amount not to exceed that which is needed to obtain financial feasibility up to the maximum amount available to that state. Each allocating agency must
have a qualified allocation plan as part of their LIHTC application. This allocation plan lists all of the requirements needed and categories with which
DSHA prioritizes LIHTC applications for funding. DSHA will review the current required energy standards and determine areas that can be improved
without adversely impacting the program’s ability to provide quality affordable rental housing to low- and moderate-income households. There will
likely be a need for training for developers who use the program or a resource that developers can go to for technical assistance (perhaps from DNREC)
on the new energy requirements.

Explore partnering on grants that
address resiliency, such as the
upcoming HUD National Disaster
Resilience Competition

The Delaware State Housing Authority (DSHA) should explore applying for grants that address resiliency by partnering with other state agencies,
including DNREC. For example, in 2014 DHSA and DNREC are exploring the feasibility of applying for a major grant through the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) National Disaster Resilience Competition. This grant program, announced in September 2014, will make
available $1 billion to the 67 communities (including Delaware) that suffered a presidentially declared major disaster from 2011 to 2013. The grant
funding will be administered through a Community Development Block Grant process. DSHA should play a lead role in coordination with other state
agencies, including DNREC, OSPC, and DelDOT, and with local governments. The money would fund the implementation of innovative resilience projects
to better prepare communities for future storms and other extreme events.

Consider sea level rise in DSHA
programs

The Delaware State Housing Authority should consider sea level rise impacts in its programs that facilitate new construction and or rehabilitation. These
include the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program, the State Housing Development Fund, the HOME program, and the Community Development Block
Grant program. DSHA will review these programs, in consideration of sea level rise, to determine modifications necessary to avoid, when possible, new
construction in areas prone to flooding. For program changes, there will likely be a need for training for developers that use the program or a resource
that developers can go to for technical assistance (perhaps from DNREC) on new building and construction requirements.

Incorporate information on sea level
rise in homeownership counseling

The Delaware State Housing Authority should work with the eleven housing counseling agencies to incorporate awareness on sea level rise into their
pre-purchase counseling. This can include information on how to determine whether a property is located in a flood zone or area prone to sea level rise.
DSHA administers a single-contract system with all eleven housing counseling agencies in Delaware. Contract language specifies that services to clients
will include counseling sessions covering specific topics, such as rebuilding credit, saving, and reducing debt. Providing meaningful outreach to
homebuyers to investigate a property’s potential vulnerability to sea level rise prior to purchase can help homebuyers avoid areas that would make
them susceptible to expensive building damage resulting from rising sea levels or extreme storms causing floods. Many homebuyers who participate in
pre-purchase counseling are first-time homebuyers or are financially constrained and would be severely burdened by additional expenses associated
with flood-related building damage.

Promote sustainable building practices
into the Downtown Development
District (DDD) grant program

The Delaware State Housing Authority should promote sustainable building practices into the Downtown Development District grant program. DSHA
should work with DNREC to incorporate incentives for developers to design and construct energy-efficient buildings that meet specified energy goals, as
certified through a third party. Because DSHA does not have the capacity to ensure that participants in the program are actually meeting the identified
energy goals, success will depend on collaboration with DNREC and Delaware Sustainable Energy Utility. Developers will need technical assistance.

Climate Framework for Delaware

Page D24



Delaware Office of Management and Budget - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Recommendation Summary
Advocate for changes to state building
design practices and policies

Improve resilience of state facilities and
equipment
Incorporate flooding considerations
into siting of state facilities

OMB should advocate for changes to state building design practices and policies to promote environmentally friendly design considerations for state
facilities to minimize environmental impact. Examples could include incorporation of higher building performance levels (such as LEED, Energy Star, etc.),
utilization of renewable energy sources where practicable, utilization of high efficiency building systems that require less energy for operation,
incorporation of drought-tolerant landscaping, and utilization of innovative design, such as green roofs, to keep buildings cooler. This strategy will
require coordination with other state agencies that perform public works building projects.
OMB should work to improve the resilience of state facilities and equipment. Extreme weather–tolerant designs should be incorporated into state
facility plans for new construction and for renovation of existing structures. OMB should also design and size replacement equipment for state facilities
to accommodate additional stress caused by extreme weather events. OMB should target leased facilities housing critical state services that are resistant
to extreme weather conditions.
OMB should develop comprehensive guidelines to site state facilities that account for sea level rise and flooding due to extreme rain events. OMB
should review existing state facilities for potential effects of flooding.

Revise Life Cycle Costing Analysis to
account for climate change impacts

OMB should review and revise Life Cycle Costing Analysis (LCCA) procedures to account for potential increased precipitation, sea level rise, and extreme
temperatures. Doing so will aid in designing state facilities to economically minimize the impacts of climate change. Coordination with other sState
agencies that perform public works building projects will be required.

Increase maintenance of state facilities
as a result of climate impacts

OMB should evaluate maintenance schedules of buildings and grounds for potential climate change effects, building equipment specifications to ensure
acceptable performance during extreme events, and roof replacement intervals to adjust for the potential for accelerated wear due to extreme weather
events. OMB should also evaluate how extreme weather could impact grounds maintenance. Maintenance staff should become familiar with potential
effects of extreme weather.

Investigate alternate work schedules
for outdoor workers
Incorporate resilience in Government
Support Services (GSS) contracting
Incorporate resilience into Messenger
Services
Offer training opportunities for
employees on impacts of climate
change

Climate Framework for Delaware

OMB should investigate alternate work schedules as appropriate for outdoor workers. Consider where appropriate flexible work schedules or scheduling
during cooler times of day.
OMB should incorporate resilience into GSS contracting by building heating/cooling and weather-resistance requirements into contract specifications as
necessary and as contract specifications are developed.
OMB should incorporate resilience into Messenger Services. The agency should review current delivery vehicle inventory for sufficiency during extreme
weather; review whether daily service is absolutely necessary during extreme weather, including heat waves; and maintain contingency plans for those
sites located in flood zones that may be difficult to access during extreme rain events.
OMB should offer employees training on the potential impacts that climate change may have on their employment and their homes. For example,
training could include the use of personal protective equipment for employees working outdoors and emergency medical training such as first aid. This
response would require assistance and collaboration with other state partners, with Statewide Training and Development taking the lead.

Page D25



Delaware Office of State Planning Coordination - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation Title
Revise PLUS checklist for
Comprehensive Plans

Examine ways to incorporate climate
change and sea level rise impacts into
PLUS application

Provide technical support to local
governments for Comprehensive Plans
and local ordinances

Provide technical assistance to support
integration of climate impacts and to
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
through adaptation and mitigation at
the local level
Examine ways to incorporate climate
change and sea level rise as factors in
the next update to State Strategies for
Policies and Spending
Establish and maintain GIS layers
related to climate change and sea level
rise impacts in FirstMap

Climate Framework for Delaware

Recommendation Summary
The Office of State Planning Coordination should revise the PLUS checklist used by local governments for preparation of their Comprehensive
Plans. OSPC has prepared checklists (last revised in 2003) designed to help municipal governments meet the requirements of state laws
regarding the preparation of comprehensive plans. Revise the checklists to “strongly encourage” (in light of Executive Order 41) the
consideration of future climate impacts. Improving community resiliency (including assessment of infrastructure vulnerabilities, land use
policies, and other adaptation strategies) is best accomplished by local governments through their Comprehensive Land Use Plans.
The Office of State Planning Coordination should examine ways to incorporate climate change and sea level rise impacts into the PLUS
application used by project applicants. PLUS is an opportunity for projects to be reviewed for a variety of considerations, and climate
change/sea level rise could be one of the criteria considered.
The Office of State Planning Coordination should provide technical support to local government to address climate change impacts in their
Comprehensive Plans and local ordinances. Improving community resiliency is best accomplished by local governments through their
Comprehensive Land Use Plans. Many local governments in Delaware do not have the resources (e.g., staff, expertise, finances, and time) to
adequately address climate change, thereby improving their community’s preparedness and resiliency. OSPC should facilitate meetings with
local governments, in coordination with DNREC, approximately 12–18 months before they begin to update their Comprehensive Plans. The
purpose of meeting with local governments early in the process would be to provide technical (and, potentially, financial) support to enhance
focus on climate impacts (including the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions) and long-term sustainability (through adaptation and
mitigation) in the comprehensive plan and in implementing ordinances. This recommendation may require OSPC to modify existing
policy/service and to create a new financial assistance fund.
The Office of State Planning Coordination should provide technical assistance to support integration of climate impacts and to reduce GHG
emissions through adaptation and mitigation. The majority of local governments in Delaware do not have the resources (e.g.,
staff/finances/time) to adequately address climate change, which would improve their community’s preparedness and resiliency. OSPC can
provide financial assistance for the same if funds become available through DNREC or another state agency. OSPC would administer financial
assistance, with administrative support from outside of OSPC.
The Office of State Planning Coordination should examine ways to incorporate climate change and sea level rise as factors in the next update to
State Strategies for Policies and Spending, which is due in 2016. During 2015, OSPC will be working with stakeholders involved with the update
process. A special focus of the update process will be coordination with DNREC to effectively include the goals and objectives of EO 41.
The Office of State Planning Coordination should continue to work in conjunction with the Department of Technology and Information to
operate FirstMap, the geospatial data warehouse for the State of Delaware. All geospatial data related to climate change and sea level rise
should be loaded into FirstMap for statewide access. The Delaware Coastal Program should develop a web application using FirstMap to show
appropriate information for contractors, consultants, and the general public regarding climate change and sea level rise.

Page D26

