MONTANA CLIMATE
SOLUTIONS PLAN
AUGUST 2020

B A C KG R O U N D – i A REPORT BY THE MONTANA CLIMATE SOLUTIONS COUNCIL



MONTANA CLIMATE SOLUTIONS PLAN
AUGUST 2020

A REPORT BY THE MONTANA CLIMATE SOLUTIONS COUNCIL

CONTENTS
Letter from Governor Bullock

2

Background

4

List of Recommendations

6

1. Preparing Montanans For Climate Impacts

9

2. Strategies to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions

21

Section I: Energy Efficiency - Utility Practices, Standards, and Buildings

28

Section II: Beneficial Electrification

36

Section III: Renewable Energy and Maximizing Electric System Integration

38

Section IV: Transportation

42

	Section V: Quantifying and Reducing Industrial, Agricultural and Methane

46

Emissions and Including Carbon Sequestration
Section VI: Tribal Nation and Community Efforts

52

Section VII: Priority State, Regional, and Federal Measures

55

3. Capturing Innovation Opportunities in Montana’s Response to Climate Change

60

and Addressing the Needs of Workers and Communities in Transitions
	Section I: Moving Montana’s Economy to Net Greenhouse Gas Neutrality

66

through Innovation and Advanced Manufacturing
	Section II: Building Resilience to Prepare Montana’s Communities, Economy,

68

and Workers for Transitions
List of Council Members

71

Suggested Citation: State of Montana. (2020). Montana Climate Solutions Plan. Helena, MT.
Acknowledgements: We wish to acknowledge and appreciate the significant contributions of the members of Montana
Climate Solutions Council for their time and dedication toward the creation of this plan. In addition, we are grateful to the
many partners who contributed to the Council’s work including the U.S. Climate Alliance, the Center for the New Energy
Economy, the Clean Energy Transition Institute, Evolved Energy Research, and The Bridge Studio. We also wish to express
our thanks to the state agency staff who provided invaluable support and the many members of the public who attended
meetings, offered comments on draft products, and shared their expertise to inform the Council’s deliberations.

1



Letter from
Governor Bullock

Dear Friends and Colleagues:
It is my distinct pleasure to share with you the final recommendations of the Montana Climate
Solutions Council. I want to thank the members of the Council for their dedication and
thoughtful deliberations as well as the many staff who lent their time and talents to supporting
the Council’s work. I also want to acknowledge the contributions from Montanans across
the state who participated in Council meetings and webinars and shared their perspectives
through formal public comments – each of which helped to strengthen our partnerships and
recommendations for moving forward.
Montanans across the state believe climate change is a significant problem posing risks to the
future of Montana and to future generations. For too long our response to this issue has been
curtailed out of a false pretense that dealing with climate will divide our state along east-west,
rural-urban, and partisan divides. As the Council’s work demonstrates, there is an impressive
array of opportunities and recommendations that represent a broad-based consensus and can
serve as a foundation for bipartisan climate action moving forward that responds to the many
values Montanans share.
There is an immediate and urgent need for the state to plan for the future and confront the
needs to prepare our communities and economy. Already Montana is three degrees warmer
on average than we were just a few decades ago. Earlier spring runoffs are causing flooding,
impacting our water availability, and contributing to the increasing size and severity of our
wildfire seasons. 2017 saw our largest fire season on record since the Big Burn of 1910,
spurring periodic waves of evacuations, curtailing visitation, and prompting twice the incidence
of respiratory-related ER visits in affected counties.
But the risks facing Montana due to climate change are not just physical risks to our health
and safety. The state’s businesses and economy face a series of economic and financial risks
as well. Shifting energy demands and policy changes are prompting a transition across our
region and around the world, impacting the markets Montana traditionally serves. Institutional
and private investors are increasingly signaling their concern over stranded assets of energy
companies and financial performance tied to these changes. In small towns across the state,
workers and communities are caught in the crosshairs, lacking the economic capacity to
shift labor and capital to emerging opportunities. These transitions are also impacting our
state’s fiscal health, where declines in traditional revenue streams from energy production and
increasing costs tied to unforeseen events, like the 2017 fire season, can impact our state’s core
services and programs. Planning for climate change helps us manage these risks and costs tied
to transitions, but it also offers insights into how we can develop competitive advantages and
local economic development strategies that put Montana at the forefront of new energy and
technology solutions.

2



As I write, the state is in the midst of our ongoing response to the COVID-19 pandemic and
associated economic recovery. The disruptive economic impacts of the pandemic place real
capacity strains on our state’s businesses, governments, nonprofits, and civic institutions.
While the challenges of disruptions to our economy to protect lives and limit exposure are not
immediately transferable to climate change, the ways in which our state, local, and tribal nation
partners and businesses have come together to respond with a sense of urgency is indicative
of the type of all-hands approach we need to prepare for and respond to the climate challenge
before us.
As I plan to leave the Office of Governor, we must work together to implement this plan,
regardless of who the next governor is in 2021. Montanans deserve a new energy policy to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and a new approach to build resilience in our communities
and economy. No matter who takes office in 2021, it is imperative that a set of pragmatic and
durable policies be advanced that address the needs of our state and offer leadership as we
confront the issue of climate change.
The recommendations in this report span a mix of state programs and policy, utility regulatory
policy, incentive programs, federal policies, and university and business partnerships. They
build from the experiences of Montana’s local and state government, tribal nations, and
businesses. Lessons learned from others across our country and around the world complement
our Montana-grown perspective. For the first time they introduce opportunities and challenges
in workforce, economic development, and community-based initiatives that accompany
the diverse and ongoing policy discussions involving the future of energy generation and
consumption for our state and region. The recommendations reflect strong alignment in
many areas across a diverse group of Council members, while also highlighting key points of
disagreement that can inform future deliberations. Together, they comprise a set of Montanabased solutions that demand our collective efforts to advance with the same dedication and
urgency that led to their development. I thank all Montanans for their partnership and support
as we seek opportunities to work together to advance this plan.

Sincerely,

Steve Bullock
Governor

3



B A C K G R O U N D

O

n July 1, 2019, Governor Bullock
issued Executive Order 8-2019,
creating the Montana Climate
Solutions Council and joining the
State of Montana to the U.S. Climate
Alliance. The Council was tasked with developing a
Climate Solutions Plan (this document) that provides
recommendations and strategies aimed at preparing
Montanans for climate impacts; reducing greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions – including achieving an interim
goal of net GHG neutrality for average annual electric
loads in the state by no later than 2035 and a goal
of net GHG neutrality economy-wide at a date to be
determined by the Council; advancing the research,
development, and commercialization of new
technologies necessary to meet these goals; and
addressing the needs of communities and workers
in transitions through economic and workforce
development efforts.
Montana’s climate is already changing. Our
temperatures are 2–3º F warmer on average than in
1950. Historical observations demonstrate a shift
to earlier snowmelt and earlier peak spring runoff,
impacting flooding, water availability, and stream
temperatures. Increased temperatures, insect and
disease mortality, and fuel loads together are driving
increases in the size and possibly the frequency
and severity of wildfires. According to the 2017

1

http://montanaclimate.org

B A C KG R O U N D – 4

Montana Climate Assessment (MCA),1 the state could
experience an additional 3–7º F increase in average
temperatures by mid-century, including more days of
extreme heat that would dramatically increase many
of these impacts moving forward.
Within our state borders, we have also begun
to experience transitions in our economy and
our energy sector that reflect changes that are
happening across our nation and around the world.
How the state responds to the shifting demands
and needs of the global economy can help ensure
our sustained economic growth and position us
to continue to provide the food, energy, products,
technology, tourism opportunities, and other goods
and services to the nation and the world that drive
our economy.
Planning for climate change can help the
state prepare for anticipated risks amid these
uncertainties. Not only does the state face a series
of physical risks tied to a changing climate, the
state also faces fiscal risks impacting state budgets
and services, and economic risks implicating
employment and income trends. The state’s
businesses must also confront financial risks as
investors react to market transitions and anticipated
policy changes.



Planning for climate change not only helps us
manage the costs tied to these risks through
proactive efforts to manage uncertainty, it also
offers opportunities for the state to capture and
localize the market for innovation resulting from
climate challenges, offering a chance for the state
to simultaneously take advantage of and safeguard
our traditional strengths while also diversifying and
growing new opportunities for the future. While there
are many benefits to climate planning and action,
many members of the Council are cognizant that
care must be taken to evaluate individual policies to
determine the implications for issues such as direct
and indirect costs, equity across communities, and
reliability of our energy system. Implementation of
this plan requires action by the state legislature, the
public service commission, the executive branch,
and numerous business and nonprofit partners –
each of which must consider the capacity, costs,
and benefits of the recommendations appropriately.
Montana must act. The urgency for action is
great, and the opportunities for benefits
commensurately large.

The Council and committees convened via in-person
meetings, webinars, and conference calls to advance
their deliberations. Meetings and calls were noticed
to the public and – along with a draft report issued in
February 2020 – offered members of the public substantial opportunity to track progress, provide input,
and share information relevant to the Council’s work.

The Montana Climate Solutions Council
The purpose of the Montana Climate Solutions
Council was to provide recommendations to the
governor, legislature, and citizens of Montana on
strategies to reduce GHG emissions, prepare the
state for climate impacts, foster innovation across
Montana’s economy, and address the needs of
communities in transition through appropriate
economic development and workforce strategies.
The Council developed three committees to further
its objectives between full meetings of the Council:

Additional information on the Council’s charter,
meeting archives, and public comments received can
be found at https://deq.mt.gov/Climate/.

1. T
 he Climate Adaptation, Information, and
Decision Support Committee;
2. G
 reenhouse Gas Mitigation Strategies
Committee; and
3. The Technology Innovation for Climate Solutions
and Community Transitions Committee.

B A C KG R O U N D – 5

Through a charter, the Council established a
commitment to mutual respect, shared learning, and
consensus decisions whenever possible. Consensus
was defined as achieved when all Council members
could live with or were in support of a proposal.
The Council recognized that to meet the goals and
objectives outlined in Executive Order 8-2019, it
would need to advance some recommendations that
did not achieve consensus. As such, the Council
agreed to adopt recommendations that received
support or neutral positions from at least a two-thirds
majority of its members with two caveats: in the final
report 1) those recommendations had to be clearly
distinguished from consensus recommendations
and 2) dissenting viewpoints and concerns had to
be articulated.



LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1: PREPARING MONTANANS FOR CLIMATE IMPACTS
1A 

 stablish the Montana Climate Solutions Network to Develop and Share Climate
E
Information and Resources; Build Capacity in Communities; and Connect Climate
Solutions at State, Local, Regional, and Tribal Nation Scales

12

1B


Build
Community Resilience to Climate Change Through Coordinating with Existing
Planning Efforts

14

1C

Adapt Montana’s Built Environment to Climate Change

15

1D

 rotect Outdoor Recreation and Tourism Resources to Maintain a Diverse and
P
Healthy Economy, Positive Mental and Physical Health Outcomes, and a Resilient,
High Quality of Life for Residents as well as Visitors

16

1E

 uild the Resilience of Montana’s Private Working Lands (Farms, Forests, and
B
Rangelands) and Support Voluntary and Incentive-Driven Efforts for Climate-Smart
Management that Reduces Risks, Improves Bottom Lines, and Enhances Carbon
Storage in Soils, Forests, and Wood Products

16

1F 

 nhance Wildfire Resilience Across Ownership Boundaries in Response to
E
Accelerating Climate Impacts

18

1G

 upport Climate-Resilient Rangelands and Wildlife Using an All-Lands, All-Hands
S
Approach Across Ownership Boundaries

19

1H

Safeguard Montana’s Water Quality and Quantity from Climate Change

20

2: STRATEGIES TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
Section I: Energy Efficiency - Utility Practices, Standards, and Buildings
2A

 stablish a Graduated Energy Efficiency Standard, a Demand Response Standard,
E
and an Energy Storage Standard for the State’s Investor-Owned Utilities (IOUs)

28

2B

Promote Energy Efficiency Through Tools like On-Bill Financing

29

2C

 dopt Rate Strategies like Decoupling, Time-of-Use Rates, Inclining Block Rates, and/
A
or Performance Measures to Facilitate Energy Efficiency

30

2D

Support Programs to Advance Commercial Energy Audits

31

2E


The
Legislature Should Evaluate the Universal System Benefits Program Funding
Mechanism for Electric Customers

31

2F

Develop Mobile-Home Replacement Program

32

2G

Address the Non-Energy Benefits of Energy Efficiency when Assessing
Cost-Effectiveness

32

2H

Identify Energy Efficiency Solutions for Rental Units

33

B A C KG R O U N D – 6



2I

Adopt State Appliance Efficiency Standards

33

2J

 he Montana Department of Labor and Industry (DLI) Should Modernize Montana
T
Building Energy Codes and Administrative Processes to Promote Energy Efficiency
and Other Climate Benefits in New Buildings [Advanced With Dissent]

34

2K

Allow for Local Governments to Establish Building Performance Standards

35

2L

Implement Net-Zero-Energy Building Strategies

35

Section II: Beneficial Electrification
2M

Support an Electric Cooperative Beneficial Electrification Initiative

37

2N

 tudy the Challenges and Opportunities of Heat Pump Technology Adoption in
S
Montana

37

Section III: Renewable Energy and Maximizing Electric System Integration
2O

 ncourage Expanded Community Solar Development and Enact Policy to Enable
E
Community Solar for Investor-Owned Utilities

38

2P

Provide Incentives for Solar-Ready and Solar-Integrated Design and Building

39

2Q

 tudy the Feasibility of Encouraging Greater Utility-Scale Renewable Energy
S
Development by Reducing Property Taxes on New Renewable Energy in Montana

39

2R

Advance the Deployment of Energy Storage Projects in Montana

40

2S

Deploy and Test Grid-Integrated Water Heaters

40

2T

Increase the Allowable Size for Distributed Generation Systems [Advanced With
Dissent]

41

2U

Investigate the Use of Microgrids in Montana

41

Section IV: Transportation
2V

 dopt Low-Emission Vehicle (LEV) and Zero-Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Standards
A
[Advanced With Dissent]

42

2W

 dvance Comprehensive Strategies to Develop and Expand Electric Vehicle Use and
A
Infrastructure [Advanced With Dissent]

43

2X

Improve Statewide Transportation Management to Foster Alternatives and Support
the Needs of Communities

44

2Y

Explore Opportunities for Passenger Rail

45

Section V: Q
 uantifying and Reducing Industrial, Agricultural and Methane Emissions
and Including Carbon Sequestration
2Z

Improve Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration Inventory and
Accounting Spanning Non-Electric and Transportation Sectors Across Montana’s
Economy

46

2A A

Assess and Reduce Sources of Methane Emissions

47

B A C KG R O U N D – 7



2AB

Address Food Waste and Food Systems Emissions

48

2 AC

Manage Solid Waste Emissions and Support Recycling and Composting

49

2AD

 dvance Efforts to Develop and Deploy Carbon Capture and Storage Technologies
A
(CCS) [Advanced With Dissent]

51

Section VI: Tribal Nation and Community Efforts
2AE

Support and Learn From Tribal Nations [Advanced With Dissent]

52

2AF

Support Community Mitigation Planning [Advanced With Dissent]

54

Section VII: Priority State, Regional, and Federal Measures
2 AG

Advocate for Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in Upcoming Federal Stimulus Packages

55

2AH


Engage
in National and Regional Dialogues Regarding Carbon Pricing [Advanced With
Dissent]

56

2AI

Advance Efforts to Take Advantage of a Coordinated Western Electricity Market

57

2AJ

Adopt a Clean Energy Standard (CES) [Advanced With Dissent]

57

2AK

Recommendation on Achieving Economy-Wide Greenhouse Gas Neutrality [Advanced
With Dissent]

58

3: A
 CCELERATING DECARBONIZATION AND INNOVATION
Section I: Moving Montana’s Economy to Net Greenhouse Gas Neutrality through
Innovation and Advanced Manufacturing
3A

 ontana, Led by the Montana Science and Technology Committee and the Office
M
of the Commissioner of Higher Education, Should Identify Key Opportunities for
Technology-Led Economic Development, Prioritizing Areas that Assist with Climate
Change Transitions and Mitigation

66

3B

 he Montana Legislature Should Invest in Initiatives that Build University/Industry/
T
Society Innovation Linkages to Address Key Montana Challenges, Including Climate
Change

66

3C

 ork to Establish Multiple Regional Innovation Clusters in Montana Focused on
W
Decarbonization of Montana’s Industries by 2035

67

Section II: Building Resilience to Prepare Montana’s Communities, Economy,
and Workers for Transitions
3D

 repare Montana’s Workforce for Opportunities in a Changing Economy and in
P
Sectors Important to Climate Mitigation and Adaptation

69

3E

Reform Montana Fiscal Policy to Address Economic Transitions

70

B A C KG R O U N D – 8



1. P
 R E PA R I N G M O N TA N A N S
F O R C L I M AT E I M PA C T S

C

limate change-driven severe events
(e.g., wildfires, drought, flooding)
threaten people, communities, and
businesses across Montana. The state
must prioritize efforts that will prepare
our communities, infrastructure, and economies
for anticipated climate impacts. Such preparations
include ensuring that our natural resources (e.g.,
farms, forests, rangelands, wildlife, water supplies)
continue to sustain our livelihoods and quality of life.
Building resilience will require addressing current
climate variability and recent extreme events as well
as preparing for future change and emergent threats.
Given recent climate projections, there is an urgency
to strengthen efforts across Montana.
The Council established the Climate Adaptation,
Information, and Decision Support Committee to
develop strategies to prepare the state for climate
impacts. Adaptation knits together a range of
activities from translating science into usable
information to building the partnerships required to
implement strategies that reduce risk. The practice
of adaptation commonly includes five general
stages: 1) awareness, 2) assessment, 3) planning,
4) implementation, and 5) monitoring.
A foundation of the best available science and locally
relevant knowledge, experience, and information is
critical to inform decision-making. However, sound

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 9

science and information alone are insufficient to
effectively manage climate-related risks. Translation
of that science-based information into a form readily
accessible to the public is required to best build
capacity, outreach, and delivery mechanisms in
response to the needs of government agencies,
tribal nations, land managers, business owners, nonprofits, and individuals. Planning exercises can help
decision-makers assess vulnerabilities and identify
appropriate strategies to minimize or eliminate
risks. In the end, effective adaptation is an iterative
process that requires a) taking action to reduce risks,
b) a commitment to monitoring results and learning
from successes and failures, and c) a willingness
to try a different approach, if necessary, based on
monitoring outcomes.
Montanans have diverse experiences planning for
climate impacts, including efforts at municipal,
county, watershed, and tribal nation scales.
Committee members discussed their past
experiences involving Climate Smart Missoula, the
Blackfeet Nation, Montana Disaster and Emergency
Services, the Montana Climate Office’s work with
state agencies to develop early warning systems
for drought and flooding, research and community
engagement from the Montana University System,
and the Department of Natural Resources and
Conservation’s work with federal partners in the
Upper Missouri River Headwaters through the



National Drought Resilience Partnership. Council
members also reflected on the findings and
process used to develop the National Climate
Assessment2 and the 2017 Montana Climate
Assessment,3 including the state-based workshops,
questionnaires, and listening sessions used to
guide the MCA’s development. Based on these
experiences and best practices, Council members
identified the following guiding principles for
effective adaptation.

2
3

https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/
https://montanaclimate.org/

GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
1.

Montana agencies, communities,
and stakeholders should approach
climate change and its impacts with an
understanding of the state’s geography,
culture, history, economy, and resources.

2. Addressing climate change impacts
requires robust, community-driven,
and bottom-up planning based on an
understanding of recent climate trends
and future climate projections and the
specific vulnerabilities and risks that
different sectors and communities will
experience, including a focus on explicit
goals and effective actions to build
resilience.
3. A common framework using the best
available science to develop adaptation
plans can help highlight commonalities
and differences across the approaches
used by different jurisdictions and sectors,
facilitating comparison and learning
among users and identification of best
practices.

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 10

4. Recommendations should build on and be
integrated into existing programs wherever
possible.
5. Adaptation efforts should be coordinated
with related efforts – including outside of
Montana – especially strategies to reduce
emissions and foster innovation to achieve
multiple benefits and synergies.
6. Communities cannot do adaptation
planning individually and without support.
The state needs to provide coordinated
assistance to gather and share
information; build and support networks
and partnerships among communities,
universities, non-profit, and philanthropic
organizations; provide sustained funding
for planning; and leverage federal dollars
and capacity.



CASE STUDY

The Montana Climate Assessment:
Stakeholder Driven, Science Informed

T

he 2017 Montana Climate
Assessment (MCA)4 was
effort
anto synthesize, evaluate, and
share credible and relevant scientific
information about climate change in
Montana with the citizens of the state.
The motivation for the MCA arose
from Montanans and organizations
across the state who expressed
interest in receiving timely and
pertinent information about climate
change, including information about
historical variability, past trends, and
projections of future impacts.
The MCA was developed by the
Montana University System’s Institute
on Ecosystems, in collaboration with
the Montana Climate Office, Montana
Water Center and Montana State
University Extension. Montana State
University scientists Cathy Whitlock
and Bruce Maxwell, past and
current co-directors of the Montana
Institute on Ecosystems, worked on
the report with a 30-member team
over two years. The Assessment,
the first in a planned series, focused
on climate trends and their impacts
for three key sectors of economic
importance for the state: water,
forests, and agriculture. The process
to develop the MCA was guided
by locally relevant science and
driven by stakeholder input through
questionnaires, conversations, and
listening sessions across the state,
helping to ensure the research was
most relevant and useful to decision
makers and end users.
“For years, stakeholders across the
state have wondered how much
Montana’s climate has changed
and how much will it change in the
future,” said Kelsey Jencso, director

4

of the Montana Climate Office at the
University of Montana and an MCA
author. “The science to address
this question has previously been
discussed at global or national levels,
whereas this assessment provides
a first look at these trends and their
impacts within Montana.”
The report concluded that the number
of days when temperatures exceed
90ºF, and the number of frost-free
days, is expected to increase.
Montana’s snowpack has declined
since the 1930s in mountains east
and west of the Continental Divide,
a trend that has accelerated in the
period since the 1980s. Warming
temperatures over the next century
are likely to reduce snowpack at
middle and lower elevations, and
earlier runoff will lead to decreased
streamflow and less reliable irrigation
capacity during the late growing
season. The state’s growing season
is lengthening – now twelve days
longer than it was in 1950, but yearto-year variability continues to pose
significant threats to production. More
frost-free days and longer growing
seasons may enable greater crop
diversity. However, more 90ºF plus
days will also increase water loss via

http://montanaclimate.org

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 11

evaporation and transpiration from
plants. Hotter days will also increase
water demand for most crops, limit
grain development, and increase heat
stress on livestock. Forest fires will
be bigger, more frequent, and more
severe over the coming decades.
The findings offer a common basis
to evaluate potential impacts and
develop responsive and smart
resilience strategies to prepare
Montanans for a changing climate.
In early 2021, the Montana Institute
on Ecosystems will release the next
installment of the MCA entitled
Climate Change and Human Health
in Montana. The effort again draws
from the experience of practitioners
and the report will include
recommendations for the state,
communities, and individuals to better
prepare for health-related climate
impacts in the decades ahead.
Continuing to support sustained,
timely, and relevant data and
assessments of climate trends and
projections impacting Montana is
a core function of the proposed
Montana Climate Solutions Network
(see recommendation 1A).



R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S

1A:

 stablish the Montana Climate Solutions Network to Develop and Share
E
Climate Information and Resources; Build Capacity in Communities; and
Connect Climate Solutions at State, Local, Regional, and Tribal Nation Scales
The Montana Climate Solutions Network (MCSN) will bring together state, local, business,
tribal nation, non-governmental organization, and university system partners to provide timely
and relevant climate information and coordinate services to meet the needs of Montanans.

Figure 1: Montana Climate Solutions Network

te

Co

m
& mun
Pl
an ity
ni
n

ke
h
In old
fo
e
& rm rAs at
se

GOV

ERNANCE

Sta

Executive Committee

Initiative
Focused Teams

Advisory
Board

PU RPOS E
To support planning
and implementation
of climate strategies
in Montana.

Sc

Montana
University
System

rps

NonGovernmental
Organizations

Tribal
Nations

d
ne L
ig
Al fic &
ti

ien

F
o c un
al din
Ex g,
pe
rt

Businesses
& Private
Sector

Communities
& Local
Government

PARTNERS
ise

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 12

R

il
es

ie

A
g r me
am riC
o

State Agencies
& Governor’s
Office

g
nin
ar
Le ort
er pp
Pe Su
g

a
im
Cl ,
ta
a
v
ri D
D n, ent
io sm
s

en

e
nc ro
P



The network will focus on the following core functions:
1. Supporting community planning initiatives by providing climate information and
decision-support tools, planning resources, best practices guidelines, and peer-to-peer
learning opportunities;
2. Overseeing, coordinating, staffing, and funding a Resilience AmeriCorps program
that provides Montana communities with the expertise and capacity to tackle on-theground work for mitigating and adapting to climate change5;
3. Supporting production of regular climate assessment reports that update existing
assessments (e.g., water, agriculture, forests, human health) and tackle new ones. The
Montana Institute on Ecosystems leads this effort in partnership with universities, tribal
colleges, state and federal agencies, and non-governmental organizations;
4. Engaging scientists and a broad range of stakeholders (e.g., communities, agricultural
producers, resource managers, businesses) to ensure that climate assessments and
services meet the needs of a range of decision-makers and end-users across Montana;
5. Supporting the Montana Climate Office to develop stakeholder-informed climate
information and tools, early warning systems for extreme events, the Montana Climate
Data Layer,6 and to assist with regular climate assessments; and
6. Advancing resilience strategies identified in this Montana Climate Solutions Plan.

1A: KE Y STR ATEGIES

5
6

•

Establish an MCSN executive committee consisting of representatives of
relevant state agencies, the Montana Climate Office, the Montana Institute
on Ecosystems, tribal communities, non-governmental organizations, and
businesses. The executive committee will have rotating co-chairs (from a
state agency and from the universities) and will be charged with 1) charting the
strategic direction of the MCSN; 2) convening regular advisory board meetings;
3) developing plans for robust stakeholder engagement and communication;
4) overseeing biennial climate assessment production; and 5) seeking and
managing diverse sources of funding to support MCSN efforts.

•

Establish an MCSN advisory board to ensure that a range of communities,
economic sectors, and decision-makers from across the state to inform
the priority activities of the Network. More specifically, the advisory board
will 1) provide strategic guidance to the executive committee; 2) prioritize
specific research and information needs; 3) prioritize decision-support
needs and investments in capacity building; 4) provide direction regarding
how to effectively engage with different groups; and 5) help identify funding
opportunities for priority projects.

To read more about adaptation and mitigation principles for responding to climate change, visit: https://climate.nasa.gov/solutions/adaptation-mitigation/
http://geoinfo.msl.mt.gov/home/msdi/climate.aspx

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 13



•

1B:

Work with State agency officials and University System partners, including
the Montana Institute on Ecosystems and the Montana Climate Office, to
determine an initial administrative home for the network. Administrative
details will include staffing and funding to support network creation and
startup needs. Committee members discussed housing the network in a new
or current nonprofit organization, a state agency, or the governor’s office, or
through Montana’s Agriculture Experiment Station and Montana Forest and
Conservation Experiment Station.

 uild Community Resilience to Climate Change Through Coordinating
B
with Existing Planning Efforts
1B: KE Y STR ATEGIES

7
8

•

In connection with the MCSN, support the Institute on Ecosystem’s Climate
Smart Montana program7 as a platform for communities to share ideas,
processes, lessons learned, and resilience plans, so that no community needs
to reinvent the wheel.

•

Leverage the experiences of practitioners across the state to develop a roadmap and
toolkit for planning, building from ongoing efforts of the Department of Commerce’s
Montana Ready Communities Initiative. Build off the Montana Resilience Framework
developed by the Initiative as a guide for communities to create and implement a
community resilience plan that incorporates climate adaptation, mitigation, and
community engagement.8

•

Develop strategies to integrate climate adaptation with disaster mitigation plans,
wildfire plans, drought and flood plans, and others that can support resilience
planning and facilitate implementation.

•

Incorporate strategies from the forthcoming special report of the MCA, Climate
Change and Human Health in Montana, to better monitor and plan for climate-related
health concerns (to be released in early 2021). Engage local, regional, and tribal health
providers in developing a response to extreme climate events that lead to heat
exposure, vector-borne diseases, water-related illnesses, food safety and nutrition
concerns, smoke-related cardio-respiratory problems, allergies, and mental
health issues.

•

Build on and complement the climate adaptation work already happening on tribal
lands throughout the state, while recognizing the leadership that Montana’s sovereign
tribal nations provide and learning from traditional and indigenous knowledge.

https://montanaioe.org/resources-opportunities/climate-smart-montana
https://comdev.mt.gov/

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 14



1C:

•

Explore opportunities to integrate adaptation planning with planning to reduce
GHG emissions, especially when solutions strengthen local resilience to potential
regional energy disruptions and further local economic development goals (see
recommendation 2AF).

•

As strategies are developed and implemented, track the range of direct and
indirect benefits. In addition, find inequalities, including systemic ones, that hurt
the well-being of Montanans by limiting their access to healthcare, clean water,
and clean air. Those inequalities are likely to be exacerbated by climate change,
especially in the most vulnerable communities.

Adapt Montana’s Built Environment to Climate Change
1C: KE Y STR ATEGIES

9

•

Integrate adaptation actions with the hazard mitigation programs of Montana
Disaster and Emergency Services (MT DES) by working with communities to
identify their highest-priority risks and vulnerabilities and implement hazard mitigation plans that incorporate climate impacts. Evaluate vulnerabilities for Montana’s
critical infrastructure (e.g., roads, bridges, power lines, telecommunications) and
develop coordinated federal, state, local, and tribal nation resilience strategies.

•

Ensure local governments have access to updated information concerning
current and future high-risk floodplain and wildfire-prone wildland-urban
interface zones. Support state and local code updates to further reduce risks and
impacts.

•

Implement active management across ownership boundaries to reduce wildfire
risks and sustain watershed functions as identified in the updated Montana
Forest Action Plan.9 Implement an engagement process to educate and inform
stakeholders on the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MT DEQ)
Smoke Management Program and the ability to use prescribed fire for forest
fuel reduction on a year-round basis and support funding to improve smoke
management forecasting.

•

Support local governments to integrate flood, disaster, and wildfire protection
planning with community land use planning and decisions when requested by
local officials.

•

Ensure local infrastructure such as schools, hospitals, community centers, and
shelters incorporate adaptation strategies to address the needs of the young,
sick, aging, and other vulnerable populations related to climate impacts such as
smoke and air quality, extreme heat, flooding, winter emergencies, and distributed
energy needs.

https://www.montanaforestactionplan.org/

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 15



1D:

•

Expand the use of nature-based solutions that use natural systems, mimic
natural processes, or work in tandem with traditional approaches to address
natural hazards such as flooding, erosion, drought, and heat. Incorporating
these nature-based solutions in local planning, zoning, regulations, and built
projects can help communities reduce their exposure to these climate impacts,
resulting in reduced costs, economic enhancement, and safer, more-resilient
communities. Examples include urban park development, beaver mimicry, and
wetland and riparian restoration.

•

Increase urban forest cover in communities large and small to provide cooling
shade, sustain public health, and reduce energy consumption. Select native
tree species that maximize water use efficiency, carbon sequestration, and
shade quality.

 rotect Outdoor Recreation and Tourism Resources to Maintain a Diverse and
P
Healthy Economy, Positive Mental and Physical Health Outcomes, and a Resilient,
High Quality of Life for Residents As Well as Visitors
1D: KEY STRATEGIES

1E

•

Develop and strengthen networks of outdoor recreation and tourism
professionals across agencies, jurisdictions, and the private sector to improve
collaborative approaches to identifying risks and vulnerabilities and to facilitate
adaptation planning.

•

Develop climate information and tools specific to the outdoor recreation and
tourism sectors and include climate adaptation strategies related to outdoor
recreation and tourism in local plans and policies (e.g., parks and recreation plans,
hazard mitigation plans).

•

Identify and support funding strategies to address local business recovery
needs – particularly in the travel and tourism sectors – from unplanned disasters
associated with climate-related weather events.

 uild the Resilience of Montana’s Private Working Lands (Farms, Forests, and
B
Rangelands) and Support Voluntary and Incentive-Driven Efforts for Climate-Smart
Management that Reduces Risks, Improves Bottom Lines, and Enhances Carbon
Storage in Soils, Forests, and Wood Products
Climate model projections show a warmer Montana in the future, with mixed changes in
precipitation and more days of extreme temperature and unexpected weather events.
Montana’s farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners remain highly vulnerable to extreme
weather events, such as flooding, wildfire, blizzards, hailstorms, and drought. Understanding
climate impacts and solutions for working landowners and agriculture in particular is complex
because of uncertainties inherent in the timing and manifestation of climate change. It is

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 16



also complex given the interactions of natural systems and human interventions that operate
in agriculture (e.g., crop selection and rotation, livestock costs, pesticide and herbicide
use, market revenues and costs, government policies, insurance markets). Agricultural
decision support must focus on reducing uncertainty by building tools that explicitly
consider the complex interactions between climate, market processes, and policy.
•

To improve understanding of climate variability and related risk management
decisions, producers need to incorporate new and expanded tools in their decision
making that considers: 1) local monitoring of climate; 2) real-time weather; 3) weekly
drought conditions including soil moisture, snow pack levels, and stream flows;
4) crop and livestock production; 5) input costs; and 6) price variability to create
a local understanding of variability and risk in management decisions.

•

Climate services need to supply decision-support tools that allow assessment of local
management alternatives based on economic sustainability and resilience to drought,
heat, floods, snowstorms, and more.

•

Increased irrigation efficiency for crop and forage production must be incentivized
and establishment of ground water-dependent systems disincentivized.

•

Agricultural research must supply plant and livestock breeding programs that will
sustain production in higher projected temperatures and subsequent extreme
water shortage.

•

Research must assess tradeoffs between input-intensive and low-input approaches
to crop and livestock production under hotter and more-variable climate.

•

Economists need to assess the tradeoffs between insurance-based versus
management-system approaches for creating resilience to climate change.

1E: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

Recognize Montana producers for their high adoption rates of soil health practices
including no/conservation tillage and cover crops, improved grazing systems, and efforts to
maintain and restore native rangelands.

•

Explore partnerships with producers and their associations to research conservation
practice adoption factors, cost savings, and climate-related co-benefits, such as
carbon storage, increased water-holding capacity in soils, and reductions in pest
and disease risks.

•

Partner with United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) resources such as the
Climate Hubs,10 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS),11 and Rural
Development12 to explore farm-scale and regional on-farm conservation and energy
planning strategies and align state and federal funding programs to support produceridentified implementation priorities.

10 https://www.climatehubs.usda.gov/
11 https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/site/national/home/
12 https://www.rd.usda.gov/

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 17



1F:

•

Explore opportunities for Montana farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners to diversify
income streams through emerging GHG markets by developing pilot projects or programs
that aggregate and quantify enhanced GHG management. Consider other creative efforts
that reward producers for climate resilience and GHG management, such as cost-share or
insurance premium reduction payments, marketing and labeling tools, and others.

•

Target Farm Bill programs to private working lands that support drought, watershed,
and wildfire resilience needs.

•

Expand operator and manufacturing capacity and diversification of uses of long-lived
wood products (see Chapter 3 for additional wood products innovation discussion).

 nhance Wildfire Resilience Across Ownership Boundaries in Response
E
to Accelerating Climate Impacts
Over the past several decades, climate change has made summer conditions much more
conducive to burning. Warmer springs and warmer, drier summers have dried fuels and
led to longer fire seasons and an increased frequency of large wildfires across the western
U.S. These changes have come with commensurate increases in acres burned, damages,
and intensity. These trends are expected to worsen in the decades ahead. Climate change
is estimated to have doubled the area of forest burned in the western United States during
the period 1984–2015, above the effects of weather events, ignition, and fire management.
For Montana (and the West), projected climatic changes consistently point to an increase in
fire danger, and years of widespread wildfire activity in Montana are consistently associated
with unusually warm, dry summer conditions (e.g., drought, sometimes starting in spring).
Montana’s forests have evolved with wildfire, and many species have adaptations to survive and
regenerate after fire. Our ability to make forests resilient to future climate-driven wildfires will be
highly variable, given that our forests range from high-elevation wet forests to low-elevation dry
forests. No single fire management strategy will be effective for all forest types, and fire-fighting
efforts must target protecting communities and safety. As regional impacts become more
prevalent, persistent wildfire smoke may pose increasing threats to human health and wildland
firefighter safety.

1F: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

Recognize that the occurrence, frequency, and severity of wildfires will increase
in most parts of the state in response to climate change. Research priorities
include efforts to better characterize fire vulnerability in the context of climate
change; identify and evaluate cascading consequences of wildfire across broad
spatiotemporal scales, using natural, physical, and social sciences; and evaluate
bottom-up and top-down approaches to predict fire trajectories and potential
impacts on ecosystem goods and services.

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 18



1G:

•

Continue to address wildland fire risks through coordinating interagency planning
and response, supporting wildfire-adapted communities, and building resilient
landscapes through active forest management to improve safety and protect
communities across ownership boundaries.

•

Maintain fire-adapted landscapes in priority regions using the updated Montana
Forest Action Plan13 for guidance. Enhance forest management and restoration
across ownership boundaries, including the use of prescribed fire to maintain
structure and composition to increase resilience to insects, disease, and
uncharacteristic stand-replacing wildfires; protect municipal watersheds; and
maintain the long-term capacity of forests to continue to buffer emissions as
natural carbon sinks.

•

Facilitate fire-resilient communities through planning efforts that include
consideration of new fire-adapted landscape and building materials, active
community participation, fire education, and reduced development in fireprone areas.

•

Collaborate with wildland firefighting agencies, MT DEQ, local public health
agencies, and others to enhance local air quality monitoring and support
indoor air quality needs for vulnerable communities during intense periods
of wildfire smoke.

 upport Climate-Resilient Rangelands and Wildlife Using an All-Lands, All-Hands
S
Approach Across Ownership Boundaries
1G: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

Maintain a diverse rangeland ecosystem that supports agriculture, recreation,
wildlife, and native pollinators across all ownerships through coordination, flexible
tools, and conservation incentives.

•

Promote best management practices for building resilience in rangelands by
increasing soil carbon and soil water-holding capacity

•

Support establishment or enhancement of infrastructure that improves grazing
management on rangeland, including technologies for monitoring range and stock
water conditions, livestock behavior changes with climate changes, and livestock
health.

•

Strengthen existing partnerships and build new collaborations across
landowners and jurisdictions to share knowledge and ensure that needs for
landscape-scale conservation and adaptation are incorporated into relevant
planning and management.

13 https://www.montanaforestactionplan.org/

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 19



•

Prioritize and conduct additional research and vulnerability assessments
for species, habitats, and ecosystems as part of periodic statewide climate
assessments.

•

Provide end users and decision-makers with information about climate change
effects on fish, wildlife, habitats, and ecosystems; adaptation and mitigation
options; training opportunities; case studies; recommended peer-reviewed
research; and critical contacts in a user-friendly format. Encourage use of this
information in adaptation planning and project environmental reviews. Monitor
integration of wildlife adaptation efforts into state agency projects, environmental
reviews, plans, and relevant communications and training.

•

Conserve, enhance, and restore rivers, streams, lakes, reservoirs, wetlands, and
riparian areas that are critical to fish, wildlife, and plant populations. Provide for
aquatic organism passage, where appropriate.

•

Continue to prevent and minimize the spread of invasive species and insect and
disease infestations that can be exacerbated by climate change, including policies
developing or continuing support of programs for monitoring, early detection, and
rapid response.

1H: 	Safeguard Montana’s Water Quality and Quantity from Climate Change
1H: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

Promote wetland and stream function through a) restoring and conserving river
corridors, floodplains, and wetlands and b) supporting related education efforts.

•

Integrate local drought and water quality planning into other climate and land-use
planning efforts.

•

Invest in tools to improve statewide monitoring and assessment of water resources.

•

Incorporate green infrastructure and adaptive water management that combine
flooding mitigation, water storage, and water quality improvement into stormwater
infrastructure and natural storage utilizing ditches, floodplains, and irrigated lands.

PR E PA R I N G MO NTANANS FO R C LI MATE I MPACTS – 20



2 . S t r a t e g i e s t o R e d u c e
Greenhouse Gas Emissions

E

xecutive Order 8-2019 requires
the Council to develop a Montana
Climate Solutions Plan that includes
recommendations to achieve an
interim goal of net GHG neutrality
for average annual electric loads in the state by no
later than 2035 and a goal of net GHG neutrality
economy-wide at a date to be determined by
the Council.

respond to these threats is significant, and Montana
has an opportunity to provide leadership and both
prepare for and inform future federal policies in
response to climate change.

The Council formed the Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
Strategies Committee to begin to formulate
strategies that can achieve the goals outlined by the
Governor. According to the Federal Government’s
Fourth National Climate Assessment14 released in
2018, “In the absence of more significant global mitigation efforts, climate change is projected to impose
substantial damages on the U.S. economy, human
health, and the environment. Under scenarios with
high emissions and limited or no adaptation, annual
losses in some sectors are estimated to grow to hundreds of billions of dollars by the end of the century.
It is very likely that some physical and ecological
impacts will be irreversible for thousands of years,
while others will be permanent.” The urgency to

combustion decreased approximately 21 percent
between 2005 and 2020, driven largely by a 35
percent reduction in emissions from the electric
power sector (Figure 2).16 Montana’s renewable
portfolio standard, which requires 15 percent
renewables17, has helped shift power generation away
from fossil fuels such as coal. Over the same time
period, CO2 emissions from industrial energy use
fell approximately 15 percent, while CO2 emissions

Fossil fuel combustion is the largest contributor of
greenhouse gas emissions in Montana. In 2020,
fossil fuel combustion resulted in approximately
27.6 million metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2).15
Economy-wide CO2 emissions from fossil fuel

from residential and commercial buildings increased
by 15 percent. Transportation emissions dipped in
2009, likely due to the economic downturn, but have
otherwise held constant since 2005 (-3 percent).
This is likely due to increasing national fuel economy
standards which have improved vehicle efficiency.

14 https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/
15 Energy-related CO2 emissions estimates were based on data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration for 2005 through 2017, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID) for 2018, EPA’s Air Markets Program Data for 2019,
and knowledge of significant power plant closures to develop current estimates for the Power Sector.
16 Preliminary estimates for 2020 CO2 emissions reflect the closure of Colstrip coal-fired units 1 & 2. All other sectoral emissions estimates were assumed
to remain at 2019 levels, meaning that 2020 estimates do not account for any additional reductions that are likely to occur as a result of the economic
downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
17 DSIRE database, https://programs.dsireusa.org/system/program/detail/384
S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 21



Figure 2: Montana CO 2 Emissions from Fossil Fuel Consumption (2005-2020)

22
20
18
16
Million Metric 14
Tons (MMT)
12
of CO2
10
8
6
4
2
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Residential & Commercial

2012

Industrial

2013

2014

2015

2016

Transportation

2017

2018

2019

2020

Electric Power

Source: EIA & EPA (million metric tons). Additional detail on data sourcing can be found in footnotes 14 and 15 on page 21.

The remaining coal-fired power plant units at
Colstrip (Units 3 & 4) account for 38 percent of total
emissions in 2020 (Figure 3), while transportation
sources account for 29 percent. Residential and
commercial buildings (11 percent), industrial sources
(14 percent), and other fossil-fueled power generation
(8 percent) comprise the remainder.
For the purpose of this report, emissions associated
with the power sector were estimated using a
generation-based approach, meaning emissions
associated with generation of electricity by power
plants operating within state boundaries. Because
Montana continues to be a significant exporter of
electricity,18 the power sector’s relative contribution
to total CO2 emissions would likely decrease if a
consumption-based approach was used, meaning
emissions associated with electricity retail sales.
It is important to note that this preliminary inventory
does not include emissions from methane, nitrous
oxide, and fluorinated gas emissions. A comprehensive inventory analysis requires gathering accurate
GHG emissions data from the agriculture, mining, oil

and gas, industry sectors and landfills, as well as net
CO2 sequestration data from the forestry, agriculture,
and land use sectors.
Using available data and studies, the Greenhouse
Gas Mitigation Strategies Committee began to
wrestle with what at first appears to be a simple
math problem derived from the executive order’s
goals, but upon closer inspection requires a dynamic
understanding of the electric supply system, its
regional context, and the role different sectors of
the economy play in producing GHG emissions.
To understand possible scenarios to achieve the
governor’s goals there are a number of variables at
play, ranging from the known (e.g., future generation
facility retirements, planned resource acquisitions) to
the uncertain (e.g., future population growth, rate of
electric vehicle adoption, the corresponding demand
for more electricity) to the fully unknown (e.g., the
emergence of novel technologies or widespread
economic disruptions). To address common needs
of policy and decision-makers, often these variables
must be coupled with additional assumptions
regarding cost and system integration, allowing for

18 U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Table 10. Supply and disposition of electricity, 1990 through 2018,” https://www.eia.gov/electricity/state/montana/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 22



Figure 3: Current Montana CO 2 Emissions by Sector

38%

Colstrip 3&4

29% Transportation
38%
Colstrip 3&4
14%
Industrial
29%
Transportation
11% Residential & Commercial
14%
Industrial
8%
Electric Power (other)
11%
Residential & Commercial
8%

Electric Power (other)

Source: EIA & EPA (million metric tons). Additional detail on data sourcing can be found in footnotes 11 and 12 on page 21.

evaluations of whether the mix of resources and
infrastructure ultimately meets widely-held goals
such as maintaining electric system reliability
and affordability.
Several studies and models have been developed
to help states, regions, and utilities understand
least-cost alternatives and pathways toward
achieving emissions-reduction goals or targets.
These modeling efforts of future scenarios can help
structure stakeholder conversations, better inform
decision-makers regarding tradeoffs, and provide
the context needed to design and implement policy
packages that are consistent with long-term goals.
The Council believes the state would ultimately
benefit from engaging a consultant to assist with
modeling that can help define Montana-specific
scenarios to reduce emissions. For the purposes
of this report, given the limitations of time and
funding, the Committee and Council members
reviewed several regionally relevant studies and
modeling efforts, including Meeting the Challenge

of Our Time: Pathways to a Clean Energy Future
for the Northwest19 completed by the Clean Energy
Transition Institute (CETI) and Evolved Energy
Research (EER). That study was presented at the
December 1, 2019 full meeting of the Council
in Helena.20
Following is the set of recommendations the
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Strategies Committee
presented to the full Council for consideration.
They span key building blocks for decarbonization,
including energy efficiency; beneficial electrification;
renewable energy adoption and electric system
integration; transportation; strategies for waste,
methane, and industrial emissions; and a set of
priority state, regional, and federal proposals.
The Council ultimately adopted most of the
recommendations through consensus. A limited
number of recommendations received the two-thirds
vote needed per the Council’s charter to be adopted,
but did not garner unanimous votes. In those cases,
dissenting viewpoints are reflected in this report.

19 https://www.cleanenergytransition.org/meeting-the-challenge
20 A copy of the presentation and meeting notes are available at: https://deq.mt.gov/DEQAdmin/dir/Climate

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 23



CASE STUDY

Modeling Deep Carbonization Pathways

D

ecarbonization planning at the
state and regional level can
help develop a blueprint that outlines
strategies to reduce carbon emissions
in the energy sector efficiently and at
least cost for the electricity grid, the
built environment, the transportation
sector, and industrial energy use.
The goal of a GHG-reduction
modeling exercise is not to correctly
determine a single solution or
accurately predict the future – it
is to inform decisions made under
uncertainty, to offer a set of
measuring sticks to evaluate the
compatibility of policy options, and
to test those options in terms of their
feasibility, costs, and emissionsreduction potential.
Given the current level of dependence
of the economy on carbon-based
energy sources and the interactions
among sectors, a modeling effort can
help scope the timing of infrastructure
changes, technology options,
investment requirements, research,
development, and commercialization
needs, as well as other areas that help
align public, private, and academic
sector goals and expectations.
Numerous studies have been
conducted at state, regional, and
national scales to evaluate pathways
to achieve GHG emissions-reduction
goals. Many of these studies,
consistent with findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, have analyzed deep
decarbonization in recognition of
the need to dramatically reduce
emissions in the near term and
manage global net emissions to zero
by 2050 or later. A review of more
than 30 of these studies showed

emissions reductions. Taking
the first steps to reduce
emissions from electricity can
be achieved by conventional
means, such as fuel switching
from coal to gas. The final emissions reductions to decarbonization require more-expensive
and harder-to-achieve solutions.

that despite their variation in scope
and methodology, a set of clear and
consistent insights can inform
policy makers:
•

•

•

Achieving mid-century climate
goals to reduce or eliminate
GHG emissions is lower-cost
when the power sector cuts
emissions nearly to zero, while
expanding to electrify (and
consequently decarbonize)
portions of the transportation,
heating, and industrial sectors.
Achieving deep decarbonization
primarily (or entirely) with
renewable energy may be theoretically possible, but it would
be significantly more challenging and costly than pathways
employing a diverse portfolio of
low-carbon resources.
Deep decarbonization of the
power sector is significantly
more difficult than more-modest

•

Notable studies for Montana and
the Northwest region confirm similar
findings. The four Northwest states
(Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and
Washington) have unique natural
resources, power systems, energy
consumption, and political conditions
that must be represented in modeling
decarbonization pathways.

21 J.D. Jenkins, S. Thernstrom, Deep decarbonization of the electric power sector insights from recent literature,
Energy Innovation Reform Project, March 2017

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 24

Absent long-term planning to
consider these unique needs,
many capital investments made
in the near-term could lock in a
suboptimal resource mix for
the future.21



Modeling Deep Decarbonization Pathways

Figure 4: Five Decarbonization Strategies

Energy
Efficiency
Energy Consumption
Per Person (MMBtu)

Electricity
Decarbonization

Fuel
Decarbonization

Electricity Carbon
Intensity (tons CO2 per
MWh)

Fuels Carbon Intensity
(kg CO2 per MMBtu)

0.20

80

0.15

60

Electrification

Carbon
Capture

Electricity Share of
Total Energy
(percentage)

(Megatons CO2)

Electric Fuels

200
150
100
50

0.10

40

0.05

20

0.00

0
2020

2050

5

50%

2050

Electricity

3

20%

2

10%

1

2020

2050

Utilized

0

0%

0
2020

4

40%
30%

Sequestered

2020

2050

2020

2050

Source: Meeting the Challenge of Our Time: Pathways to a Clean Energy Future in the Northwest. June 2019. Eileen V. Quigley. Clean Energy Transition Institute. p. 54. Technical Citation.

Energy+Envrionmental Economics
produced Resource Adequacy in the
Northwest22 in March 2019 for
sponsors Puget Sound Energy,
Avista, NorthWestern Energy, and the
Public Generating Pool. The study
finds that deep decarbonization
of the Northwest electricity grid is
feasible without sacrificing reliable
electric load service, but that absent
technology breakthroughs, achieving
a 100 percent GHG reduction using
only wind, solar, hydro, and energy
storage is “both impractical and
prohibitively expensive” due to
the very large quantities of these
resources that are required during
periods of low renewable production
once storage is depleted.

capacity today. The study maintains
that adding new gas does not conflict
with deep decarbonization goals
because the gas will only be used for
reliability, and notes that new nuclear
generation, fossil generation with
carbon capture and sequestration,
long-duration electricity storage,
and replacing natural gas with
carbon-neutral hydrogen or biogas
are also firm capacity solutions. The
study recommends investigating a
formal mechanism to share planning
reserves on a regional basis to ensure
the region’s resource adequacy
needs are met in the coming decades
as the Northwest transitions off
of coal and aims to achieve deep
decarbonization.

Sufficient firm capacity is required
during periods of low wind, solar,
and hydro production and the study
finds that natural gas generation is
the most economic source of firm

CETI and EER released Meeting the
Challenge of Our Time: Pathways
to a Clean Energy Future for the
Northwest in June 2019. It was the
first study to examine the technical

and economic feasibility of achieving
economy-wide deep decarbonization
in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and
Washington. The study identified
region-specific strategies that
include the five strategies of energy
efficiency, decarbonized electricity,
decarbonized fuels, electrification,
and carbon capture.
CETI and EER provided results from
the June 2019 analysis specific
to Montana. Those results can be
explored at https://deq.mt.gov/
Climate/. The study forecasts final
energy demand to fall by 35 percent
through greater efficiency, much of
which comes from a transition to
electrified transportation. As a result,
electricity demand rises 71 percent.
In the study, Montana utilizes its
geographic strengths on the supply
side serving regional needs. A
large wind sector is established,

22 https://www.ethree.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/E3_Resource_Adequacy_in_the_Pacific-Northwest_March_2019.pdf

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 25



Modeling Deep Decarbonization Pathways

Figure 5: Energy CO 2 Emissions by Sector

Overall emissions decrease across all sectors of the state’s economy. Transportation emissions decline significantly as
vehicles (Light-duty, Medium-duty, and Heavy duty vehicles) are electrified or use cleaner fuels. In 2050, biofuels with CCS
are the dominant source of diesel and jet fuel, resulting in negative emissions. Building emissions are reduced to ~1MMT
by 2050 as heating services are electrified.

Transportation
Residential
Commercial
Productive

20

15

MMT

10

5

0
2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Source: Supporting Montana July 15th Climate Solutions Council Report. June 2020. Jeremy Hargreaves. Evolved Energy Research. p. 29. Technical Citation.

Figure 6: Montana Energy CO 2 Emissions by Fossil Fuel Type 2020-2050

The five decarbonization strategies reduce Montana’a emissions over the next three decades. The largest remaining source
of emissions is natural gas. Natural gas is the cheapest fossil fuel, therefore it is the last to be decarbonized. Montana offsets
remaining emissions with carbon sequestration in saline aquifers to reach the 2050 target.

Other
Natural Gas
Gasoline
Diesel
Jet Fuel
Residual Fuel Oil
Coal
Sequestered CO2

20

15

MMT

10

5
2050 Target

0
2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Source: Supporting Montana July 15th Climate Solutions Council Report. June 2020. Jeremy Hargreaves. Evolved Energy Research. p. 28. Technical Citation.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 26



Modeling Deep Decarbonization Pathways

supplying clean energy to Montana
and surrounding regions. Carbon
is sequestered in saline aquifers in
the production of liquid fuels from
biomass, offsetting emissions from
other sources.
Policy actions taken in the rest of
the West could impact Montana’s
investments in significant ways, with
opportunities to play a major export
role in a decarbonized Western
electricity system. Key opportunities
for Montana include:
•

•

in the study. Other Western
states also rely on decarbonized
fuels to reach their own targets.
Montana has low-cost
resources to produce fuels
and could export fuels to
other states.
•

Sequestration potential:
Montana has geological CO2
sequestration potential, which
allows for the capture of CO2
and storage in saline aquifers.

A low-cost and complementary
wind resource: Coastal states
have less potential for highquality wind resources and
import significant quantities
of wind from Montana and
Wyoming as emissions caps
tighten. Montana has the
opportunity to build a valuable
energy export market.

The results offer a preliminary
assessment of least-cost pathways
to achieve decarbonization goals for
Montana. They also highlight the need
for a stakeholder process to support
future study and investigation. Future
studies will need to tailor assumptions
to Montana’s specific state objectives,
and may wish to consider the implications of proposed projects and the
timing of resource retirements.

Decarbonized fuels:
Decarbonized fuels from
biomass and hydrogen play
a major role in Montana’s
transportation sector by 2050

Since the study was conducted,
Western states including Washington,
Colorado, and Nevada have set
more-stringent emissions and clean
energy standards that will drive

23 https://www.2035report.com/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 27

more clean energy investment,
and potentially greater demand for
Montana resources. Forecasted
prices have been lowered for many
clean energy technologies. A recent
study found that updated cost
projections for wind, solar, and
battery technologies could accelerate
rapid decarbonization.23 Potentially
transformative energy projects,
such as the Mitsubishi Hitachi
Power Systems renewable hydrogen
project discussed for Butte, could
provide seasonal energy storage
needs across the Northwest through
generation that aims to operate on
25 percent hydrogen and 75 percent
natural gas by 2025 and 100 percent
hydrogen by 2045.
Through a stakeholder-driven and
iterative planning process, Montana
can better understand its regional
competitive advantage and align
policies that reduce emissions and
foster economic opportunities.



R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S
SECTION I. Energy Efficiency - Utility Practices, Standards, and Buildings

2A:

 stablish a Graduated Energy Efficiency Standard, a Demand Response Standard,
E
and an Energy Storage Standard for the State’s Investor-Owned Utilities (IOUs)
The rate of energy savings in Montana is quite low, around 0.5 percent annually. States that are
high-performing acquire energy efficiency at over 2.0 percent annually. Investments in energy
efficiency will reduce the need for electricity generation, thereby reducing GHG emissions.
A graduated energy efficiency standard establishes specific targets for energy savings that
utilities or non-utility program administrators must meet through customer energy efficiency
programs. Demand response involves timing energy conservation measures at industrial
sites, commercial buildings, homes, and other locations to save energy and meet utility peak
demands. Energy storage can provide power that can be dispatched to better integrate variable
resources like renewable energy, but it can also provide management of variable demand –
helping to flatten demand requirements of the utility and allow the utility to implement voltage
regulation and other efforts to improve system efficiency.

2 A: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

Adopt a statutory, or through administrative rule by the PSC, energy efficiency
standard at 1 percent energy savings annually within 3 years after program
implementation, then increase the standard to 1.5 percent annually for the next 4
years, and to 2 percent annually thereafter for IOUs.
•

To ensure that the utilities are not disincentivized from adopting policies that
promote beneficial electrification (e.g., converting from natural gas or propane
to electric heat) load growth attributable to these activities would be excluded
from total sale volumes and thus would not have any effect in the calculation
of energy savings that must be acquired to meet the efficiency standard.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 28



•

•

Adopt a statutory, or through administrative rule by the PSC, demand response
standard that would require the state’s IOUs to acquire, within 5 years after
implementation, a total of 35 megawatts (MW) of demand response resources,
calculated based on each utility’s overall system contribution to Montana load.
•

•

2B:

The proposal could consider specifying some amount of energy efficiency
investments targeted at low-income Montanans. Energy efficiency
significantly benefits low-income households, given those customers spend
a disproportionately large amount of their income on meeting energy needs.

Efforts could focus on 1) Load control for residential and commercial
customers (water heaters, air conditioning), where equipment is cycled for
short periods of time; 2) Curtailable load for larger commercial/industrial
operations, where operators nominate an amount of load to be curtailed
when an event is called; and 3) Interruptible rate for commercial/industrial
operations that can curtail most or all of their load.

Adopt a statutory, or through administrative rule by the PSC, energy storage
standard that would require the state’s IOUs to acquire, within 2 years after
implementation, a total of 35 MW of energy storage, calculated based on each
utility’s overall system contribution to Montana load.

Promote Energy Efficiency Through Tools like On-Bill Financing
One of the largest barriers to energy efficiency acquisition is the upfront cost to individuals,
households, and businesses. To help alleviate this issue, utilities should provide the opportunity
for customers to apply for loans that are paid back in installments included in their monthly
energy bills. On-bill financing is an energy efficiency uptake tool that utilities have used for
decades, yet has failed to gain traction in Montana. Flathead Electric Cooperative is believed to
be the only utility in the state providing an on-bill financing option, having alleviated the upfront
cost burden for over 500 customers in just 8 years. Financing through the USDA’s Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Loan Program can assist cooperatives in developing/financing
programs.

2B: KEY STRATEGY
•

Utilities and co-ops should provide an opportunity for customers throughout
Montana to access energy efficiency measures by taking advantage of utilityadministered on-bill financing programs. Utilities and electric cooperatives should
utilize lessons learned from experiences around the country and explore voluntary
partnerships and legislative options to leverage funding and further incentivize
adoption of energy efficiency financing opportunities. In addition to traditional on-bill
financing, which utilizes a third-party intermediary such as a bank, utilities should also
pursue on-bill repayment and tariffed on-bill financing in order to ensure renters and
low-income customers are able to fully take advantage of these programs.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 29



2C:

 dopt Rate Strategies Like Decoupling, Time-of-Use Rates, Inclining Block
A
Rates, and/or Performance Measures to Facilitate Energy Efficiency
Decoupling is an approach to better align utility profit incentives with customers’ energy
service needs. In simple terms, under a decoupling mechanism a utility is assured of
being able to recover the revenue that the Commission has authorized it to recover, no
more and no less. Should the utility recover less than the authorized amount, rates would
increase in order to recover those revenues. On the other hand, should a utility sell more
energy than was projected when rates were set and recover more than the authorized
revenue, rates would decrease in order to refund the over collection. The mechanism
removes the incentive to maximize energy sales in order to achieve recovery, and thus
makes energy efficiency and distributed generation options more attractive to utilities.
Currently, most utility customers in Montana pay the same energy charge no matter when
they use the energy (electricity or gas). Under this flat-rate design, the per-kilowatt-hour
or per-therm charge is stagnant, meaning there is no price signal to use energy during
non-peak times. In Montana, peak times usually mean that a utility’s generation is fully
operational, meaning GHG-emitting thermal units are emitting. Furthermore, increases
in peak load prompt utilities to build additional natural gas “peaker” units, increasing
emissions. Time-of-use (TOU) rates, on the other hand, send price signals to customers
to shift load to non-peak times, such as at night or during the middle of the day.
Most Montana utility customers pay the same amount per unit (kWh or therm) regardless
of the amount they use. For example, a customer that uses 600 kWh/month pays the same
for each kWh as does a customer that uses 2,500 kWh per month. As such, there is no
price signal to conserve energy or use the energy more efficiently. To address this issue and
encourage energy efficiency and conservation, utilities and co-ops should consider adopting
inclining block rates (IBR). Utilities with this rate structure encourage large users to reduce
their energy usage through higher prices for energy consumed within the higher blocks.
Performance-based measures change the business model for investor-owned utilities (IOUs)
operating in Montana, such that rate of return for the utility is calculated based on performance
against certain pre-defined metrics rather than only spending or costs. For example, metrics
could include environmental impact, mitigation of climate and environmental risks and
investment risk, reliability and availability, safety, conditions for connection, social obligation,
and ratepayer satisfaction. In the United Kingdom, regulated utilities receive a profit based on
the RIIO Model, where Revenue = Incentives + Innovation + Outputs.

2C: KEY STRATEGIES
•

Work with the PSC, IOUs, rural electric cooperatives, and other stakeholders to
advance proposals for decoupling, TOU rates, inclining block rates, and/or
performance measures.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 30



•

Consider implementing a three-tiered TOU pricing rate design, being sensitive
to the specific needs and circumstances of low-income customers. The first and
cheapest tier (i.e., the low-usage times) should be priced below the “flat rate”
charge (e.g., $0.06/kWh) to encourage customers to shift load to these times.
The second tier (i.e., average-usage times) should be priced somewhere near the
“flat rate” charge (e.g., $0.11/kWh). Finally, the third tier (i.e., peak times) should be
appropriately priced to send a proper signal that customers should only use energy
essential to home/business operation (e.g., $0.16/kWh). Committee members wish
to emphasize that TOU rates will not be applicable to large industrial, agriculture, or
large irrigators who already operate under demand charges.

2D: 	Support Programs to Advance Commercial Energy Audits
In-depth energy audits are necessary for businesses, schools, government agencies, and
communities to discern the appropriate energy conservation and renewable energy measures
available to them. Previous Montana programs of this scope include the Montana Resource
Efficiency Program24 and the Energy Efficiency Program. The Montana Resource Efficiency
Program has a proven track record of success assisting 188 businesses and governments and
authoring 48 in-depth audit reports. Customers saved more than $10 million on their energy
bills, thanks to more than 131 million kWh and more than 6 billion Btu in energy savings.

2D: KEY STRATEGY
•

Explore budget resources through the legislature to support commercial
energy audits.

2E: 	The Legislature Should Evaluate the Universal System Benefits Program Funding
Mechanism for Electric Customers
In 1997, Montana’s energy utilities were restructured, which deregulated the supply of
electricity and natural gas. At the time, it was acknowledged that deregulation could
negatively affect several activities of the state’s utilities that provided societal benefits.
To ensure these activities continued in the future, the legislature established a universal
system benefits (USB) program and approved a USB charge to be added to natural gas
and electric utility bills of all utility customers. These spending activities are annually
reported and many utilities consistently exceed minimum USB spending requirements.
There are differences between natural gas and electric USB programs, but both programs
provide funding support for three common activities: 1) cost-effective local energy conservation,
2) low-income energy bill discounts, and 3) weatherization activities. Electric USB charges

24

https://www.mtefficiency.org/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 31



also fund energy research and development, renewable energy development, and market
transformation programs. Natural gas USB funding is based on 1.12 percent of the utility’s
annual natural gas revenues from the previous year. Electric USB collections are based on
2.4 percent of the utilities’ 1995 revenues. Over the past 20 years, there has been a decline
in the effective value of electric USB funds. This is a narrowly focused recommendation
pertaining to the electric USB funding formula and not the allocation of funding among
programs, particularly the low- income energy programs that are so critical for lowincome electric customers.

2E: KEY STRATEGY
•

2F:

The Council recommends the Legislature evaluate the electric USB funding
mechanism that determines overall annual contributions to the USB program.

	Develop Mobile-Home Replacement Program
Many Montanans still occupy pre-1976 mobile homes, considered to be among the leastenergy-efficient housing stocks in the country. Low-income Montanans who are least able to
afford energy services reside in these units. Accordingly, replacing pre-1976 mobile homes
with newer mobile homes would not only reduce GHG emissions but would reduce low-income
Montanans’ energy bills and improve their lives.

2F: KEY STRATEGY
•

The executive branch of state government should convene a stakeholder group
charged with taking an inventory of older, energy-inefficient, and unhealthy mobile
homes and developing a mobile-home replacement program to meet both energy
efficiency and environmental justice goals.

2G: 	Address the Non-Energy Benefits of Energy Efficiency when Assessing
Cost-Effectiveness
Congress recognized non-energy benefits, which are often difficult to quantify, in the
Northwest Power Act of 1980, requiring the Northwest Power and Conservation Council and
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) to include a 10 percent adder in cost-effectiveness
calculations. As a result, western Montana co-ops, as customers of BPA, benefit from the
adder. The law applies to all utilities in the Pacific Northwest. Montana-Dakota Utilities
Company has a 15 percent adder included in PSC administrative rule. NorthWestern Energy
utilized a 10 percent adder, citing the Northwest Power Act, but abruptly stopped several
years ago, at the same time that the utility slashed its energy efficiency acquisition goals.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 32



Cost-effectiveness calculations are a crucial part of procuring energy efficiency as a resource.
Utilities must demonstrate that efficiency is cheaper than the cheapest alternative resource in
order to receive cost-recovery and/or a rate of return on their investments. Theoretically, both
costs and benefits are included in the cost-effectiveness calculation; however, many benefits
are not included, leading to skewed outcomes that limit energy-efficiency acquisition. The
missing benefits include those related to good health, clean water, environmental protection,
compounded economic benefits, etc.

2G: KEY STRATEGY
•

In an effort to more-accurately calculate the full benefits of energy efficiency,
all utilities and co-ops should include a non-energy benefit adder in costeffectiveness calculations. The specific number should be left up to individual
utilities, but should be no less than 10 percent as described in the Northwest
Power Act. The result would mean that any measure or program achieving a 0.9
or above (for 10 percent adder) cost-effectiveness ratio would be deemed to be
cost effective.

2H: 	Identify Energy Efficiency Solutions for Rental Units
Installing energy efficiency at rental units is challenging because of the split in incentives that
exists between the owner and occupant of the rental unit. Specifically, the owner incurs the
cost of capital improvements that yield energy savings but benefits in the form of lower costs of
energy and unit comfort and livability advantage the occupant. Consequently, owners have no
incentive to invest in energy efficiency, meaning that the benefits are not realized – to the owner,
in terms of marketing the unit; to the tenant, in terms of reduced cost of living in the unit and
comfort; and to society, in terms of reduced emissions.

2H: KEY STRATEGY
•

2I:

The governor shall establish a task force examining existing energy efficiency
efforts specific to rental units and ways to improve energy efficiency acquisition at
rental units. The task force shall comprise stakeholders, including investor-owned
electric and natural gas utilities, electric cooperatives, local government, energy
efficiency providers, and owners of rental units and tenants.

Adopt State Appliance Efficiency Standards
Many states have adopted appliance efficiency standards. Standards require products, such
as refrigerators or air conditioners, to meet specific minimum efficiency requirements thereby

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 33



reducing energy use, which reduces emissions and also saves consumers money. Equally
important, the existence of standards drives manufacturers to focus on incorporating energyefficient technologies into their products at the least cost and hastening the development of
innovations that bring improved performance. While Montana’s relatively low population will not
drive the market, Montana consumers should not be deprived of the advantages that will be
produced as a result of ensuring their appliances meet a minimum level of efficiency performance.

2I: KEY STRATEGY
•

2J:

The State should enact legislation that adopts minimum energy and water efficiency
standards for a variety of products sold in the state. The legislation should use as a
template the “Model Act for Establishing State Appliance and Equipment Energy and
Water Efficiency Standards” issued by the Appliance Standards Awareness Project and
the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.25

	The Montana Department of Labor and Industry (DLI) Should Modernize Montana
Building Energy Codes and Administrative Processes to Promote Energy Efficiency
and Other Climate Benefits in New Buildings [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
Building energy codes are an effective way to save energy over the long term. The value of
energy efficiency in properly implemented construction standards is universally recognized as
the easiest and most cost-effective way to help consumers and businesses save energy and
money, make housing and businesses more affordable, and reduce GHG emissions.

2J: KEY STRATEGIES

25

•

Support regular adoption of updated International Energy Conservation Code codes
every three years, with amendments appropriate to Montana. The adoption process
must be accelerated to occur within 12 months of a new code being issued by the
International Code Council. Consider capacity building support to meet accelerated
adoption objectives.

•

Require that the energy code be considered at the same time as the other codes to
avoid the current situation where the energy code lags adoption of other codes.

•

Require that all builders operating in the self-certification areas of the state be
required to submit, to the Building Codes Bureau, a written statement that a house
complies with the state energy code and/or have the appropriate state agency
enforce building codes outside of local jurisdictions.

https://appliance-standards.org/sites/default/files/2019_Model_Bill_ASAP_Jan_24_2018.pdf

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 34



•

Modify language regarding energy stretch codes to allow a jurisdiction to require
compliance with that local stretch code in their jurisdiction. Explore the possibility
of developing a stretch code for the entire state that would be optional for local
jurisdiction adoption.

•

Investigate the feasibility of requiring energy rating labeling for new home sales
and new commercial buildings.

DISSENTING VIEW: One Council member opposed this recommendation citing concerns over

the potential for a local governing body to apply rules and regulations to people or companies
outside of their jurisdiction. DISSENTING VOTE: Olson.

2K: 	Allow for Local Governments to Establish Building Performance Standards
Building performance standards are utilized by local governmental bodies to, over time, improve
the energy performance of commercial buildings. In Montana, the building sector is responsible
for approximately 11 percent of CO2 emissions. By setting an overall target along with interim
targets that ramp up gradually, a building performance standard allows owners of commercial
buildings the ability to choose a package of technologies and actions that improve the
performance of their buildings best suited to their circumstances. A combination of short- and
long-term goals enables building performance to gradually improve and will discourage building
improvements that lock in place economically and environmentally inefficient investment.

2K: KEY STRATEGY
•

2L:

The State, through legislation, should explicitly allow Montana local
governments to adopt building performance standards and Montana cities
should adopt such standards tailored for their individual circumstances.

Implement Net-Zero-Energy Building Strategies
Net-zero-energy (NZE) buildings tackle climate change mitigation and adaption
simultaneously. NZE strategies and goals overlap with those of other committees of this
Council. In Montana, heating and cooling account for most of the energy used in most
buildings. NZE buildings are designed to significantly reduce a building’s energy use and
produce enough on-site renewable energy to fully address GHG emissions associated with
annual energy consumption. Many above-code building programs provide best practices,
strategies, and require third-party certification. The State of Montana can adopt one of
the existing programs for all state-owned new construction or existing building retrofits.
NZE adoption has several barriers. There is a lack of awareness of the concept and its benefits.
Further, there is a lack of educated customers and trained professionals. There exists a

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 35



chicken-and-egg issue: customers building new buildings need to know that NZE and NZEready is an option and ask for it. And, Montana’s architects and builders need to know how to
design and build NZE so they can be hired. There are numerous architects and builders across
the U.S. with the knowledge, expertise, and experience required, but Montana will need to
assess knowledge gaps and educate and train most of its building-related professionals. A third
issue is the emphasis on capital/first costs versus equal consideration of the “second price
tag” of continuous operation and maintenance costs paid over a building’s lifetime. Lastly, there
is a persistence of outdated myths about off-the-shelf and proven technologies used in NZE
buildings. For example, companies that install traditional HVAC systems may say that air-source
heat pumps do not work well in cold climates like Montana’s.

2L: KEY STRATEGIES
•

The Montana Energy Office26 should conduct an audit of existing state-owned and
-leased buildings to rank them by which are most energy- and water-efficient
and retrofit to achieve NZE.

•

The State of Montana should seek to ensure all new construction for state-owned
buildings has a NZE or NZE-ready goal.

•

The Montana legislature should provide tax incentives for developers designing
and building to NZE standards.

•

The Montana Energy Office should work with national experts and professionals
to develop educational materials, guidelines, and learning opportunities (e.g.,
seminars, trainings) on NZE design for various stakeholder audiences, including
developers, building owners/operators, local code officials, and the general public.

SECTION II. Beneficial Electrification

26

https://deq.mt.gov/Energy

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 36



2M: 	Support an Electric Cooperative Beneficial Electrification Initiative
Beneficial electrification means to substitute electricity as an energy source in place of
applications that traditionally rely on fossil fuels, such as switching to electric vehicles instead
of internal combustion engine vehicles that utilize petroleum products or utilizing electric space
heat instead of natural gas or propane. This approach limits uncontrolled GHG emissions from
many sources. Instead, by using electricity from clean energy sources, beneficial electrification
allows for these various applications to lower and potentially to zero-out their associated GHG
emissions. The electric cooperatives serve a significant number of customers in Montana and
thus will be critical if Montana is to achieve emission reductions. In order for electrification
initiatives to qualify as ‘beneficial,’ typically the efforts should contribute toward the goals of
saving consumers money over the long run, enabling better grid management, and reducing
negative environmental impacts.
2M: KEY STRATEGY
•

2N:

The Montana’s Electric Cooperatives Association and its member cooperatives
should consider establishing a beneficial electrification initiative to save
customers money and improve their and their communities’ way of life, enhance
grid stability and reliability, and reduce environmental impacts.

 tudy the Challenges and Opportunities of Heat Pump Technology Adoption
S
in Montana
Heat pump technology is used widely across various parts of the country for both heating and
cooling needs (air and water). Powered by electricity, heat pumps take energy in the form of
heat and by a mechanical process move it from one place to another. Cold-climate heat pump
technology for residential and commercial heating is relatively new, but as the technology
advances the cost of the technology continues to decline. As such, deploying heat pumps
is another way to reduce reliance on fossil fuels for heating, such as natural gas. Additional
analysis on the performance of cold-climate heat pump technology is needed to assess the
efficacy of the technology in Montana, the emissions reduction potential, and consumer costs
and benefits.

2N: KEY STRATEGY
•

The State should commission a study, to be prepared by an entity familiar with the
subject, examining the efficacy of air-source and ground-source (i.e., geothermal) heat
pumps in Montana. Working with electric utilities, the study should field-test applications of
heat pump technology in a variety of climatic regimes and undertake an economic analysis.
The study should also make recommendations as to deployment of the technology and
funding – including, for example, state financial grant, loan, or tax incentives for purchase
and/or installation – if the report determines the technology has potential value in the state.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 37



SECTION III: Renewable Energy and Maximizing Electric System Integration

2O:


Encourage
Expanded Community Solar Development and Enact Policy
to Enable Community Solar for Investor-Owned Utilities
Community solar programs allow households, businesses, and other energy customers
the opportunity to subscribe to one or multiple small portions of a large solar array,
typically owned by an energy provider. Community solar can benefit many Montanans
by making it possible for them to afford investments in renewable energy without having
to pay the high up-front cost of owning a renewable energy generator. Maintenance
costs are also reduced because these costs are shared by participating individual
consumers. Under current property tax law, after expiration of the five-year tax holiday,
these community solar arrays are treated as utility property for tax purposes.
Community solar provides access for individuals, households, and businesses that may not
otherwise be able to install an on-site distributed generation system (e.g., renters, buildings with
shaded roofs, multi-story apartment buildings and condos). Community solar allows the utility
to control the siting of the array, which can provide more-efficient solar production and moreefficient grid interconnection. Community solar subscribers can help finance projects, lessening
burden on the developer.

2O: KEY STRATEGIES

27

•

The legislature should enact policy to extend or make permanent the current fiveyear property tax holiday for community solar energy development by electric
utilities (MCA 15-6-225 “Small Electrical Generation Equipment Exemption”).27

•

The legislature should enact policy to enable community solar for investorowned utilities.

https://leg.mt.gov/bills/mca/15/6/15-6-225.htm

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 38



2P:

Provide Incentives for Solar-Ready and Solar-Integrated Design and Building
In its report Solar Ready: An Overview of Implementation Practices,28 the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory defines a solar-ready building as one that is engineered and designed for
solar installation, even if the solar installation does not happen at the time of construction. The
report states that creating a solar-ready structure improves the cost effectiveness of solar when
pursued later, which eliminates barriers to future solar applications and facilitates market growth.
Examples provided in the report demonstrate significant savings if solar-ready measures are
implemented during design and construction versus if those measures must be taken during
solar installation. In Montana, solar-ready design incentives should focus on two types of
buildings: 1) residential (single- or multi-family structures) and 2) small buildings designed
for multi-family housing, commercial use, or mixed-use applications. This second group of
buildings typically have flat roofs and are excellent candidates for solar.

2P: KEY STRATEGIES

2Q:

•

The legislature should enact legislation that provides incentives to encourage
solar-ready design for new buildings in Montana.

•

The Montana Energy Office and the Montana Department of Labor & Industry
should collaborate to provide solar-ready design guidance for residential and
commercial building developers.

•

The Montana Department of Labor & Industry’s Building Codes Program29 should
adopt the most-recent IECC energy code and specifically include Appendix RB,
“Solar-Ready Provisions – Detached One- and Two-family Dwellings, Multiple
Single-family Dwellings (Townhouses).”30

 tudy the Feasibility of Encouraging Greater Utility-Scale Renewable Energy
S
Development by Reducing Property Taxes on New Renewable Energy in Montana
Montana currently has by far the highest taxes on renewable energy in the region compared
to North Dakota, South Dakota, and Minnesota. North Dakota’s taxes on a 150 MW generator,
for example, are only one-quarter the amount of taxes on the same-sized generator developed
in Montana. Taxes in South Dakota and Minnesota are only slightly higher than those in North
Dakota (and therefore also much lower than in Montana).

28
29
30

https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/51296.pdf
http://bsd.dli.mt.gov/building-codes-permits
https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/IECC2015/appendix-rb-solar-ready-provisions-detached-one-and-two-family-dwellings-multiple-single-familydwellings-townhouses-

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 39



2Q: KEY STRATEGY
•

The legislature’s Revenue Interim Committee31 should conduct independent
research to compare taxation across states and renewable energy projects to
determine if rates should be adjusted for new projects. Committee members
emphasize that any proposed adjustments must fully consider revenue impacts.

2R: 	Advance the Deployment of Energy Storage Projects in Montana
Nationally, energy storage is increasingly being utilized by utilities, other energy suppliers,
and customers. Energy storage has many applications and roles, including addressing utility
peak needs requirements, enhancing system reliability, and renewable resource integration.
Presently, however, energy storage development in Montana is hampered by, among other
things, a lack of acceptance and awareness of its potential uses and value.

2R: KEY STRATEGY
•

2S:

MT DEQ should, together with other executive branch agencies, the Montana
Public Service Commission, and electric utilities, host a symposium on energy
storage to explore new storage technologies and their potential application in
Montana and identify possible recommendations and next steps.

Deploy and Test Grid-Integrated Water Heaters
Grid-interactive electric water heaters can assist with load control. By shifting water heating
load from morning and evening to mid-day and overnight, water heat energy requirements can
be served more economically while still meeting customer needs during peak use times. Water
heaters can also be controlled on a minute-to-minute basis to provide voltage support and
frequency regulation service to the grid at a much lower cost than generating units or batteries.

2S: KEY STRATEGY
•

31
32

MT DEQ, working with regional entities, such as the national laboratories, the
Bonneville Power Administration, and the Northwest Energy Efficiency Alliance,32
should develop pilot programs in the service territories of Montana utilities to
deploy and test grid-interactive water heaters to evaluate performance, energy
savings, and their role in system stability and reliability.

https://leg.mt.gov/committees/interim/2019rvic/
https://neea.org/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 40



2T:

	Increase the Allowable Size for Distributed Generation Systems
[ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]

The current system size cap for small-scale generation interconnecting to the grid is restrictive
for entities like commercial buildings, schools, libraries, and private businesses. The cap
involves what is known as net metering – a billing mechanism that credits solar energy system
owners for the electricity they add to the grid. The current cap of 50 kilowatts (kW) was passed
in 1999 and has not been updated since. Meanwhile, solar technology has become more
efficient and less costly. Increasing the allowable system size will allow users to meet more of
their energy needs with solar, wind, micro-hydro, and other eligible technologies.

2T: KEY STRATEGY
•

The legislature should evaluate and institute a new cap for distributed
energy systems.

DISSENTING VIEWS: Four members did not support the advancement of this recommendation

citing concerns over potential increased costs for utility customers who do not take part in net
metering and the need to consider the potential for stranded transmission/distribution costs.
Members also cited concerns over cost and complexity of ratemaking for a potential new class
of generators. DISSENTING VOTES: Hoffman, Wiens, Olson, and O’Hair.

2U: 	 Investigate the Use of Microgrids in Montana
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) defines microgrids as “localized grids that can
disconnect from the traditional grid to operate autonomously.” DOE goes on to note that
“because they are able to operate while the main grid is down, microgrids can strengthen
grid resilience and help mitigate grid disturbances as well as function as a grid resource for
faster system response and recovery.” These resilience benefits may be particularly valuable
in Montana, where uncharacteristic wildfire and other severe weather can disrupt service and
potentially pose liability risks in circumstances where transmission infrastructure is the source
of ignitions. Microgrids can also provide an opportunity to deploy more distributed generation,
especially with storage technology, and can more efficiently use those technologies. The
development of microgrids is still relatively new. As of January 2020, Wood Mackenzie was
tracking just over 2,400 operational microgrid projects across the United States. However,
Montana itself is home to NorthWestern Energy’s Beck Hill Rural Microgrid Project. A group
of energy stakeholders should be convened in order to further investigate the increased use
of microgrids in Montana.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 41



2U: KEY STRATEGY
•

The Montana Energy Office should establish a microgrid stakeholder advisory
group to investigate the increased use of microgrids in Montana to identify impacts
to energy consumers and energy providers, as well as technical barriers impacting
development, and report its findings to the Energy and Telecommunications Interim
Committee.33

SECTION IV: Transportation

2V:

Adopt Low-Emission Vehicle (LEV) and Zero-Emission Vehicle (ZEV) Standards
[ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]

Fourteen states have adopted LEV standards and twelve states have adopted ZEV standards.
Three other states – Minnesota, Nevada, and New Mexico – are in the process of adopting
these standards, which the auto industry broadly supports. California adopted the first LEV
regulations in 1990, requiring automobile manufacturers to introduce progressively cleaner lightand medium-duty vehicles with more-durable emission controls. The ZEV regulation requires
automakers to invest in clean vehicle technologies such as plug-in hybrid, battery electric,
and hydrogen fuel cell by maintaining zero-emission credits equal to a set percentage of
non-electric sales. The credit requirement increases over time, much like a renewable portfolio
standard.

2V: KEY STRATEGY
•

MT DEQ should undertake a rule-making process (or pursue legislation as
appropriate) to adopt low-emission vehicle and zero-emission vehicle standards
by the fall of 2020.

33 https://leg.mt.gov/committees/interim/etic/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 42



DISSENTING VIEWS: Four Council members did not support the advancement of this
recommendation. Concerns were raised regarding pending litigation of clean vehicle standards,
and the necessity for standards to drive market adoption as opposed to market and consumer
preferences. Some members questioned whether Montana should serve as a leader in the
development of this marketplace in light of adoption and cost challenges associated with a low
population and low population density across the state. Others raised concern that the standards
might lead to additional regulations and taxes on existing vehicles. DISSENTING VOTES:
Hoffman, Wiens, Olson, and O’Hair.

2W: 	Advance Comprehensive Strategies to Develop and Expand Electric Vehicle Use
and Infrastructure [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
The states of Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming have
entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish a Regional Electric Vehicle
Plan for the West (REV West Plan).34 The MOU acknowledges the value of taking coordinated
action to deploy EV charging stations across the region. The buildout of an “Intermountain West
EV Corridor” will increase access to each state’s highways, promote tourism and recreation
in rural communities, and support economic development. While private-sector roles for
advancing infrastructure will be critical, partnerships will also be needed to overcome initial
hurdles to EV adoption attributed to a lack of infrastructure.

2W: KEY STRATEGIES
•

The State should provide tax incentives for the purchase of low- and zeroemission vehicles at a level sufficient to evoke a robust consumer response.

•

The governor should issue an executive order establishing a goal for the
deployment of EV charging infrastructure in the state and establish a task force
charged with creating a plan and action items leading to the implementation of
that goal.

•

To ensure that transportation electrification occurs as expeditiously as possible,
based on sound utility regulatory principles the State should enact legislation
requiring investor-owned electric utilities to file plans every two years with the
Montana Public Service Commission. Likewise, every two years the Montana
Electric Cooperatives Association, on behalf of its member cooperatives, would
be required to file a report with MT DEQ. The regulated utilities’ plans should
include such things as: an analysis of existing market opportunities, existing
policies, barriers to EV growth, and the impact of rates and rate design on EV
adoption. These plans, through an open, public process, would be subject to
Commission approval, disapproval, or modification. The electric cooperative
report should include a discussion of EV charging in the service territories of
member cooperatives.

34 https://afdc.energy.gov/laws/11875

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 43



•

The Montana Department of Transportation (MDT),35 working with stakeholders
(including the Federal Highway Administration36), should evaluate the feasibility
and advisability of installing fast-charging (direct current) EV charging stations
at rest areas administered by the Department. The process should endeavor to
identify the specific rest areas suitable for the development of EV infrastructure,
establish target dates, and determine funding requirements and sources. MDT
should, within existing authority, deploy uniform signage on routes under its
jurisdiction indicating the location of public charging stations.

•

The imposition of taxes on low- and zero-emission vehicles should be equitable
and should not create disincentives for the ownership of LEVs and ZEVs.

•

Enact legislation exempting electric vehicle charging stations from property
taxes, installed for use by employees, patrons, and visitors by the owners of
commercial property.

•

The Montana Department of Labor should by rule exclude the cost of installing
electric vehicle charging infrastructure when calculating the cost.
of an electrical inspection for new construction.

DISSENTING VIEW: One Council member did not support the advancement of this recom-

mendation. That member voiced concern over mandatory reporting requirements for electric
cooperatives, which were viewed as unnecessary. The member offered that electric cooperatives
would be willing to provide this reporting on a voluntary basis if requested by the legislature.
DISSENTING VOTE: Wiens.

2X: 	Improve Statewide Transportation Management to Foster Alternatives and
Support the Needs of Communities
Transportation-related GHG emissions occur not just because our fleet uses fossil fuels, but
also because of the nature of our overall transportation system. Montanans have the tenthhighest reliance on personal vehicles of any state in the nation, partly reflecting our geographic
range and low population density, but also limited integrated transportation and growth
planning and transportation alternatives.

2X: KEY STRATEGIES
•

MDT should assemble a broad-based stakeholder group, including transportation
consultants and experts from outside of Montana, to consider and evaluate the
Department’s transportation planning and operational practices. This evaluation
should include a focus on the state’s need and commitment to reduce GHG
emissions and the importance of and benefits from developing transportationefficient communities.

35 https://www.mdt.mt.gov/
36 https://cms8.fhwa.dot.gov/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 44



2Y:

•

MDT should build, or arrange to have built, and host a ride-sharing mobile
app. The app will enable drivers and riders to connect with each other to
reduce vehicle miles travelled and costs for Montanans, while also lessening
the burden on existing transportation infrastructure.

•

MDT, working with local governments, should direct additional resources
towards planning for and the development of expanded bike infrastructure
both within and between communities. Such development will help
decrease miles driven, while helping increase tourism revenue (including,
potentially, to more rural Montana communities).

•

The Department of Labor should prepare and make available a manual on
remote working practices and should assist employers that wish to institute
remote work opportunities for their employees.

	Explore Opportunities for Passenger Rail
Public transportation across Montana is limited, with few affordable options for intercity
travel throughout the state. During the 20th century, southern Montana saw passenger
rail service by way of Northern Pacific’s North Coast Limited and the Chicago, Milwaukee,
St. Paul and Pacific’s Hiawatha trains. With the cessation of private rail service in 1971
and the creation of Amtrak, the North Coast Hiawatha was established and ran until 1979
when, during a period of retrenchment, Montana lost the southern route and only retained
the Empire Builder along the Hi-Line. Unfortunately, the majority of the state, and the
major population centers of the state, are not connected by rail or even by regular bus
routes. Transportation accounts for a significant percentage of harmful air pollutants in
urban areas, and there is tremendous opportunity to reduce those emissions by reducing
single-occupant vehicle trips. A cohesive intercity public transportation system would both
reduce air pollution by decreasing the necessity of car travel across the state and would
increase equitable access to travel options for those not able to afford car ownership or
with other barriers to driving. More regional rail connectivity can help reduce the need for
air travel as well (more about GHG reduction benefits here and here). Passenger rail cars
could further reduce Montana’s GHG emissions if electrified or powered by hydrogen.
The last study on the feasibility of reinstating passenger rail in Montana was conducted in 2010.
It is likely that many of the estimates of cost and even the state of the current infrastructure
need to be reevaluated. Additionally, the previous study did not account for the social cost
of emitting carbon and the need to reduce GHG emissions. Another barrier to reinstating
passenger rail is the lack of a governance structure, like a rail authority, to lobby for and
actively pursue restoration/expansion of passenger rail service. Rail authorities provide the
governance structure and institutional framework for engaging state, federal, and private-sector
partners to plan and implement restored passenger rail service throughout the region.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 45



2Y: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

The State should develop a passenger rail authority modeled after passenger rail
authorities in other states. To start, the governor could direct MDT to coordinate
with and support the county officials developing a multi-county Big Sky Passenger
Rail Authority.37

•

The governor and Montana’s Congressional delegation should advocate for the
creation of a regional, multi-state passenger rail commission (like the Southern
Rail Commission) that allows Montana to create connectivity with other states and
tap into federal resources.

•

MDT should conduct an updated feasibility study of restored passenger rail
service through southern Montana and conduct an impact analysis that accounts
for anticipated reductions in GHG emissions.

•

The governor should establish a committee to examine the issue and investigate
how Montana can prioritize passenger rail and expanded public bus service as a
part of the state’s multi-modal approach to mitigating climate change.

SECTION V. Quantifying and Reducing Industrial, Agricultural and Methane
Emissions and Including Carbon Sequestration

2Z:

I mprove Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration Inventory
and Accounting Spanning Non-Electric and Transportation Sectors Across
Montana’s Economy
Presently, the state lacks a comprehensive inventory or estimates of GHG sources and sinks
spanning other critical sectors of the economy, including industrial sources, methane emissions,
and agriculture, forestry, and wood products. These estimates and inventories are critical to
understanding economy-wide strategies to reduce emissions and boost the capacity of carbon
storage in healthy soils, forests, and in wood products.

37 https://montanapassengerrailsummit.org/big-sky-passenger-rail-authority

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 46



2Z: KEY STRATEGIES
•

MT DEQ, in consultation with other appropriate agencies, should develop GHG
emissions and sink estimates for key sectors of Montana’s economy and
land use.

•

The GHG emissions reporting program should be developed through DEQ
rulemaking to encourage facilities and other industrial, institutional, and
commercial operations that produce more than 25,000 metric tons of CO2e
to annually report GHG emissions. This recommendation would allow for
developing a summary report of existing facilities currently reporting to the U.S.
EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP)38 and also incorporate other
facilities subject to 40 CFR 63 Part 98 who are not reporting.

•

In forestry and agriculture, integrate strategies with voluntary and incentivedriven approaches, including potential carbon markets, as outlined in Chapter
1. Consider use of widely available tools from the USDA for estimating GHG
emissions and sinks, including tools like COMET-FARM39 and COMET PLANNER40
that allow for farm-scale and regional estimations of the benefits of conservation
practices for carbon management and reduced emissions.

2AA: 	Assess and Reduce Sources of Methane Emissions
Reducing methane emissions is an important component of strategies to address GHG
emissions. Key sources include landfills, agricultural emissions from livestock production,
and oil and gas operations.

2AA: KEY STRATEGIES

38
39
40
41

•

MT DEQ, working with industry and other appropriate agencies, should develop a
study plan and then conduct a study to identify and quantify sources of methane
emissions in Montana.

•

The Montana Board of Oil and Gas Conservation (MBOGC),41 working with MT DEQ,
should institute a program, directed at well and pipeline operators, that has as its
objective the promotion of best management practices such as leak detection and
repair, the use of no-bleed or low-bleed control devices and pneumatic controllers,
and to discourage the use of manual liquids unloading processes.

https://www.epa.gov/ghgreporting
http://comet-farm.com/
http://comet-planner.com/
http://dnrc.mt.gov/divisions/board-of-oil-and-gas-conservation

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 47



•

The governor should propose and the legislature should adopt a budget that
provides sufficient funding to address orphan well remediation and closure
in accordance with a plan, developed by MBOGC, taking into account a well’s
potential to emit methane, that enables the existing orphan well inventory to be
remediated and closed by the end of 2023.

•

If the next round of Covid-19 disaster relief and economic stimulus funding
directs monies to orphan well remediation and closure, the state should
advocate to ensure that Montana receives its fair share of those funds –
through its Congressional delegation, the governor, and the legislature.

•

MT DEQ should assess the extent to which methane emissions are occurring as
a result of the use of continuous or intermittent control devices on oil and gas
pipeline infrastructure and shall, if appropriate and working with industry, develop
a program to replace continuous or high-bleed control devices with no-bleed or
low-bleed control devices on oil and gas infrastructure.

•

To the extent not already regulated by MT DEQ’s facility registration program,
MBOGC – using existing authorities – should require operators to submit a plan,
providing information to be required by the Board, minimizing or eliminating
methane emissions, to be submitted no later than three months after the
commencement of production.

•

MT DEQ should review its standards and requirements related to methane
production and releases at the municipal solid waste landfills it regulates and
revise those standards and requirements, if necessary, to ensure that methane
produced by the facility is captured and diverted for beneficial use.

•

The Montana Department of Agriculture (MDA)42 should undertake a comprehensive
review and inventory of methane emissions as a result of livestock production and
agricultural practices and, should, working with Montana producers, create a
program to reduce or eliminate those emissions.

2AB: 	Address Food Waste and Food Systems Emissions
Local food systems can reduce “food miles” and transportation costs, offering significant
energy savings by reducing fossil fuel energy use and GHG emissions. Although local
food systems can reduce transportation distances for food, studies of food transportation
energy use and GHG emissions do not always agree on whether local food systems
are more energy-efficient, primarily because of the great variability among local foods
markets. In some cases, local and regional food systems are more efficient and distance
food travels to the consumer is an important factor in determining environmental
impacts. Others have found that distance is not an adequate measure of impact because
transportation accounts for a relatively small share of energy use and emissions in the
food system. The vast majority of energy used in the U.S. food system goes above and
beyond transportation, including processing, packaging, storing, and preparing food.

42 https://agr.mt.gov/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 48



Local food systems bring other benefits supporting community nutrition and rural economic
development goals and complementary market revenues for producers. Spending money
in the local community rather than sending it far away can be economically valuable,
and having a vibrant local-food system creates community resilience in the event of
unexpected occurrences such as what we are experiencing with the COVID-19 pandemic.
For example, many meat-packing facilities across the country are currently shut down
because of the pandemic leaving some producers with few options for processing their
beef, hogs, and lamb. If Montana had more regional meat processing plants, producers
would have more options and Montana would have more jobs. However, although bringing
in more feeding and processing capacity could reduce transportation emissions and have
some economic or social benefits, doing so could increase GHG emissions as well.
Food waste is a serious problem in the United States. An estimated 30–40 percent of the
nation’s food supply is wasted.43 When food is wasted, resources like the energy and water it
takes to grow, harvest, transport, and package it are also wasted. Breakdown of food in landfills
also produces methane, a potent GHG. About an 11 percent reduction of all the GHG emissions
that come from the food system could be achieved if food waste was mitigated. Reducing the
impacts of food waste could be achieved through composting programs and programs that
funnel unused food to people in need.

2AB: KEY STRATEGIES
•

MDA should establish a food policy council that will establish goals, strategies,
and policy recommendations to address opportunities and barriers to reducing
GHG emissions related to our food systems and to address food waste
generated within the state. The food policy council should include stakeholder
representatives from Montana producers, farmers market managers, farm-toschool programs, food hubs, retail grocers, food banks, and on-the-ground
experts in the areas of energy efficiencies, composting, and solid waste disposal.

•

MDA should set a goal of beginning to implement recommendations from the
food policy council within 12 months of receiving the food policy council’s report,
including pilot projects as appropriate.

2AC: 	Manage Solid Waste Emissions and Support Recycling and Composting
There are direct and substantial links between GHG emissions and solid waste management,
recycling, and composting. Waste reduction, recycling, and composting are a critical part
of reducing emissions in several ways:
•

Energy consumption: Recycling saves energy. Producing goods from recycled materials
typically requires far less energy than making goods from virgin materials. Waste
prevention is even more effective. Less energy is needed to extract, transport, and

43 https://www.usda.gov/foodwaste/faqs#:~:text=In%20the%20United%20States%2C%20food,worth%20of%20food%20in%202010.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 49



process raw materials and to manufacture products when a product’s life is extended,
people reuse things, or when less material is used to make and package the product.
•

Incinerators: Diverting certain materials from incinerators through waste prevention and
recycling reduces GHG emissions in addition to other pollutants. Using certain agricultural,
forestry, and yard waste products to instead produce biochar, a natural form of charcoal
sometimes used as a soil amendment, would further reduce emissions that would
otherwise result from incinerating waste streams or allowing natural decomposition.

•

Methane emissions from landfills: Waste prevention and recycling, including composting
to divert organic waste from landfills, reduces the methane released when these materials
decompose. (Note: Depending on the sophistication and funding of a given landfill,
methane emissions can also be captured and used as an alternative power source with
the net output, as with aerobic composting, of CO2 emission.)

•

Increased carbon storage in trees and long-lived wood products: Forests take large
amounts of CO2 out of the atmosphere and store it in wood, in a process called carbon
sequestration. Waste prevention and recycling of paper products and building materials
can leave more trees standing in the forest, continuing to absorb carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and can prevent methane emissions by maintaining carbon stored in longlived wood products.

The U.S. EPA estimates that increasing our national recycling rate from its current level
of 27 percent to 35 percent would reduce GHG emissions by 11.4 million metric tons
of carbon equivalent (MTCE, the basic unit of measure for GHGs) over landfilling the
same material. Waste prevention also makes an important difference. By cutting the
amount of waste we generate by just 5 percent, we could reduce GHG emissions by
another 10.2 million MTCE. Together, these levels of recycling and waste prevention
slash emissions by more than 20 million MTCE – an amount equal to the average annual
emissions from the electricity consumption of roughly 12 million households.
In addition, landfilling food waste rather than composting it results in the loss of nutrients,
a critical aspect for Montana’s agriculture. Burying food waste and other organics, such as
wood and paper waste, contributes to the production of leachate that must be treated for
methane, one of the most-potent GHGs. Food waste is a significant portion of the waste stream
nationally. According to an informal survey of licensed solid waste management facilities in
Montana, food waste constituted 20% of our state’s waste stream in 2017.44 Composting
represents tangible, local action to reduce GHGs. Substantial reductions in GHGs can
be further gained by diverting methane-emitting feedstocks derived from municipal
treatment centers, lagoons, and agriculture from landfills to composting operations.

44 Survey from the Montana DEQ Materials Management Program, Waste Management and Remediation Division.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 50



2AC: KEY STRATEGIES
•

MT DEQ should establish an advisory group that will make recommendations for
setting goals and establishing strategies to address GHG emissions related to
municipal solid waste generated within the state, through increased recycling
and composting, and by diverting the amount of solid waste going to landfills.
The advisory group should include representative from the Montana League of
Cities & Towns,45 the Montana Association of Counties,46 Montana Chamber of
Commerce,47 and on-the-ground experts in the areas of solid waste, recycling,
and composting.

•

MT DEQ should set a goal of beginning to implement recommendations from the
advisory group within 12 months of receiving the advisory group’s report,
including pilot projects as appropriate.

2AD: 	Advance Efforts to Develop and Deploy Carbon Capture and Storage
Technologies (CCS) [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
Even as Montana diversifies its energy portfolio, fossil fuels are expected to meet a portion
of energy demand. The deployment of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology can
accelerate efforts to reduce emissions from power plants and industrial processes, and
support other needs such as renewable fuel production central to meeting the net-neutral
goal. As the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions notes, more than half of the models
cited in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report48 required
carbon capture for a goal of staying within 2o C of warming from the pre-industrial period.
For models without carbon capture, emissions-reduction costs rose 138 percent.49
Governor Bullock co-founded multiple regional and national initiatives supporting carbon
capture, including the State Carbon Capture Work Group, the Governors’ Partnership for
Carbon Capture, and the Regional Carbon Capture Deployment Initiative. Governor Bullock
also entered a carbon capture memorandum of understanding (MOU) in 2018 along with North
Dakota, Wyoming, and Canadian province Saskatchewan.50

2AD: KEY STRATEGIES
•

45
46
47
48
49
50

MT DEQ should consider seeking primacy for Class VI deep injection wells.
Class VI wells are used to inject CO2 into deep rock formations. This long-term
underground storage is called geologic sequestration (GS). Geologic sequestration
refers to technologies to reduce CO2 emissions to the atmosphere and mitigate
climate change. The U.S. EPA has finalized requirements for GS, including

https://mtleague.org/
https://www.mtcounties.org/
https://www.montanachamber.com/
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
https://www.c2es.org/content/carbon-capture/
https://www.saskatchewan.ca/government/news-and-media/2017/december/01/mou-with-montana

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 51



the development of a new class of wells, Class VI, under the authority of
the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Underground Injection Control provisions.
These requirements, also known as the Class VI rule, are designed to protect
underground sources of drinking water. North Dakota is the only state with primary
enforcement authority for UIC Class VI wells. EPA directly implements the Class
VI program in all other states, territories, and tribes. State management of the
program could expedite permitting while maintaining appropriate safeguards
to water supplies. MTBOGC already has statutory authority to regulate class VI
disposal wells. No application for primacy currently exists.
•

Identify federal and private-sector partners and funding to advance carbon
capture and storage in Montana.

DISSENTING VIEWS: Four Council members did not support the advancement of this

recommendation. While most Council members agreed that carbon capture and storage
technology may play a role in meeting long-term climate targets and objectives, particularly with
regard to industrial activities that often have hard-to-eliminate emissions footprints, Council
members expressed concern that relying on the development of expensive, unproven CCS
technologies in lieu of strong commitments to reduce emissions could inappropriately prolong
the transition from fossil fuel technologies to renewable energy sources. Several members also
raised concern over unknown water quality impacts associated with sequestration. DISSENTING
VOTES: Piserchia, Rivas, Magraw, and Jencso.

SECTION VI: Tribal Nation and Community Efforts

2AE: Support and Learn from Tribal Nations [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
Despite a comparatively small contribution to the state’s overall greenhouse gas emissions, Tribal
nations in Montana face unique challenges from climate change impacts that threaten their diverse
ecosystems, communities, health, livelihoods, and cultural resources. Energy affordability issues
are an additional concern for many members of Montana’s tribal nations. Many of Montana’s

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 52



tribal nations also have long histories and traditions of inter-relationship with particular ecosystems, as well as practices of monitoring and planning for climatic changes spanning
generations. Montana’s tribal nations have much to offer in developing and assessing
climate solutions.
The scale of climate impacts facing tribal nations far outweighs the funding and support
that the federal and state governments devote to addressing these impacts. In addition
to new challenges, climate impacts also have the potential to magnify unaddressed
long-standing systemic inequities and discrimination affecting tribal nations.
A number of tribal nations, including the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) and
the Blackfeet Nation, are currently leading on the state and national levels, with exemplary
climate planning efforts. Initiatives to address GHG emissions reductions and climate
resilience and adaptation – developed with and in support of tribal nations – would ensure
that the unique circumstances and needs of all the tribes are recognized and addressed
and that tribal needs are prioritized and not overlooked, especially given the numerous and
competing demands for climate efforts in all Montana communities. The State of Montana
should help resource this work, in addition to working closely with and incorporating the
input of tribal nations in ongoing reassessment of the state’s climate targets and mitigation
efforts, as well as the state’s policy efforts to meet adaptation needs and concerns.

2AE: KEY STRATEGIES
•

The State of Montana should collaborate with tribal nations in full recognition
of tribal sovereignty to devise programs and structures that are specifically
designed to support tribal nations as they develop climate change mitigation
and resilience plans.

•

Specifically, the State of Montana (i.e., the Governor’s office and appropriate
agencies) and Montana’s tribal governments should convene a process working
with other entities (e.g., federal agencies, energy suppliers, community action
agencies) to support tribal nations to 1) assess GHG emissions-reduction
opportunities and develop plans to achieve emissions reductions on reservations
where appropriate, 2) develop adaptation and resilience plans, and 3) work in
partnership to address emerging climate adaptation and mitigation concerns
and challenges.

DISSENTING VIEW: One Council member did not support the advancement of this

recommendation. The member felt this recommendation should either be incorporated into
the state’s broader support for community-based initiatives or left out of this report in
recognition of tribal sovereignty over planning and implementation. DISSENTING VOTE: Olson.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 53



2AF:

Support Community Mitigation Planning [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
Local governments should develop GHG mitigation plans and processes that tackle communitywide emissions where possible. Different communities in Montana will proceed and prioritize
in ways that respond to local strengths and needs, recognizing their unique opportunities and
challenges. Local climate action planning processes will vary depending on the size of the
community and jurisdiction. Effective mitigation planning requires meaningful involvement and
buy-in from a diverse group of relevant decision-makers, stakeholders, and community members.
Planning efforts should start by bringing community leaders, including local government staff or
elected officials, and interested parties together to determine the scope and basic path forward.
Efforts should focus on actions that fit with local needs and opportunities and can either be
implemented locally or by working with other communities and the State. In turn, communities
can inform state policies that reduce GHG emissions. The State of Montana should support
these efforts.

2AF: KEY STRATEGIES
•

Outline and support a process for community mitigation planning and to engage
and connect communities. Every community in Montana is unique and will need to
address climate mitigation in ways that recognize its own opportunities and
limitations. While there are some similarities, community climate action processes
and plans will vary depending on community size and resources, whether they are
municipalities, tribal nations, or counties and whether they are primarily served by
rural electric cooperatives or an investor-owned utility. Mitigation processes should
secure buy-in from key community members, build on existing programs, and be
data-driven wherever possible. Recommendations should follow best practices for
effective GHG emissions-reduction strategies, with strong consideration for equity
and co-benefits, including strategies that also build resilience and help prepare for
future climate impacts

•

Communities and tribes engaged in local mitigation processes should set
quantitative goals and timelines for GHG reductions and develop mitigation
strategies within a local climate action plan, determine mitigation targets with goals
and clear timelines informed by climate science, conduct a community-wide GHG
inventory, and determine actionable goals and prioritized strategies to reduce
emissions.

•

Connect mitigation strategies and actions across Montana. Montana State
University hosts an online map of existing community and tribal nation mitigation
and adaptation plans.51 As more communities assess mitigation strategies,
limitations, and challenges, the State of Montana should reassess statewide
strategies in support of locally identified goals.

51 http://www.msucommunitydevelopment.org/plans.html
S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 54



DISSENTING VIEW: One Council member did not support the advancement of this
recommendation. The member cited concern with the potential for an unelected or selfappointed group to inappropriately assert leadership in planning on behalf of a community.
DISSENTING VOTE: O’Hair.

SECTION VII: Priority State, Regional, and Federal Measures

2AG: 	Advocate for Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in Upcoming Federal Stimulus Packages
The COVID-19 pandemic has created economic disruption across the United States. Congress
has addressed the near-term effects of the pandemic but is also discussing measures to help
ensure long-term recovery and economic vitality for the country. The recovery effort presents
an opportunity to invest in rebuilding our infrastructure, social, and economic systems to reduce
emissions with intention.

2AG: KEY STRATEGIES
•

The Governor and Montana’s Congressional delegation should advocate
for stimulus measures to include programs that are called upon throughout
this report, especially those supportive of needs facing low-income groups,
disadvantaged communities, and tribal nations. Examples include:
•

Clean physical infrastructure investment: renewable energy, energy storage
(including hydrogen), and grid modernization.

•

Building efficiency spending for retrofits, including improved insulation,
heating, and domestic energy storage systems.

•

Revitalizing coal country through the cleanup and restoration of abandoned
coal mines on federal, state, tribal, and private lands.

•

Reclaiming and plugging orphaned oil and gas wells, prioritizing those
that emit methane.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 55



•

Support for sustainable agriculture and ecosystem regeneration
and resilience.

•

R&D spending on clean energy technology and sequestration technologies.

2AH: 	Engage in National and Regional Dialogues Regarding Carbon Pricing
[ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]

The Council acknowledges that a carbon pricing mechanism – if structured thoughtfully and
with appropriate stakeholder input – has the ability to both lower emissions (through either
a cap on emissions or through a price on carbon) as well as generate revenues that can be
invested back into the economy to expand Montana business and/or further reduce Montana
GHG emissions. The most effective and equitable approach on carbon pricing would be for
Congress to enact national legislation with input from impacted groups. To that end, Montana
should track and influence the development of federal legislation through its Congressional
delegation and through its membership in the U.S. Climate Alliance (and other association
memberships, such as the National Governors Association,52 the Western Governors’
Association,53 and Environmental Council of the States 54). The Council further acknowledges
that a federal carbon pricing mechanism should consider potential fiscal impacts to states
(both positive and negative), workforce transition needs, and any disproportionate impacts to
low-income and vulnerable communities.

2AH: KEY STRATEGIES
•

In the absence of a federal approach to pricing carbon, the Council encourages
the Governor to direct the appropriate state agencies – including MT DEQ,
Department of Revenue, Department of Natural Resources and Conservation,
MDT, Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, and the Department
of Agriculture – to explore the options, costs and benefits, and feasibility for
Montana to join other states in an existing or future regional carbon market.
As a starting point, Montana should conduct research and analysis of existing
regional markets and should also identify which other states may be interested
in working together on some form of a carbon pricing policy. This will inform
the decision of whether, and with whom, Montana should collaborate on the
development of such policies.

•

With either a federal or regional approach, Montana should consider both the
mechanism for pricing carbon (e.g., fee vs. cap), the efficacy of reducing carbon
emissions, and how revenues generated from carbon pricing will be invested
back into the economy (e.g., through investments such as innovative

52 https://www.nga.org/
53 https://westgov.org/
54 https://www.ecos.org/

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 56



energy technology, energy efficiency, job training, and building community climate
resilience) and used to mitigate the economic impacts on low-income residents.
DISSENTING VIEWS: Four Council members did not support the advancement of this

recommendation. Concerns were raised regarding the implementation of carbon pricing, its
potential disproportionate impacts on Montana businesses and low-income communities, and
potential for carbon pricing to compound known challenges facing the state’s fiscal health.
Concerns were also expressed regarding impacts to the price of energy in all sectors by setting
an artificial price floor. One member also noted that increased prices on energy and other goods
would cause impacts to low-income populations and that use of revenues to offset costs to lowincome individuals has proven challenging in other states. DISSENTING VOTES: Wiens, Hoffman,
Olson, and O’Hair.

2AI: 	Advance Efforts to Take Advantage of a Coordinated Western Electricity Market
The western United States electric grid comprises 38 balancing areas resulting in a level of
jurisdictional fragmentation and complexity that contributes to economic, contractual, and
practical obstacles to buying and selling electricity – creating extensive market inefficiencies.
A more-integrated electricity market in the West would allow load-serving entities to better
manage their loads and optimize production, delivery, and use of the low-cost renewable energy
that the western U.S. has in abundance, resulting in cost savings for consumers. Development
of a regional electricity market has special salience in Montana, which has significant renewable
resource potential, the development of which is presently hampered as a result of the present
balkanized system.

2AI: KEY STRATEGY
•

The governor and legislature, along with the state’s electric utilities, should
express their support for a western regional electricity market designed, among
other things, to provide transparency and equitable treatment and opportunities for
cost savings for all market participants, and should actively work with other states
and regional utilities to develop such a market.

2AJ: 	Adopt a Clean Energy Standard (CES) [ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]
A clean energy standard is a technology-neutral mechanism that requires that a certain
percentage of utility sales be met through “clean” zero- or low-carbon resources, such as
renewables including existing hydroelectric generation, nuclear energy, coal or natural gas
generation with carbon capture technology, and other forms of generation.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 57



2AJ: KEY STRATEGY
•

The State should adopt a clean energy standard, taking into account customer
affordability concerns. Specifically, by 2025, 60 percent of a utility’s total sales
would come from “clean energy;” by 2035, 80 percent; and by 2050, 100 percent.
Compliance with the standard by electric cooperatives would not apply on an
individual cooperative basis but rather by aggregating total sales and generation
of all the state’s electric cooperatives. NorthWestern Energy and the state’s electric
co-ops already meet the 60 percent clean energy by 2025 standard.

Note: There are many design features of a clean energy standard. Design features frequently considered in the
development of clean energy standards include more-precisely defining what constitutes “clean” generation (for
example, Washington limits biomass fuel to certain kinds); and if certain clean energy approaches should be favored
or disfavored based on type and timing (for example, Nevada affords a ten percent credit for energy efficiency
measures achieved by 2024). In order to maximize economic efficiency and compliance flexibility, some clean energy
standards establish a credit system based on emission rates. Another design element considered is to provide
for cost-containment provisions, either in the form of an alternative compliance payment or cost off-ramps. Both of
which keep the cost of compliance within a certain range and, thus, seek to balance concern over impacts
to customers with the goals of the standard.

DISSENTING VIEWS: Five Council members did not support the advancement of this
recommendation with four members citing the need to address cost considerations and
availability of technology in the development of such a standard and questions regarding the
achievability of the timelines for adoption. One council member expressed concern over the
inclusion of certain technologies including large new hydropower, nuclear, and carbon capture
and storage technologies and felt any standard should be set to incentivize early actions.
DISSENTING VOTES: Hoffman, Wiens, Olson, O’Hair, and Piserchia.

2AK: Recommendation on Achieving Economy-Wide Greenhouse Gas Neutrality
[ADVANCED WITH DISSENT]

In accordance with Executive Order 8-2019, the Council is charged with adopting a target date
by which the Council believes the state should adopt GHG neutrality across the economy.
The Council considered IPCC guidance and the objectives identified by a number of states. In
accordance with those objectives and guidance, the Council identified an option of a goal of 2050
or a range targeting 2045–2050. Upon vote of the Council, this range was adopted with the intent
to address the need for flexibility in achieving a specific goal, while also acknowledging the urgent
action that is needed to address the increasing threats and impacts of climate change. Ultimately
the goal provides a benchmark to evaluate policy options and pathways and align near-term
programs and policies with potential emissions trajectories as part of ongoing climate planning.
DISSENTING VIEWS: Four Council members did not support the advancement of this
recommendation citing uncertainty associated with mitigation pathways, costs, and technology
advancement. Members voiced concern that the establishment of such a goal could foster
uncertainty rather than lead to additional planning efforts. DISSENTING VOTES: Hoffman, Wiens,
Olson, and O’Hair.

S T R AT E G I E S T O REDU C E GREENH O U S E GAS EM IS SIONS – 58



3. Accelerating Decarbonization
and Innovation in Montana’s Economy,
and Addressing the Needs of Workers
and Communities in Transitions

A

goal of the Council is to move
Montana’s economy to net GHG
neutrality for average annual
electric loads in the state by 2035
and economy-wide by 2050. To
achieve these goals, Montana must accelerate
the development and deployment of innovative
technologies and practices in the energy, industrial,
manufacturing, and agricultural sectors. The Council
thus recommends establishing an innovation cluster
initiative to assess, define, and support the needed
environment, culture, workforce, and resource
allocation to sustain statewide efforts to achieve
these goals. An innovation cluster initiative will help
enable new, or nurture and grow existing, low- and
zero-GHG industries across Montana.
Montanans live by an inherently innovative
culture. According to the Kauffman Index of
Entrepreneurship,55 Montana consistently ranks at or
near the top for entrepreneurship and startup activity
per capita. Building on a mindset that is inherent to
who we are, an innovation cluster initiative will work
to identify regional and statewide capacity strengths,
leverage lessons-learned and best practices from
successes in sectors where Montana exhibits
comparative and competitive advantages, and
grow what works.

Regional innovation clusters (discussed below)
succeed when industry efforts align with existing
capacity and focus among state agencies, the
education system, industry associations, labor
unions, economic development associations, and
community leaders. The Council’s recommendations
on regional innovation clusters focus on the role
the state can play in forging new partnerships,
sharing information, and prioritizing strategic public
investments in research and business formation.
Finally, efforts to understand innovation potential
and cluster formation around net-zero emissions
technologies and industries should be networked
across Montana and supported by the broader
intention of fueling Montana’s “innovation landscape”
and fostering culture, leadership, and environment
that motivates and incentivizes public- and privatesector innovation.

Regional Innovation Clusters and
Cluster Initiatives Defined
To define clusters, the Council drew on the work of
the Brookings Institution and the writings of Harvard
economist Michael E. Porter.56 Regional innovation
clusters are “concentrations of interconnected
businesses, supply chains, and service providers
located in the same geographic area with

55 https://indicators.kauffman.org/
56 https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/0921_clusters_muro_katz.pdf
A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 59



coordinating intermediaries, and public institutions
like universities or community colleges in a particular
field.” Clusters create synergies and drive growth by
leveraging advantages of a specialized labor pool,
suppliers that can serve special needs of multiple
businesses, and “knowledge spillovers” among
companies, business associations, and university
faculty. The synergies associated with clusters often
result in faster commercialization and growth of
innovative technologies and services, driving growth
in employment, wages, and revenue for the region.
To support industry clusters, several states have
launched cluster initiatives. Cluster initiatives are
coordinated efforts – motivated by state leadership,
policy, and funding – to accelerate and sustain
growth of industry clusters. Cluster initiatives seek
to build networks and dialogue among industry
partners, universities, labor, philanthropy, and
other stakeholders to identify areas where strategic
investments or shared information and resources will
support private-sector growth that achieves public
goals, including economic development and climate
goals. Cluster initiatives may sponsor education and
training activities, encourage relationship building, or
facilitate market development through joint market
assessment and marketing, among many others.

Net-Zero Greenhouse Gas
Innovation Clusters
The Council recommends that Montana launch
cluster initiatives to decarbonize the state’s
economy built around existing industries in the
state and capacity among the state’s universities,
community colleges, tribal colleges, and state
agencies. Declaring decarbonization as a state goal
provides a competitive advantage for Montana’s
workers, businesses, and communities. Net-zero
GHG innovation clusters will protect Montana’s
economy, revenue, and jobs against future climate
regulations. Decarbonization as an organizing
goal will attract and retain business in our state,
including entrepreneurs, investors, and industries
that see innovation and decarbonization as a market,
investment, and regulatory benefit. Montana also
stands to benefit from a continuing national trend
of advanced manufacturing and knowledge-based
innovation sectors locating in smaller cities that have
access to global markets, an educated and skilled
labor force, and the quality of life and amenities
business leaders and workers are seeking.
The Council’s proposed Montana innovation initiative
will draw on lessons learned among states and in
Montana. The photonics cluster in Bozeman57 is
an example of an industry cluster focused around

57 https://www.montanaphotonics.org/

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 60



technology developed jointly between Montana
State University and local entrepreneurs. From
small beginnings, this innovation cluster supported
the creation of many private photonics businesses,
collectively having substantial economic presence on
our state and positive outlook for continued success
and growth. The cluster arose organically because of
synergies among basic research at the university and
businesses. Strategic partnerships, shared material
resources, a skilled locally trained workforce, and
sustained research funding facilitated rapid growth.
Montana’s proposed innovation initiative would
first explore how the state can apply lessons
from established industry clusters and assess
opportunities to nurture, expand, and grow emerging
innovation clusters and secure the associated
economic and climate benefits. An innovation cluster
initiative would a) convene key partnerships and
networks, b) make strategic public investments
in basic research and early commercialization
efforts that are often too risky or diffuse for the
private sector, and c) support the institutions that
can sustain efforts over the years and decades
sometimes required to achieve success.
Properties that should be present before public
investments are committed include a critical mass
of companies in a defined geographic region that
interact synergistically. The synergies may be
based on product and supply chains, occupations
and skills, technology and specialized knowledge,
or other traits. The Brookings report Rethinking
Cluster Initiatives58 identifies five common traits
of successful cluster initiatives: 1) they focus on a
robust ecosystem to produce talent, innovation, and
economic opportunities, not just quick job gains 2)
they are typically industry-driven, but with university
involvement and government funding 3) the initiative
is willing to target resources at specific opportunities
based on unique and legitimate strengths 4) they
have dedicated leadership and 5) they have a
physical center allowing significant interaction.

institutions are most-often located in the same city or
region. Bozeman’s photonics cluster is an example
of how synergies develop from proximity and the
easy flow of information, resources, and people
between public and private sectors. Montana’s
precision agriculture, basic and applied research,
and commercialization are occurring across wide
distances and require new approaches to networking
and leveraging shared assets. Montana’s innovation
initiative can build capacity in unique ways that
could become the standard for uniting the state with
growing research and technology innovation centers
with rural areas where natural resources, skilled
labor, and business innovation are located.
Montana’s competitiveness will stem from
continued assessment and assembly of a statewide
“innovation landscape” that engenders a culture
among community and state leaders that motivates
and incentivizes innovation. A robust innovation
landscape provides the institutional framework that
would coordinate the partnerships and relationships,
funding and investment capital, and place-based
roundtables identifying and driving forward industry
clusters when they get started.
The Council recommends learning from the success
of existing innovation clusters and applying these
lessons to accelerate growth and deployment of
nascent clusters that will help achieve the state’s
climate goals. Further, the Council recommends six
possible regional industry technology development
efforts that could be nurtured to form innovation
clusters. These efforts build on existing strengths in
our state’s energy, academic, industry, technology,
and agricultural sectors (see Figure 7).

Montana’s cluster initiative must be designed to
overcome the limits of distance. Clusters benefit
from proximity: industries, capital, and research
58 https://www.brookings.edu/research/rethinking-cluster-initiatives/

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 61

1.

 orthwest Montana Mass Timber and
N
Wood Products Manufacturing Innovation.
This region has an existing industrial
cluster that includes SmartLam North
America, FH Stoltze Land & Lumber Co.,
and Idaho Forest Group. The University of
Montana has research capacity to support
innovation in mass timber construction,
wood fiber insulation, and other low- and
negative-carbon technologies. State and



Figure 7: Montana’s Regional Innovation Clusters Initiative

1 2 3
5
6
4
Bl a c kf e e t

3

10 Br o wn i n g

13

Kalispell

9
F l a th e a d

NW MT MASS TIMBER
& WOOD PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURING
INNOVATION CLUSTER

H avre

7

F o rt Belknap
19
Ro cky Bo y’s

L i ttl e S hell

CENTRAL MT
RENEWABLE ENERGY
INNOVATION CLUSTER

F o rt P eck

NORTHERN PLAINS
PRECISION AGRICULTURAL
& SOIL CARBON
INNOVATION CLUSTER

Great Falls

12

15

8

Glendive

18

Mi s s o u l a
5

14

Miles C it y

16

He l e n a

4

SW MT BIOFUELS
INNOVATION CLUSTER

Bu tte

SW MT RENEWABLE
HYDROGEN & ADVANCED
ENERGY STORAGE
INNOVATION CLUSTER

6

EASTERN MT
NET-ZERO MANUFACTURING
INNOVATION CLUSTER

Billing s
2

1

Bo zeman

C ro w

Lame D eer

17

11

N o rt hern
C heyenne

Dillon

INNOVATION CLUSTERS

3 - MSU Northern

8 - Bitteroot College - UM

14 - Fort Peck Community College

Cities
INNOVATION CLUSTERS

4 - Montana Tech

9C-OSalish
Kootenai College
L L EGES
10 - Blackfeet Community College

15 - Great Falls College - MSU

11 - Chief Dull Knife College

17 - Little Big Horn College

Native American Reservations
Cities

5 - University of Montana (UM)

UNIVERSITIES
Nati ve A meri can Reservations COLLEGES
6 - University of Montana Western
1 - Montana State University (MSU)
2 - MSU Billings
UNIVERSIT IES

7 - Aaniiih Nakoda College

1

MT S t a t e University ( MSU)

2

MS U Bi l ling s

3
4
5

6

16 - Helena College - UM

U n iv e r s ity of M on ta n a We s te r n

7 - Dawson
Aa n iiih
N a k odCollege
a C olle ge 18 - Miles City Community College
12
Community
13
Community
8 - Flathead
B itte rValley
oot C
olle ge - U of 19
M T- Stone Child College

tribal community colleges – including
MS U N orthern
University of Montana-Western, Bitterroot
Mont a na T ech
College, Blackfeet Community College, and
U ni v e r s i ty o f Mo ntana
Salish Kootenai College – add capacity in
workforce, skills training, and apprenticeship
as well as institutional capacity to convene
college, community, tribal, and industry
leaders.
Advanced wood products manufacturing
aligns with adaptation efforts to thin
small-diameter trees to manage wildfire
risk around communities in Montana. Wood
building materials also sequester carbon in
buildings, reducing emissions from concrete
construction. These efforts would grow the
state’s industrial capacity and workforce

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 62

9 College
B la c k fe e t C ommu n ity C olle ge
10

C h ie f D u ll Kn ife C olle ge

11

D a w s on C ommu n ity C olle ge

12

Fla th e a d V a lle y C ommu n ity C olle ge

14

in the timber and manufacturing sectors
and generate income and revenue in rural
For t P e c k C ommu n ity C olle ge
communities.
Gr e a t Fa lls C olle ge - M T S ta te U

15

H e le n a C olle ge - U of M T

13

2.L ittle
Central
Montana Renewable Energy
B ig H or n C olle ge
Innovation. Montana has substantial
1 7 M ile s C ity C ommu n ity C olle ge
renewable energy generation and storage
1 8 Ston e C h ild C olle ge
potential of wind, solar, pumped-storage,
and renewable hydrogen. Locating
an innovation cluster around existing
institutional and industry capacity in Great
Falls, Havre, and Harlowton can accelerate
the technology, infrastructure, and projects
that will be needed to decarbonize
Montana’s electricity system and maintain
and expand the state’s position as an energy
exporter.
16



3.

 orthern Plains Precision Agricultural
N
and Soil Carbon Innovation. A Northern
Plains precision agriculture and soil carbon
innovation cluster would build on and expand
research capacity at MSU Northern and
MSU. Agriculture is an important sector
in Montana’s economy and culture and is
a key sector with opportunities to reduce
emissions from operations, sequester carbon
in soils, and meet regional and global market
demands

capacity located in Butte. Aligning research
capacity at Montana Tech and Montana
State University with the industry-led novel
technology innovation could help advance
and accelerate growth in battery technology
and expand industrial applications of
hydrogen – including heavy-duty vehicles,
rail and equipment, home heating, and
manufacturing processes.
Electrifying Montana’s economy and
eliminating emissions from the electricity
sector requires continual advancement in
short-term and seasonal energy storage at
both distributed and utility scales. By some
estimates, the global market for energy
storage systems is expected to grow 13-fold
from current levels by 2024.59 Designing and
deploying these technologies in Montana
will help meet the state’s climate goals
and offers significant opportunity to grow
and establish new businesses. The large
industrial proposal from Mitsubishi Hitachi
also represents a significant opportunity
to develop new skills and job markets for
Montana labor.

Building on successful research and
technology integration efforts at Montana
State University, new technology
innovation can be developed that focuses
on decarbonizing agricultural processes
and sequestering carbon in soils. By
working with industry, technology
providers, and agricultural producers,
MSU can better understand technology
improvements and opportunities for research
demonstrations that highlight economic
and carbon-reduction opportunities. Those
demonstrations will then serve as the
springboard for the new innovation cluster,
centered at least in part on the Hi-Line.
5.
4.

 outhwest Montana Renewable Hydrogen
S
and Advanced Energy Storage Innovation.
A significant proposal from Mitsubishi Hitachi
Power Systems to establish an electrolysis
plant in Butte creates opportunities to
establish research capacity to deploy a
new, world-leading method for energy
storage and electricity generation. The
electrolysis process planned would use
excess renewable electricity capacity
seasonally to split water into hydrogen and
oxygen. The hydrogen could be stored
seasonally and used to generate electricity
when demand exceeds renewable energy
capacity. Montana already has a nascent
cluster around REC Silicon Inc., the nation’s
sole supplier of silane gas critical in the
manufacture of next-generation lithiumion batteries and anodes, and research

 outhwest Montana Biofuels Innovation.
S
This cluster will target creating the
technologies and scale-up capabilities
required for large-scale biofuels
manufacture. A key goal is to minimize or
eliminate the use of diesel fuel derived from
non-renewable sources, a major source of
carbon emissions for our state. Diesel is
used to fuel large vehicles (e.g., for trucking,
agriculture, and construction) and, most
importantly, to fuel jet travel. Electrifying
such vehicles, an especially positive move if
it could be done with solar- or wind-derived
energy, is hindered by energy needs and
current battery capacity. Thus, development
of biodiesel and biojet fuel manufacturing
will be a key focus of the biofuels innovation
cluster. The cluster will include existing
capacity at UM Missoula, MSU and MSU
Northern (e.g., Energy Research Institute,

59 https://www.woodmac.com/reports/power-markets-global-energy-storage-outlook-2019-295618

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 63



Chemical Engineering, Plant Sciences,
Forestry, others), the Northwest Advanced
Renewables Alliance,60 private industry,
agricultural producers, and labor. The
emphasis will be on the creation of diesel
and biojet fuel from Montana-sourced
feedstocks, including wood products waste,
ag production waste, and crops grown
specifically as biofuels sources such as
safflower, camelina, and algae.
6.

 astern Montana Net-Zero Manufacturing
E
Innovation. The long-standing industrial
cluster in Billings provides an opportunity
to decarbonize existing industries through
innovation and a networked approach to
industrial processes, carbon capture and
storage, and renewable energy innovation
and deployment. Large-scale industrial
processes will continue to need utility-scale
power generation, but innovation in industrial
and manufacturing processes to decarbonize
the regional industrial cluster could expand
capacity to attract new, low-carbon industrial
development.
Co-locating industrial processes can utilize
waste heat and make carbon capture and
storage economic, reducing or eliminating
GHG emissions from large-scale industrial
processes. Decarbonizing Montana’s
industrial cluster in Billings will reduce GHG
emissions, protect the state’s economy
from potential carbon regulations, and
attract new investment and industry that see
decarbonization as a market, financial, and
regulatory benefit.

support new clusters not identified by the Council’s
work to date.
The following recommendations include steps the
state can take to assess the viability of regional
innovation clusters and to build capacity to
coordinate innovation initiatives across Montana.
The recommendations draw on lessons learned
from existing industry clusters in Montana and from
existing work and capacity in state agencies and
the university system to coordinate and advance
research and business development in innovation
sectors. Additionally, some aspects of the innovation
landscape are influenced by policy, particularly
the innovation environment and the culture. The state
should investigate best practices in jurisdictions with
strong innovation landscapes to develop policies
that: a) create competitive business and regulatory
environments; b) foster effective fiscal incentives;
and c) provide financial and infrastructure incentives
to promote business growth. The design of the
policy environment can support innovation in market
formation (for example, energy balancing markets).
Strategies should focus on actions the state can
take to create, coordinate, and support innovation
initiatives, including roundtables organized around
new partnerships, collecting and sharing information,
and prioritizing research and public investments.

The Council acknowledges that these
recommended innovation initiatives will not all lead
to successful, sustained industry clusters. On the
other hand, several steps can be taken to support
the growth, development, and success of nascent
clusters, whether existing or formative. Any new
policy direction related to innovation clusters must
also be flexible and responsive to identify and
60 https://nararenewables.org/

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 64



CASE STUDY

What’s in a Cluster?
Montana’s Photonics Industry

E

arly in the Montana Climate
Solutions Council’s deliberations,
the Council had the opportunity to
hear from Trent Berg, president of
the Montana Photonics Industry
Alliance, co-founder of Blackmore
Sensors and Analytics (now Aurora
Innovations), and program director
of Photonics and Laser Technology
at Gallatin College. Berg was active
from the beginning during the
emergence and ultimate success
of the photonics industry cluster in
the Gallatin Valley. Photonics is the
science and technology of generating,
detecting, and controlling light.
Photonics technology is key to many
of the things we rely on every day
including smartphones, DVD players,
cameras, medical instruments, and
lighting products. Photonics will
power many of the most important
innovations of the 21st century,
including applications in energy,
precision agriculture, manufacturing,
and transportation that will drive the
transformation required to achieve
climate solutions.
From modest beginnings in the 1980s,
Montana’s photonics cluster is now
comprised of over 30 organizations,
one of the highest per capita
concentration of optics and photonics
companies and research institutions
in the United States. The cluster
supports high-wage jobs in private
and university research, development,
and commercialization. What fueled
that success and how can be it be
replicated?
Berg credits much of the success
to Montana’s strong fundamentals:
world-class outdoor amenities, an
academic infrastructure that fosters
original applied research, and a focus
on attracting and developing a skilled

and innovative workforce. Once
started, the companies and university
partners nurtured and grew the
material capacity (labs, equipment,
etc.), workforce, specialized suppliers,
revenue and research funding, and
a cluster’s leadership characteristic
that reinforces and accelerates
development of ideas, products,
and profits.
Around the world, countries like the
United Kingdom are beginning to
study and apply the logic and power
of cluster economic development
strategies to the challenges of
confronting global climate change.
With backing from the UK Industrial
Strategy Challenge Fund, the effort
aims to recruit global investment and
demand for low-carbon products
and technologies by harnessing the
power of markets, the public sector,
universities, and local communities.
The Fund aims to have at least
one cluster with the low-carbon
infrastructure needed to support

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 65

industrial decarbonization in place
by 2030, and at least one cluster that
has achieved net-zero GHG emissions
by 2040.
The Montana Climate Solutions
Council recommends launching
a Montana regional innovation
cluster initiative. The initiative would
support applied research and
business innovation partnerships to
create hubs for economic growth in
support of the transition to a net-zero
economy. The Council recognizes the
importance of sparking innovation
through collaboration and creating
intersections where companies
and university partners can share
ideas and research developments.
Additionally, the initiative would
leverage existing research and
business innovation with attention
and focus on leadership and
workforce development efforts that
train Montana’s workers for emerging
job opportunities tied to new growth.



R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S
Section I. Moving Montana’s Economy to Net Greenhouse Gas Neutrality
Through Innovation and Advanced Manufacturing

3A:

 ontana, Led by the Montana Science and Technology Committee and
M
the Office of the Commissioner of Higher Education, Should Identify Key
Opportunities for Technology-Led Economic Development, Prioritizing
Areas that Assist with Climate Change Transitions and Mitigation
3A: KE Y STR ATEGIES

3B:

61

•

Revise and update Montana’s Science & Technology Plan61 with a focus on
industry linkage opportunities and opportunities to foster and sustain competitive
industry/university collaborations in basic and applied research.

•

Within identified areas of strength, charge and fund key networking organizations
(e.g., industry organizations, university research centers, state agencies) with
regularly convening key university/industry/society players.

•

Within the Montana University System, institute seed-granting opportunities and
research capacity building efforts to grow the state’s university expertise and
competitiveness in each identified area of strength

 he Montana Legislature Should Invest in Initiatives that Build University/
T
Industry/Society Innovation Linkages to Address Key Montana Challenges,
Including Climate Change

https://www.mus.edu/research/MUS_STPlan_2015.pdf

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 66



3B: KE Y STR ATEGIES

3C:

•

Institute a state-funded grant program to further develop research capabilities
and user facilities at Montana’s public universities, with a goal of leveraging these
facilities to grow innovative Montana-based technology development companies
and clusters.

•

Develop a recruitment and retention funding pool for strategic growth in research
capabilities in key areas of state need.

•

Appropriate further rounds of funding for the Montana Research and Economic
Development Initiative62 to encourage applied research addressing Montana
needs.

•

Set aside a match-funding pool to increase Montana researcher’s competitiveness when pursuing federal grant dollars and capitalize on existing federal and state
tax incentives and work to create new incentives where deemed appropriate.

•

Develop, identify, and appropriately fund a research center or institute charged
with networking and organizing university research and university/industry
linkages statewide in the area of energy innovation. Key areas of focus based on
Montana’s industry and existing research expertise may include biofuels, energy
storage, transportation, grid electrification, and energy-related agricultural
practices.

•

Utilize and bolster existing apprenticeship programs at state agencies in
Montana to transition and prepare Montana’s workforce for innovation sectors.

 ork to Establish Multiple Regional Innovation Clusters in Montana
W
Focused on Decarbonization of Montana’s Industries by 2035
3C: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

62

Resource and convene statewide innovation initiatives with university, state
agency, private industry, labor, finance, and non-profit sector leaders to assess
the viability of innovation clusters. These initiatives should begin with regional
roundtables focused on assessing the viability of six emerging regional innovation
clusters listed below. Other regional clusters may well emerge as the roundtables
convene. However, the six listed have been identified through the work of this
Council as areas where, to some extent, private and public research, development,
and commercialization of innovations that will help decarbonize Montana’s
industries is already occurring or has good potential for success:

https://www.mus.edu/research/research_initiative.html

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 67



•

•

Northwest Montana Mass Timber and Wood Products Manufacturing
Innovation Cluster

•

Southwest Montana Renewable Hydrogen and Advanced Energy Storage
Innovation Cluster

•

Eastern Montana Net-Zero Manufacturing Innovation Cluster

•

Northern Plains Precision Agricultural and Soil Carbon Innovation Cluster

•

Central Montana Renewable Energy Innovation Cluster

•

Southwest Montana Biofuels Innovation Cluster

Over time, identify a cross-sector team, emerging either directly from government
or as a public/private partnership or non-profit, charged with and resourced to
support nascent cluster initiatives.

Section II. Building Resilience to Prepare Montana’s Communities, Economy,
and Workers for Transitions

Economic transitions often occur without consistent or coherent policy to address displaced
workers and community impacts. Unions secured wages, benefits, workplace safety, and
jobs security that transformed employment in the manufacturing sector into respected
and desired jobs. As these jobs have declined, no significant replacement for similar skills
has emerged and other sectors have lacked the same wages, benefits, or security.
An industrial transition required to meet ambitious decarbonization goals will require
innovation and investment in technology and infrastructure. These investments
must be matched with clear and consistent support for the role of unions, fossil
fuel communities, disadvantaged communities, tribal communities, and displaced
workers in shaping industrial policy and spending. That includes discussions
around workforce training and apprenticeship, wages and benefits, and community
impacts related to the closure and replacement of energy infrastructure.

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 68



The Council calls for engagement with labor, the fossil fuel industry, state agencies,
and the university system to ensure a just transition for communities and workers.
The workforce recommendations here are aligned with recommendations related to
innovation, commercialization, and deployment of technologies that are required to
meet decarbonization goals, recommendations to network and build capacity to prepare
Montana’s communities for climate and economic transitions, and recommendations
to align fiscal policy with economic development and transition strategies.

3D:

 repare Montana’s Workforce for Opportunities in a Changing Economy
P
and in Sectors Important to Climate Mitigation and Adaptation
Montana’s climate, transition, and industrial policies should benefit the state’s workforce and
ensure justice for displaced workers, including through the key strategies listed below.

3D: KE Y STR ATEGIES
•

 ocus on apprenticeship. Apprenticeship ensures that training is targeted to
F
actual needs and opportunities. It reduces risk by keeping existing workers in
the workforce instead of removing them for months or years of education and
re-training. Montana should expand existing, approved apprenticeship programs
registered with the Montana Department of Labor and Industry and develop
and provide new registered apprenticeship programs, if required, specifically
to transition fossil fuel extraction, transmission, and power generation workers
to renewable energy infrastructure and generation sectors.

•

 stablish career training centers in public school systems that deliver basic
E
and advanced skills-based training to middle and high school students throughout
the state. These can be coordinated with proposed innovation initiatives and
networked with community and tribal colleges. (For example, Billings Career
Center in the Eastern Montana Net-Zero Manufacturing Innovation Cluster).

•

 ecure prevailing wages in industrial, energy, transportation, and building
S
sectors, including renewable energy, efficiency, and infrastructure required to
meet decarbonization goals.

•

Allow for neutrality agreements for the purpose of collective bargaining for any
new major generation facility or site.

•

 he state should develop funding and regulatory proposals to advance
T
these efforts.

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 69



3E:

Reform Montana Fiscal Policy to Address Economic Transitions
Montana’s economy is transitioning away from natural resource extraction sectors and
toward services. The economic transition will have fiscal implications because of the state’s
existing tax structure that taxes natural resource sectors more highly than other economic
activities (such as health care, the fastest-growing employment sector in the state).63 The
state also faces rising costs associated with extreme flood, drought, and wildfire events
as well as healthcare impacts on an aging population, particularly in rural areas.
Recommendations to accelerate decarbonization of Montana’s electric power sector and
the state’s economy will have fiscal implications. The exact revenue impact is unknown,
but the Council discussed the economic, workforce, and fiscal implications of proposed
recommendations. The Council acknowledges the broader structural transition in revenues
already under way in response to changing market, economic, and policy conditions affecting
our region and further recognizes the key challenges that energy transitions pose for Montana
and neighboring states in light of current tax structures.

3E: KE Y STR ATEGIES
Currently, two legislative interim committees in the Montana legislature are studying
and making recommendations for possible reforms to the state’s tax structure. These
reforms should include revenue and budget policies that ensure local governments
have fiscal tools and revenue to continue to provide services and infrastructure as
the economy transitions. For example, reforms should consider greater autonomy for
local governments to manage volatile revenue and save for transition and adaptation
needs; dedicated state and local resources to bolster and sustain adaptation and
transition planning over time; and new revenue policies that broaden the tax base,
address inequities among communities and economic sectors, and generate more
sustainable and predictable revenue as the economy continues to restructure and grow.
The Council makes no specific fiscal policy recommendations. The Council
recognizes the need to address revenue impacts and spending needs associated with
decarbonization. Better alignment between Council recommendations and the interim
committees could help the state understand the types of revenue impacts that may
occur and to develop evidence-based solutions using actual revenue and budget data.

63

https://leg.mt.gov/content/Committees/Interim/2017-2018/Revenue-and-Transportation/Taxes-Changing-Economy/Meetings/Mar-2018/Exhibits/
MontanaEconomyandTaxRevenue.pdf

A C C E LE R AT I N G DECARBO NI ZATI O N AND I NNOVATION – 70



LIST OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
Montana Climate Solutions Council
Tom Armstrong, Bozeman.
Armstrong is president of the
Madison River Group.
Scott Bischke, Bozeman.
Bischke is a consulting
chemical and environmental
engineer and co-principal for
MountainWorks Software, Inc.
Bill Bryan, Bozeman. Bryan is
the co-founder of One Montana.
Amy Cilimburg, Missoula.
Cilimburg is the executive
director of Climate Smart
Missoula.
Al Ekblad, Helena. Ekblad is
the executive secretary of the
Montana AFL-CIO.
Sally Ericsson, Whitefish.
Ericsson is a strategic
consultant for non-profit
organizations and foundations.
Kathy Hadley, Deer Lodge.
Hadley is the former executive
director of the National Center
for Appropriate Technology.
Mark Haggerty, Bozeman.
Haggerty is a research director
at Headwaters Economics.
David Hoffman, Helena.
Hoffman is the director
of government affairs for
NorthWestern Energy.
Kelsey Jencso, Missoula.
Jencso is the state climatologist
for the Montana Climate Office
at the University of Montana.
Chuck Magraw, Helena.
Magraw is with the Natural
Resources Defense Council.

LI S T O F C O U N C I L MEMBERS – 71

Jayne Morrow, Chinook.
Morrow is the assistant vice
president of research and
economic development at
Montana State University.
Bruce Maxwell, Bozeman.
Maxwell is the co-director
of the Montana Institute on
Ecosystems and professor of
agroecology and applied plant
ecology at Montana State
University.

Joe Thiel, Helena. Thiel is the
director of academic policy
and research for the Montana
University System.
Steve Thompson, Butte.
Thompson is the executive
director of the National Center
for Appropriate Technology.
Paul Tuss, Havre. Tuss is the
executive director of the Bear
Paw Development Corporation.

Todd O’Hair, Helena. O’Hair
is the president and CEO
of the Montana Chamber of
Commerce.

Andrew Valainis, Missoula.
Valainis is the executive director
of Montana Renewable Energy
Association.

Alan Olson, Helena. Olson
is the executive director
of the Montana Petroleum
Association.

Gerald Wagner, Browning.
Wagner is the director of the
Blackfeet Environmental Office
for the Blackfeet Nation.

Caitlin Piserchia, Missoula.
Piserchia is a climate organizer
who works for the Montana
chapter of the Sierra Club.

Charlene Waters Alden, Lame
Deer. Alden is the director of
the Environmental Protection
Department for the Northern
Cheyenne Nation.

Diego Rivas, Helena. Rivas is
senior policy associate for the
NW Energy Coalition.
Eric Somerfeld, Power.
Somerfeld is a family farmer.
Lee Spangler, Bozeman.
Spangler is the director of the
Big Sky Carbon Sequestration
Partnership at the Montana
State University.
Tracy Stone-Manning,
Missoula. Stone-Manning
is associate vice president of
public lands at the National
Wildlife Federation.

Cathy Whitlock, Bozeman.
Whitlock is a regents professor
in earth sciences and fellow
of the Montana Institute on
Ecosystems at Montana State
University.
Gary Wiens, Great Falls.
Wiens is the CEO of the
Montana Electric Cooperatives’
Association.
Laura Wood-Peterson,
Billings. Wood-Peterson is the
senior director of government
affairs for Indio Agriculture.



ExOfficio Members
Jennifer Anders, Anaconda.
Qualification: Northwest Power
Planning Council representative
and ex-officio member.
Commissioner Galen
Hollenbaugh, Helena.
Qualification: Director of the
Department of Labor and
Industry or designee and
ex-officio member.
Patrick Holmes*, Helena.
Qualification: Governor’s Office
representative and ex-officio.
Director John Lewis, Helena.
Qualification: Director of the
Department of Administration
or designee and ex-officio
member.

* denotes voting members

Director Shaun McGrath*,
Helena. Qualification:
Director of the Department
of Environmental Quality
or designee and ex-officio
member.

Director Mike Tooley, Helena.
Qualification: Director of the
Department of Transportation or
designee and ex-officio member
and is an addition to this new
Council.

General Matthew Quinn,
Fort Harrison. Qualification:
Director of the Department of
Military Affairs or designee and
ex-officio member.

Director John Tubbs*,
Helena. Qualification: Director
of the Department of Natural
Resources and Conservation
or designee and ex-officio
member.

Amy Barnes*, Helena.
Qualification: Representative of
the director of the Department
of Commerce and ex-officio
member.

Director Martha Williams,
Helena. Qualification: Director
of the Department of Fish,
Wildlife and Parks or designee
and ex-officio member.

Director Ben Thomas,
Helena. Qualification: Director
of the Department of Agriculture
or designee and ex-officio
member.

Photo Credits
Cover

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 38

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 3

Montana Governor’s Office

p. 42

Montana Department of Environmental Quality

p. 4

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 46

Montana Department of Environmental Quality

p. 9

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 52

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 10

Chris Boyer, Kestrel Aerial

p. 55

Montana Department of Environmental Quality

p. 11

Rachel Leathe, Bozeman Daily Chronicle

p. 59

William Campbell

p. 12

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 60

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 21

Jordan Solar

p. 65

Bridger Photonics

p. 24

Montana Department of Environmental Quality

p. 66

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 27

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 68

Montana Department of Commerce

p. 28

Montana Department of Commerce

Wave Textures by rawpixel.com / Freepik

p. 36

Mountain Line

A R E P O R T BY T H E M O N TA N A C L I M AT E S O L U T I O N S C O U N C I L
h t t p s : //d e q .m t .g ov/clima t e /

