New Hampshire Climate Change Policy Task Force

The New Hampshire Climate Action Plan
A Plan for New Hampshire’s Energy, Environmental
and Economic Development Future

Prepared by NH Department of Environmental Services
March 2009





ARD-09-1

The New Hampshire Climate Action Plan
A Plan for New Hampshire’s Energy, Environmental
and Economic Development Future

March 2009

The Honorable John Lynch
Governor

Prepared by the
New Hampshire Climate Change Policy Task Force
Thomas S. Burack, Chair
Commissioner
N.H. Department of Environmental Services



ii - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



New Hampshire Climate Change Policy Task Force
Chair
Thomas Burack
Members
Will Abbott
Roland Aube
Richard Barry
Charles Bass
Clifton Below
Daryl Burtnett
William J. Cahill, Jr.
Patricia Carrier
Alice Chamberlin
Jameson French
Martha Fuller Clark
George Gantz
Suzanne Harvey
Meredith Hatfield
Amy Ignatius
William Janelle
John Kanter
Jim Kennedy
Don Kent
Rhett Lamb
Al Lelis
Gary Long
Dr. Jose Montero
Jim O’Brien
Sheila Roberge
William Sherry
Dr. Cameron Wake
David Withers

Commissioner, N.H. Department of Environmental Services

Vice-President, Policy and Land Management, Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests
MRO Manager, Isaacson Steel
Representative (R ), New Hampshire House of Representatives
Former U.S. Congressman
Commissioner, Public Utilities Commission
State Director, The Nature Conservancy
Vice-President and Group Counsel, Hanover Insurance Group
Facilities/Environmental Manager, New Hampshire Ball Bearings Inc.
Executive Director, Two Countries, One Forest
President and CEO, Northland Forest Products
Senator (D), New Hampshire Senate
Senior Vice President, Unitil
Representative (D), New Hampshire House of Representatives
Consumer Advocate, Office of the Consumer Advocate
Director, N.H. Office of Energy and Planning
Asst. Director of Project Development, Department of Transportation
Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program Coordinator, N.H. Fish
and Game Department
Vice-President, New Hampshire Wildlife Federation
Administrator, Natural Heritage Bureau, N.H. Department of Resources and Economic Development
Planning Director, City Of Keene
Division Manger for Safety and Environment, Osram Sylvania
President, Public Service of New Hampshire
Director, Division of Public Health Services, N.H. Department of Health
and Human Services
Executive Director, Granite State Conservation Voters
Senator (R ), New Hampshire Senate
Director - US Employee Volunteerism, National Grid
Research Associate Professor, University of New Hampshire
Property - Casualty Actuary, Department of Insurance

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - iii



Acknowledgments
The New Hampshire Climate Change Policy Task Force would like to acknowledge the following individuals and organizations
who contributed to the completion of the development and publication of the 2009 New Hampshire Climate Action Plan: A
Plan for New Hampshire’s Energy, Environmental and Economic Development Future:
Joanne Morin and Chris Skoglund of the NH Department of Environmental Services, who coordinated and supervised the
activities associated with the Task Force process on behalf of NHDES, including overseeing the writing and production of this
Climate Action Plan.
Dr. Cameron Wake and Dr. Ross Gittell of Carbon Solutions New England and their team, including Matt Frades and Matt
Magnusson, who provided extraordinary dedication, energy and expertise in their analysis of CO2 reductions, costs of implementation and economic benefits associated with the potential actions considered by the Task Force.
The New Hampshire Charitable Foundation, which provided the financial support for the work of Carbon Solutions New
England as well as support for many of the meetings and conference calls, and also provided leadership in implementation
planning
Special thanks go to the following NHDES employees who served, in addition to their normal job assignments, as working
group facilitators and coordinators, providing significant contributions to organizing and managing over 125 volunteers, evaluating potential actions in collaboration with the working groups, assisting with public meetings, providing technical resources
during Task Force deliberations, and preparing various aspects of the final report:
Michele Andy
Kathy Brockett
Ted Diers
Sherry Godlewski

Deana Aulisio
Sharon Crane
Joe Fontaine
Pat North

Karen Rantamaki
Carolyn Russell
Sharon Yergeau
Tom Niejadlik

Becky Ohler
Charlie Martone
Jim Martin
Pat Gruttemeyer

A special “thank you” goes to the following individuals and their organizations who supported this effort by providing the
use of their facilities for Task Force meetings:
Dr. Helen Giles-Gee, President, Keene State College

Rick Minard, Former President, New Hampshire Audubon

Gary Hirschberg, President and CEO, Stonyfield Farm
Dr. Sara Jayne Steen, President, Plymouth State University
Mary Ann List, Director, Portsmouth Public Library
The New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission
George Fryburg, Director, Program and Services, Granite State Distance Learning Network
The Task Force would also like to recognize the approximately 125 individuals who participated in the Task Force’s sectorbased working groups. These individuals offered their valuable time to participate in hundreds of hours of meetings, phone
calls, and technical discussions. Their dedication produced over 100 potential action reports which the Task Force used to
develop its recommendations. All of their work is included in the report appendices and will continue to serve as a valuable
resource for implementing the Task Force recommendations as well as for considering new actions in the future. For a complete listing of these individuals by working group, see Appendix 2.
Finally, the Task Force would like to thank all the members of the public, including the University of New Hampshire students
of Natural Resources 444H, who participated in this process by attending Task Force meetings, public listening sessions, and
providing their comments.
iv - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



Table of Contents
Executive Summary. ................................................................................................................................................... 1
Overview: A Call to Action............................................................................................................................. 3
Chapter 1: Introduction............................................................................................................................... 10
Chapter 2: Recommendations..................................................................................................................... 19
Chapter 3: Adapting to Change................................................................................................................... 27
Chapter 4: Economic Opportunities............................................................................................................ 33
Chapter 5: Summary of Actions................................................................................................................... 38
Chapter 6: Moving the Plan Forward.......................................................................................................... 66
Climate Action Plan Glossary....................................................................................................................... 69
Endnotes...................................................................................................................................................... 72
Appendices.................................................................................................................................................. 75
Appendix 1: Climate Science
Appendix 2: Plan Development Process
Appendix 3: Public Comments
Appendix 4: Recommended Actions
Appendix 4.1: Maximize Energy Efficiency in Buildings
Appendix 4.2: Increase Renewable and Low-CO2-Emitting Sources of Energy in a
	   Long-Term Sustainable Manner
Appendix 4.3: Support Regional and National Actions to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Appendix 4.4: Reduce Vehicle Emissions through State Actions
Appendix 4.5: Encourage Appropriate Land Use Patterns That Reduce Vehicle-Miles Traveled
Appendix 4.6: Reduce Vehicle-Miles Traveled through an Integrated Multi-Modal
	   Transportation System
Appendix 4.7: Protect Natural Resources (Land, Water and Wildlife) to Maintain the
	   Amount of Carbon Fixed and Sequestered
Appendix 4.8: Lead by Example in Government Operations
Appendix 4.9: Plan for How to Address Existing and Potential Climate Change Impacts
Appendix 4.10: Develop an Integrated Education, Outreach, and Workforce Training Program.
Appendix 5: Actions for Future Consideration
Appendix 6: CSNE – Action Analysis Tables
Appendix 7: CSNE – Approach and Assumption
Appendix 8: CSNE – The Wood Biomass Wedge in New Hampshire

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - v



vi - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



Executive Summary
The Energy and Climate Challenge
Over the course of a year, through a process that engaged
over 125 stakeholders and received input from over 200
citizens, the 29 members of Governor John Lynch’s Climate
Change Policy Task Force developed this Climate Action Plan
which is aimed at achieving the greatest feasible reductions
in greenhouse gas emissions while also providing the greatest
possible long-term economic benefits to the citizens of New
Hampshire. The most significant reductions in both emissions
and costs will come from substantially increasing energy efficiency in all sectors of our economy, continuing to increase
sources of renewable energy, and designing our communities
to reduce our reliance on automobiles for transportation.
In essence, a response to climate change and our economic
future are inextricably tied to how we produce our energy
and how much energy we use. Future economic growth in
New Hampshire as well as mitigation of, and adaptation to,
a changing climate will depend on how quickly we transition
to a new way of living that is based on a far more diversified
energy mix, more efficient use of energy, and development
of our communities in ways that strengthen neighborhoods
and urban centers, preserve rural areas, and retain New
Hampshire’s quality of life.

The Opportunity
New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan presents an opportunity to:
• Spur economic growth through investment in our own
state’s economy of monies currently spent on energy
imports.
• Create jobs and economic growth through development
of in-state sources of energy from renewable and lowemitting resources, and green technology development

and deployment by New Hampshire businesses.
• Avoid the significant costs of responding to a changing
climate on the state’s infrastructure, economy, and the
health of our citizens.

The Importance of Our Forests
Preserving our working forests and avoiding conversion of
our forest lands to other purposes will be critical to the success of New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan. New Hampshire
is currently 84 percent forested, and the forest products
industry has been and will continue to be a key component
of our state’s economy. In addition, our tourism and outdoor
recreation economies are heavily dependent on the health of
our forests. Sustainably managed forests in New Hampshire
provide a broad range of benefits, including: the ability to
absorb and store large amounts of carbon; renewable supply
of wood for heating, lumber, and a variety of forest products;
and recreational opportunities.

Task Force Recommendations
The Task Force recommends that New Hampshire strive to
achieve a long-term reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of
80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. The goal of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions by 80 percent by 2050 has been adopted by numerous states, cities and organizations1. This goal
is based on the reductions that climate scientists believe to be
necessary to stabilize greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at
or below 450 parts per million CO2. It has been projected that
stabilizing the concentrations of greenhouse gases at this level
will avoid the most severe and catastrophic potential impacts
of climate change2.
In order to move toward this long-term goal and provide the
greatest economic opportunity to the state of New Hampshire,
the Task Force recommends 67 actions to:
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 1



• Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from buildings, electric
generation, and transportation.
• Protect our natural resources to maintain the amount of
carbon sequestered.
• Support regional and national initiatives to reduce greenhouse gases.
• Develop an integrated education, outreach and workforce
training program.
• Adapt to existing and potential climate change impacts.
Based on the greenhouse gas emission reductions projected
for the recommended actions, the Task Force has chosen
a mid-term goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 20
percent below 1990 levels by 2025. All of the recommended
actions can be implemented immediately or through a phasedin approach that can expand implementation as technology
evolves and economic means become available. The sooner
reductions are accomplished, the greater the economic benefit; actions can either begin more quickly to provide a fairly
steady rate of greenhouse gas emission reductions or they
could be delayed, thus requiring larger reductions at a later
time. Delays in achieving reductions would result in increased
implementation costs, thus reducing their economic benefit
and making it more difficult to reach the long-term goal.
To achieve the goals in the Plan, the Task Force recommends the formation of a public/private partnership – the

2 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

New Hampshire Energy and Climate Collaborative – to oversee
and guide early implementation of the NH Climate Action Plan.
Effectively, the Collaborative will be “the keeper of the Plan.”
The primary purpose of the Collaborative will be to track and
facilitate implementation of the Plan’s recommendations, and
to report to the Governor, Legislature, and general public on
progress toward achieving the desired outcomes.
New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan will benefit the
economy, increase state and regional energy security, and
improve environmental quality. By implementing the actions
recommended by the Task Force, New Hampshire will achieve
substantial emission reductions beginning immediately, using
cost-effective, available technology. The greatest reductions
would come from improvements in the building sector, followed by the transportation and the electric generation
sectors. These emission reductions are associated with significant reductions in energy consumption. The total impact
of the recommended actions will be sufficient to place New
Hampshire on a track to achieve substantial reductions in the
mid-term and to be well placed to achieve the more aggressive reductions over the long-term. Additional measures will
be needed in the long-term to achieve the 80 percent below
1990 levels reduction target. Such measures are likely to be
based on the widespread adoption of new and advanced
technologies.



Overview: A Call to Action

The Energy and Climate Challenge

O

ver the course of a year, through a process that engaged over 125 stakeholders and received input from
over 200 citizens, the 29 members of Governor John
Lynch’s Climate Change Policy Task Force developed this Climate Action Plan. It is aimed at achieving the greatest feasible
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions while also providing
the greatest possible long-term economic benefits to the
citizens of New Hampshire. The most significant reductions in
both emissions and costs will come from substantially increasing energy efficiency in all sectors of our economy, continuing
to increase sources of renewable energy, and designing our
communities to reduce our reliance on automobiles for transportation. Our response to climate change and our economic
future are inextricably linked and should focus on how we
produce our energy and how much energy we use. Future
economic growth in New Hampshire as well as mitigation
of and adaptation to a changing climate will depend on how
quickly we transition to a new way of living that’s based on a

far more diversified energy mix, more efficient use of energy
and development of our communities in ways that strengthen
neighborhoods and urban centers, preserve rural areas, and
retain New Hampshire’s quality of life.
There is a significant economic development potential for
New Hampshire and our nation if we recognize the climate
change challenge as an opportunity and approach it with resourcefulness, ingenuity, inventiveness and an entrepreneurial
spirit. Energy, environment, and economic development are
interrelated, just as our ecological systems consist of many
interrelated and interdependent elements. Well-crafted solutions to these issues should be interrelated and will create
benefits in all of these arenas, across the state and for all of
our citizens.
The potential to reduce our energy consumption with existing technologies is significant. For example, every day New
Hampshire citizens travel a total of 43 million miles by car, truck
and bus, resulting in the consumption of 700 million gallons of
gas and 200 million gallons of diesel fuel annually, and leading
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 3



to approximately 15.7 billion miles of wear on the state’s roads
and bridges per year. To a large extent, the billions of dollars
spent each year on transportation fuel and road maintenance
doesn’t stay here in New Hampshire’s economy, but instead
goes out of the state or out of the country. Similarly, the 11
million megawatt hours of electricity, which New Hampshire
citizens consume to light, heat, cool and operate our homes,
offices, factories and schools each year, include significant
costs for fuels that are imported from out of the state or out
of the country.

New England’s Changing Climate
The greenhouse gas emissions that result from the generation of energy are also contributing to New England’s
changing climate. These changes include: warmer winters,
reduced snowfall and snow-on-ground days, earlier spring
runoff, sea-level rise, increased total rainfall, and more severe
weather events that result in increased risk of flooding1,2,3.
These changes in New England’s climate are projected to
increase in severity in the future and, if left unchecked, have
the potential to significantly change our economy and way of
life by the end of this century by:
• Affecting the viability of most ski areas (a $650 million
annual industry in New Hampshire) and the snowmobiling
economy (a $3 billion annual industry in the Northeast
region) by almost eliminating these industries in the
southern areas and reducing their operations to fewer
than 20 days per year in the northern part of the state
by end of the century.
• Increasing the frequency and severity of heavy, damaging
precipitation events and the associated major economic
impacts of cleanup, repair, and lost productivity and
economic activity.
• Increasing the frequency of short-term (i.e., one to three
month) summer droughts from every two to three years
to annually, resulting in increased water costs, and agricultural and forestry stress.
• Increasing coastal flooding, erosion, and property damage
due to rising sea levels.
• Significantly increasing human health impacts due to
extreme heat (e.g., more than 20 days per year projected
over 100°F), increased air pollution, and vector borne
disease.
• Changing the quality and productivity of the forestry
4 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

and agricultural sectors, both of which are significant
contributors to the state’s economy and quality of life.

The Opportunity
New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan presents an opportunity to:
• Spur economic growth through investment in our state’s
economy of monies currently spent on energy imports.
• Create jobs and economic growth through development
of in-state sources of energy from renewable and lowemitting resources, and green technology development
and deployment by New Hampshire businesses.
• Avoid the significant costs of responding to a changing
climate to the state’s infrastructure, economy, and the
health of our citizens.
• Preserve the unique quality of life that makes New
Hampshire an outstanding place to live, work, and raise
a family.
New Hampshire’s economic well-being has long been
heavily dependent on tourism businesses related to summer
and winter outdoor recreation in the natural beauty of our
mountains, lakes, rivers and seacoast region. These natural
resources also attract and retain a skilled workforce. It has
also been recognized for many years that economic vitality and
environmental protection are inextricably linked, and there is
no reason to believe that addressing climate change should be
any different. In fact, there is a significant body of literature
to support the economic benefits of a “green economy4.”
President Obama has stated that, “there is no better potential
driver that pervades all aspects of our economy than a new
energy economy5.”
One area of the “green economy” upon which New Hampshire has already concentrated is the development of in-state
renewable sources of energy. In 2006, the state enacted a
renewable portfolio standard (RPS) that requires a substantial
portion of our electricity to come from renewable sources such
as hydro, wind, solar, or biomass. In addition, New Hampshire’s
participation in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (also
known as “Reggie” or RGGI) will provide further impetus for
investment in renewable energy sources. Of equal importance,
the sale of RGGI allowances for emissions of carbon dioxide
(CO2) from large power plants will also generate funds that will
be used to improve energy efficiency across all sectors of the
economy, including to help weatherize homes for low income



families. Economic studies performed by the University of New
Hampshire on both the RPS and RGGI programs demonstrated
that over time, these programs will create jobs and, through
increased fuel diversity and investment in energy efficiency,
will help to reduce electricity costs6, 7.
There is no compelling reason why New Hampshire could
not and should not take a lead in the important and growing
markets for such technologies as solar, photovoltaics, geothermal heating systems, components of electric powered vehicles, or wastewater treatment plants that actually generate
energy. In contrast to other countries like Denmark, which now
produces one third of the world’s terrestrial wind turbines, and
whose annual energy technology exports are over $10.5 billion
and growing, the United States is not a significant exporter of
wind technology. According to an opinion piece by Thomas
L. Friedman in the New York Times on August 8, 2008, there
have been 35 new wind turbine companies in China over the
past 18 months, but not a single one in the United States8. Due
to this national vacuum, New Hampshire has an opportunity
to take a leadership role in these new markets. Examples of
early renewable energy innovators in New Hampshire include
GT Solar and New England Wood Pellet. These industries
provide “green collar” jobs that pay well, require people who
have both blue collar and white collar skills and knowledge,
and are a great fit for the excellent pool of skilled workers in
New Hampshire.
Today, we already have a set of technologies and techniques that can save us money by reducing our energy use,
substantially cutting our greenhouse gas emissions, and creating new economic opportunities. In the future, our fuel mix
for electricity, transportation, heating and cooling will need
to be more diversified. It will also likely involve more small
power generators – what is being called “distributed generation” – and working with a more sophisticated electric grid
to more efficiently meet all of our electric needs. All of this
change will continuously create opportunities for new jobs
and economic growth.
If we design our new technologies and policies carefully, we
can use less energy and greatly reduce our environmental impact. Creative people are discovering ways to make old engines
work better, inventing new engines, creating greener fuels, and
discovering ways to build and run equipment that needs only
a fraction of the energy it uses today. While technology is not
the only answer to the twin challenges of climate change and
reducing energy use, it will be a powerful tool, and it will bring

to New Hampshire and the wider world substantial economic
growth and benefits.

Task Force Goals & Recommendations
The Task Force recommends that New Hampshire strive to
achieve a long-term reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
of 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050, consistent with the
New England Governors – Eastern Canadian Premiers resolutions and the consensus recommendations of the scientific
community. The goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 80
percent by 2050 has been adopted by numerous states, cities
and organizations9. This goal is based on the reductions that
climate scientists believe are necessary to stabilize greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere at or below 450 parts per million CO2.
It has been projected by scientists that stabilizing greenhouse
gas emissions at this level will avoid the most severe and catastrophic potential impacts of climate change10.
In order to move toward this long-term goal and provide the
greatest economic opportunity to the state of New Hampshire,
the Task Force recommended 67 actions to:
• Reduce emissions from buildings, electric generation, and
transportation.
• Protect our natural resources to maintain the amount of
carbon sequestered.
• Support regional and national initiatives to reduce greenhouse gases.
• Develop an integrated education, outreach and workforce
training program.
• Adapt to existing and potential climate change impacts.
Based on the greenhouse gas emission reductions projected
for the recommended actions, the Task Force has chosen a
mid-term goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 20 percent below 1990 by 2025. The 67 recommended actions are
organized into the following 10 overarching strategies:
1. Maximize energy efficiency in buildings.
2. Increase renewable and low-CO2-emitting sources of
energy in a long-term sustainable manner.
3. Support regional and national actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
4. Reduce vehicle emissions through state actions.
5. Encourage appropriate land use patterns that reduce
vehicle-miles traveled.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 5



6. Reduce vehicle-miles traveled through an integrated
multi-modal transportation system.
7. Protect natural resources (land, water and wildlife) to
maintain the amount of carbon fixed or sequestered.
8. Lead by example in government operations.
9. Plan for how to address existing and potential climate
change impacts.
10. Develop an integrated education, outreach and workforce training program.
The recommended 67 actions that support these 10 overarching strategies will enable New Hampshire to continue to
do its part to address climate change immediately as well as
position the state and its citizens to implement even greater
reductions in the future. These actions will benefit the economy, increase state and regional energy security, and improve
environmental quality.

The Benefits of Energy Efficiency
A significant focus of the Task Force recommendations
is to maximize energy efficiency across all sectors of New
Hampshire’s economy. For example, if we started promptly to

Public Input
Over 175 people attended five public listening sessions
and provided over 75 oral comments. Four major themes
were evident at all the public listening sessions:
•

The Task Force should be bold in its decision
making and recognize the magnitude of the
problem that needs to be addressed.

•

Significant improvements in energy efficiency in
every sector, but particularly buildings, should
be a major recommendation and commitment
of the state action plan.

•

Transportation issues, including reducing the
amount of gasoline we use, improving public
transportation, and encouraging consumers to
select more fuel efficient cars, are critical to any
plan addressing climate change.

•

Comprehensive education is needed to inform
the public of actions that can reduce energy
use, to train the energy services trades in new
technologies, and to develop appropriate curricula for our schools.

make a substantial portion of existing homes 60 percent more
efficient (i.e., reducing their energy usage by 60 percent), in
the year 2025 alone, we would achieve very substantial reductions in greenhouse gases emissions as well as significant
cost savings (nearly 3.5 million metric tons of CO2 equivalents
(MMTCO2e) at a net savings of nearly $1.6 billion annually) to
New Hampshire homeowners. Savings of a similar magnitude
could be expected in every year, and would likely increase over
time as energy becomes more costly.
The technology, equipment and expertise exist today to
substantially reduce the amount of energy required to heat
and cool the average existing home, as well as to make new
homes highly efficient from the outset. Studies have shown
that existing homes can be made anywhere from 15 to 60
percent more energy efficient by the use of improved air
sealing, insulation, and equipment. Typically, the initial capital
costs are rapidly offset by the savings in heating costs. While
many of these measures can be undertaken by the average
homeowner, there is also a significant and growing market
for building contractors and others to provide these services.
The current New Hampshire housing stock of approximately
500,000 homes provides a substantial energy efficiency
services market opportunity for heating and cooling, as well
as lighting and other electrical usage, that could result in
thousands of new long-term jobs in construction and related
trades over the next several years. New Hampshire has the
technology to do this today and we simply must act now.

The Importance of Our Forests
Preserving our working forests and avoiding conversion of
our forest lands to other purposes will be critical to the successful implementation of New Hampshire’s Climate Action
Plan. New Hampshire is currently 84 percent forested and
these forest lands possess the ability to absorb and store
large amounts of carbon, offsetting some of the CO2 emissions
resulting from human activities.
In addition to playing a role mitigating climate change,
this extensive natural resource provides a broad range of
benefits12 including:
• Renewable supply of wood for heating, lumber, and a
variety of forest products.
• Water cycle regulation.
• Groundwater recharge and water quality protection.
• Wildlife habitat.

6 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



Climate Science
The variation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere has
contributed to the earth’s changing climate throughout
its geologic history and helped create an environment
conducive to life. In fact, without pre-industrial levels of
greenhouse gases, the average temperature of the planet
would be some 50 degrees F lower. However, levels of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere are currently accumulating rapidly and these
levels are causing air and ocean temperatures to rise at a
substantial rate. In its fourth assessment report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) found the
evidence for the warming of the Earth to be “unequivocal.”13
The IPCC concluded that most of the observed temperature
increase since the middle of the 20th century is very likely
due to the observed increase in greenhouse gases and a
significant portion of these concentrations of carbon dioxide are from emissions of fossil fuels from human activities.

• Recreational opportunities.
New Hampshire’s forest lands, therefore, play a critical
role in maintaining the quality of life in our state. The forest
products industry has been and will continue to be a key component of our state’s economy. In addition, our tourism and
outdoor recreation economies are also heavily dependent on
the existence of healthy forests. In 2005, forest-based manufacturing and forest-related recreation and tourism in the state
contributed over $2.3 billion to the state economy13.
New Hampshire could be heating a significant percentage
of its homes and buildings with wood from New Hampshire
forests in the form of firewood, wood chips and wood pellets,
and still have wood available to generate some electricity
and to create durable wood products such as construction
materials and furniture. Today, the state benefits from having
wood pellet manufacturing plants, and more may be on the
way, along with related businesses such as those that manufacture wood pellet furnaces and stoves. In addition, some of
New Hampshire’s top scientists are also on the cutting edge
in developing technologies for deriving cellulosic ethanol fuel
for transportation from tree fiber and other plant materials.
These technologies are spurring investments, which are leading to new businesses and new jobs.
However, this homegrown natural resource is also at risk.
Currently, about 17,500 acres of New Hampshire’s forest are

Scientists also predict that the impacts of this warming
will cause significant changes to our climate affecting
our health, economy, and quality of life. Regardless of
the causes, the most viable solutions to climate change
involve reducing energy usage in ways that save money
for our citizens and businesses and create new economic
opportunities. Simply put, we must cut energy use and
develop more renewable energy sources. Doing so will
save us money and will have wide-ranging economic and
environmental benefits.
There is still much to learn about the mechanics of climate change, and work continues on improving climate
models. However, if we fail to take action, the consequences to human populations are potentially severe. If
we are wrong about the causes, but we take the actions
that have been recommended, man and the environment
will certainly be no worse off and arguably better off than
under a business-as-usual scenario.­­

being developed each year for such things as new housing,
shopping malls and businesses, and about 5,000 of those acres
are totally cleared of trees. By recognizing the value of our
forests (e.g., as a source of energy, as a source of ecosystem
services, as a wonderful playground), New Hampshire may be
able to slow, if not reverse, this trend, and ensure that we will
retain our healthy forests and the services they provide for the
long term. Sustainable management of this resource will not
only provide a CO2 emission benefit but also contribute to the
long-term economic health of the state’s rural economies.

Adapting to a Changing Climate
Climate change will have significant economic, health, and
natural resource impacts throughout New Hampshire in the
twenty-first century. Unfortunately, because of the levels
of greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere, the state’s
climate will continue to change even if immediate steps are
taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions significantly. This
is because greenhouse gases reside in the atmosphere for a
century or more, and interdependent physical, chemical and
biological processes in the oceans, atmosphere, and on land
respond slowly to changes in the atmospheric concentration
of greenhouse gas emissions. Therefore, in addition to actions
that reduce or mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, New Hampshire must also plan to adapt to changes that are occurring now
and more that are anticipated to occur in the future.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 7



The Process
Development of the New Hampshire Climate Action Plan
was initiated in December of 2007 following an executive order issued by Governor John H. Lynch. The order
established a Climate Change Policy Task Force, whose
29 members represent a diverse group of regulators,
scientists, business leaders, utility representatives, and
environmental leaders from around the state. In addition,
over 125 stakeholders participated on six technical and
policy Working Groups; Adaptation, Agriculture, Forestry
and Waste; Electric Generation and Usage; Government
Leadership and Action; Residential, Commercial and
Industrial; and Transportation and Land Use. Having enthusiastically embraced their charge, the working groups
submitted over 100 separate potential actions for the
Task Force’s consideration. These potential actions were
designed to address the causes as well as the impacts of
climate change through a range of mechanisms that take
advantage of specific opportunities in New Hampshire
to sequester and store carbon dioxide, reduce the fossil
fuel-based emissions associated with activities in the
state, and reduce New Hampshire’s vulnerability to a
changing climate. The Task Force also developed several
additional potential actions following its review of the
potential actions developed by the working groups. The
University of New Hampshire, through Carbon Solutions
New England (CSNE), analyzed the carbon reductions,
cost of implementation, and cost savings for most of the
potential mitigation actions. The Task Force selected 67
recommended actions that will:
• Reduce the cost of energy to our citizens, businesses
and government.
• Promote the growth of new jobs in energy services,
the building trades, and renewable energy.
• Encourage growth of our communities in a way that
retains our rural character and quality of life.

One of the most significant recommended actions of the
Task Force is to develop a climate change adaptation plan for
New Hampshire. The plan should address impacts affecting
the state’s infrastructure, agricultural and forestry sectors,
coastal areas, sensitive ecosystems, wildlife populations, and
human health.
The New Hampshire adaptation plan should address these
issues by including actions that:
8 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Increase natural resilience in species and ecosystems to
facilitate recovery from climate disturbances or adjust
to new patterns of climate variability and climate extremes.
• Facilitate responses to climate change that help human
communities and ecosystems to continue to exist under
new conditions.
• Build resistance to climate change by helping human
communities and ecosystems resist impacts and maintain
their valued resources.
In addition to recommending the development of a detailed
adaptation plan, the Task Force selected the following initial
actions, which are further described in Chapter 5, to begin
building the programs and infrastructure needed to address
these issues:
• Develop and distribute critical information on climate
change.
• Promote policies and actions to help populations most at
risk.
• Charge and empower public health officials to prepare
for climate change.
• Strengthen protection of New Hampshire’s natural systems.
• Increase resilience to extreme weather events.
• Strengthen the adaptability of New Hampshire’s economy
to climate change.

Report Overview
Chapter 1: Introduction – Provides an overview of climate
science, the existing and future potential impacts of climate
change on New Hampshire, the inventory of New Hampshire’s
greenhouse gas emissions, and projected emissions of greenhouse gases. It also provides a detailed description of the
process, including public input that the Task Force followed
to develop the Climate Action Plan.
Chapter 2: Task Force Recommendations – Describes the 10
overarching strategies identified by the Task Force and lists the
67 recommended actions selected to achieve these strategies.
It presents the calculations of the emission reductions that
will be achieved by the selected actions and discusses recommended mid-term and long-term emission reduction goals.
Chapter 3: Adapting to a Changing Climate – Describes the
estimated risks from an already changing climate and the ac-



tions needed to plan for unavoidable impacts from existing
concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Chapter 4: Economic Opportunities – Summarizes the economic costs and benefits, as quantified by Climate Solutions
New England, for the selected actions.
Chapter 5: Summary of Actions and Implementation – Provides brief summaries of, and the short-term to mid-term
implementation strategies for, each of the recommended
actions.
Chapter 6: Moving the Plan Forward – Describes the organizational structure, stakeholders, and potential implementing
parties of a new public/private partnership – the New Hampshire Energy and Climate Collaborative – which will oversee
and guide the implementation of the NH Climate Action Plan.
Effectively, the Collaborative will be “the keeper of the Plan.”

Early Action is Important
We have an opportunity now, if not an obligation, to move
as quickly as we can to address the challenge of climate change
in a manner that recognizes the role that energy production
and use plays in contributing to climate change. We can

derive substantial economic and environmental benefits by
developing and using homegrown, renewable energy sources
as well as technologies that save energy. In so doing, we will
create many new jobs and economic opportunities for New
Hampshire’s people and businesses. We can insulate ourselves
from the volatility of world energy prices and at the same time
enhance New Hampshire’s quality of life.
The Climate Change Policy Task Force has identified a suite
of actions that can be implemented immediately or through a
phased-in approach that can increase as technology evolves
and economic means become available. The sooner reductions
are accomplished, the greater the economic benefit. There are
a number of reduction pathways New Hampshire and other
states can take to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions 80
percent by 2050. Actions could either begin more quickly to
provide a fairly steady rate of greenhouse gas emission reductions or they could be delayed, thus requiring larger reductions at a later time. Delays in achieving reductions would
result in increased implementation costs, thus reducing the
economic benefits and making it more difficult to reach the
long-term goal.

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 9



Chapter 1: Introduction

I

n order for New Hampshire to address climate change, we
must use cleaner energy and we must use energy more
efficiently. Among other things, this means that we will
need to develop plentiful sources of renewable energy at the
same time that we must adapt to the changes in weather and
climate that are already underway due to anthropogenic (manmade) emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
Actions to curb the emission of heat trapping gases will, in
almost all instances, have co-benefits, including creating new
economic opportunities and jobs, reducing energy costs, and
protecting natural resources and man-made infrastructure.
New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan focuses on those actions that are expected to achieve the greatest reductions in
greenhouse gas emissions while providing the greatest net
medium- to long-term economic benefits. This Plan follows
a “no-regrets” approach based on the principle that what’s
good for the environment will also be good for the economy.
The recommended actions in this plan will:
• Promote growth of new jobs in energy services, the build10 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

ing trades and renewable energy development.
• Reduce the cost of energy to our citizens, businesses and
government.
• Encourage the growth of our communities in ways that
strengthen neighborhoods and urban centers, preserve
rural areas and retain New Hampshire’s quality of life.
Changes are already occurring to New England’s climate, including warmer winters, reduced snowfall and snow-on-ground
days, increased rainfall, rising sea level, and more severe
weather events that result in increased risk of flooding1. These
changes are projected to grow in severity and could include
other impacts such as a decrease in the abundance of sugar
maples, stresses on our fisheries, more widespread occurrence of insect-borne diseases, and an increase in heat-related
illnesses2. Although the extent and timing of these potential
impacts is uncertain, the costs of inaction could be large. The
Stern Review found that failure to take actions to avoid the
worst effects of climate change could depress global gross



domestic product (GDP) by as much as 20 percent below what
it otherwise might have been3*. On the other hand, avoiding
the most severe impacts of climate change would require the
investment of just 1 percent of global GDP per year4.
As a small state, New Hampshire is responsible for only
a minor fraction of emissions contributing to global climate
change. However, the actions identified in this plan will enable
New Hampshire to continue to do its part to reduce emissions
of greenhouse gases and prepare for a changing climate, especially when these actions are aggregated with the actions
of its neighbors in the New England5. These actions, in turn,
will benefit the economy, increase state and regional energy
security, and improve environmental quality. Taking action
now in the areas of energy efficiency, renewable energy, and
more efficient transportation will provide New Hampshire with
a competitive advantage as energy resources become even
more costly in the future.

Climate Change Science
The presence and variability of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere has contributed to changes in the Earth’s climate
throughout its geologic history and helped create an environment conducive to life. However, levels of CO2 and other socalled greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are accumulating
at rates greater than can be attributed to natural processes.
Consider that, for hundreds of thousands of years, atmospheric
CO2 levels varied between 180 and 280 parts per million (ppm).
Since the Industrial Revolution (a period of roughly 200 years),
the atmospheric CO2 concentration has risen steadily above
this range to more than 380 ppm and continues to rise today. There is an extensive body of evidence published in the
peer-reviewed scientific literature that has concluded that
a significant portion of the emissions that have contributed
to this rise in the atmospheric CO2 concentration originates
from the burning of fossil fuels; and this excess CO2 appears
to be causing air and ocean temperatures to rise. An extensive
analysis review of peer-reviewed scientific literature by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has clearly
shown that if global greenhouse gas emissions continue to
grow at current rates, there will be significant and far reaching
changes in our future climate that will profoundly affect our
* The Stern Review is a 700-page report released on October
30, 2006 by economist Lord Stern of Brentford for the British
government which discusses the effect of climate change and
global warming on the world economy.

health, economy, security, and quality of life6.
During the public listening sessions held regarding the
development of this action plan, four members of the public
questioned the interpretation of climate science as presented
above, especially the conclusions that average global temperatures were increasing and that increased temperatures were
caused by the increase in CO2 concentrations. The Task Force
relied on the peer-reviewed scientific literature, especially the
work conducted by the IPCC and other more regionally focused
assessments of climate change published in the peer-reviewed
scientific literature (e.g., Wake et al., 2008). Appendix 1 provides a list of all of IPCC reports and assessments. Appendix 1
also provides a set of short reports from the IPCC that answer
frequently asked questions regarding climate change science.
These questions were selected to address some of the more
common issues and questions that were raised at Task Force
meetings and public listening sessions over the course of
2008.
The scientific literature makes it clear that we must address
climate change now because of the potentially catastrophic
impacts that may occur if we delay action or fail to act. In addition, the actions that are necessary to combat climate change
also achieve environmental, economic, and societal benefits
that are worthwhile and important on their own. In fact, most
of the recommendations of the Task Force are grounded in this
type of “no regrets” policy.

Cost of Inaction
A failure to act to address climate change within New
Hampshire and globally is expected to result in increased impacts and costs to New Hampshire. The state was hard hit by
100-year flood events in 2005, 2006, and 2007. These floods
caused major damage in several communities and resulted in
the loss of life, as well as an enormous cost to affected citizens, municipalities and the state’s highway system†. Flooding
over this period caused an estimated $130 million in property
damage across the Northeast7. Although short-term weather
events cannot be directly attributed to climate change, scientists anticipate that the incidence and frequency of severe
weather events such as these, as well as the recent 2008 ice
† NHDOT reports state highway repairs from recent flooding
disasters of $28.1 million (Oct. 2005), $5.3 million (May 2006), $7
million (April 2007), $2.5 million - including $1 million for railway
repairs (Aug. 2008) (Source: DES staff phone call with Bill Boynton,
NHDOT – November 7, 2008).
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 11



storm, will increase with rising global temperatures. Failure
to reduce CO2 emissions will lead to climate change that will
result in more severe weather events and the costs related to
emergency response, storm clean-up, and reduced productivity
and economic activity will be significant.
The Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA)8, a recent analysis by more than 50 independent climate, ecosystem,
and health scientists and economists, examines the potential
impacts that may result from the unchecked rise in greenhouse
gas emissions and states that:
“If global warming emissions continue to grow
unabated, New Hampshire can expect dramatic
changes in climate over the course of this century,
with substantial impacts on vital aspects of the state’s
economy and character.”
On a regional scale, the 2007 Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA)9 concludes that if greenhouse gas emissions
continue to increase at current rates, by late in this century
New Hampshire’s climate will more closely resemble that of
North Carolina (Figure 1.1).
Such a change in New Hampshire’s climate presents numerous potential economic impacts:
Figure 1.1 - Temperature Effects of a Warming Climate

rainfall events and the associated major economic impacts
of cleanup, repair, and lost productivity and economic
activity.
• Increased frequency of short-term (one to three month)
summer droughts from every two to three years to annually, resulting in increased water costs, and impacting
New Hampshire’s agricultural and forestry industries.
• Increased coastal flooding, erosion, and private property
and public infrastructure damage from the estimated rise
in sea level.
• Increased human health impacts and costs due to extreme
heat (more than 20 days per year projected over 100°F),
increased air pollution, and prevalence of vector borne
diseases.
• Change in forest species and extinctions.
Such large-scale changes to our climate have the potential
to affect human health, well being, and the economy over the
short- and long-term. Economic effects could include impacts
to New Hampshire’s forestry and tourism industries as well as
lead to greater infrastructure costs for cities and towns and
state government. Higher summertime temperatures would
exacerbate air pollution and create
health concerns for all citizens, especially children, the elderly, and
those with respiratory ailments.

• Reduced viability of New Hampshire ski areas (a $650
million annual industry in New Hampshire) and other
winter-based recreational industries; the snowmobiling
economy ($3 billion annually in the Northeast region)
almost eliminated in the southern areas and reduced to
fewer than 20 days per year in the northern part of the
state.

Given the dependence of the
state’s economy on tourism and
the natural environment, impacts
to the state’s ecosystems and
landscapes are of particular concern and have implications for
the New Hampshire way of life.
Already the ski and snowmobile
industries have been affected by
warming winters10,11,12 and there
are implications for the logging
industry and coastal beaches as well. Commercial logging occurs most efficiently in the winter when the ground is frozen.
Warmer winter temperatures affect the number of days and,
hence income, for logging activities. Coastal beaches can be
affected by warmer and shorter winters with increased bacterial counts, changes in fisheries, and increased outbreaks of
nuisance species such as red tide.

• Increased frequency and severity of heavy, damaging

A May 2008 report, The Cost of Climate Change13, based on

12 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



new research relying on historical impact data to project future
economic impacts, projects that total global warming economic cost in the United States (under the “business as usual”
emissions growth scenario) could equal 3.6 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP). Impacts from hurricane damage, real
estate losses, and energy and water costs will account for about
half of these costs, or $1.9 trillion annually by 2100.
In addition to taking steps to reduce CO2 emissions, New
Hampshire must also invest in adaptation to better prepare for
and reduce the risks of changing local conditions with climate
change – as discussed in detail in Chapter 3. Even if emissions
were significantly decreased immediately, New Hampshire’s
climate patterns are expected to continue to change over
time as a result of delays in response by the global climate
system. The enormous costs to the state of the three recent
major floods (over an eighteen month period) as well as the
recent ice storm, are exemplary of the types of costs we may
face by failing to adapt to changes in climate through actions
such as improved emergency management, and infrastructure
improvements to increase resistance and resiliency.

Reduction Goals
New Hampshire has worked cooperatively to develop a
regional climate change action plan under the auspices of the
Conference of New England Governors and Eastern Canadian
Premiers (NEG/ECP). The 2001 NEG/ECP Climate Change Action
Plan calls for a long-term goal that reduces regional greenhouse
gas emissions “sufficiently to eliminate any dangerous threat to
the climate: current science suggests this will require reductions
of 75-85 percent below current levels.” In a 2007 resolution,
the NEG/ECP established a target date of 2050 to achieve “a
75-85 percent worldwide target reduction in emissions, subject
to further scientific analysis of this target.”14
The goal of reducing greenhouse gases 80 percent below
1990 levels by 2050 has been adopted by numerous states,
cities, and organizations15. The 2007 IPCC report (Appendix 1)
indicated that this goal was necessary to stabilize greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere at or below 450 ppm CO2 – a level
that would avoid the most severe and dangerous impacts of
climate change. However, recent research suggests that even
more aggressive emission reductions are required to stabilize
our climate system16.
Clearly, stabilizing the concentrations of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere will only occur through global action. Even
regionally, the NEG/ECP Climate Change Action Plan recognized

that different jurisdictions would have varying degrees of success at meeting even the short-term goals of that plan. However, the long-term goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions
80 percent by 2050 is the benchmark being used by many states
and environmental organizations to assess whether climate action plans are putting into place the policies, market changes,
technologies, and regulations needed to adequately address
the causes of climate change17. Accordingly, the Task Force
recommends that New Hampshire strive to achieve a long-term
reduction of 80 percent below 1990 levels, consistent with the
NEG/ECP resolutions and the consensus recommendations of
the scientific community.
In the more immediate future, a mid-term goal should be
consistent with specific actions that New Hampshire can take
in the context of its energy profile, environmental priorities and
resources, and economic circumstances. At the request of the
Climate Change Policy Task Force, UNH-based Carbon Solutions
New England (CSNE) conducted a detailed and comprehensive
evaluation of all the potential actions New Hampshire could
take to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions and move towards
the long-term goal of reducing its emissions 80 percent below
1990 levels by 2050. The major result of this undertaking is a
set of recommended actions (described in Chapter 5) based
on the projected greenhouse gas emission reductions and
economic effects that would result from these actions. Consistent with the specific action recommendations in the action
plan, the Task Force recommends that New Hampshire strive
to achieve mid-term emission reductions of 20 percent below
1990 levels by 2025.

New Hampshire’s Greenhouse Gas
Inventory
To understand New Hampshire’s contribution to climate
change and be better positioned to identify and select recommended actions, a greenhouse gas emission inventory was conducted for 1990-2005 using the EPA’s State Inventory Tool‡.
The inventory revealed that the vast majority of New
Hampshire’s greenhouse gas emissions are in the form of CO2
resulting primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels for heat,
power, and transportation. Analysis of this inventory showed
that electric generation, transportation, and direct fuel use
in buildings each contributed roughly one-third of the state’s
The EPA’s State Inventory Tool (SIT) is intended to assist with the
development of a state-level greenhouse gas emission inventory. It
uses interactive spreadsheet software that gives users the option

‡

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan -13



Figure 1.2 Historical Emissions by Sector

Hampshire rose by 42 percent from 489 million gallons per year
in 1990 to 695 million gallons in 2005, and diesel consumption
rose by 105 percent from 52 million gallons per year to 106
million gallons18.

NH Greenhouse gas emissions [MMTCO2e/year]

25

20

15

Transportation

10
Electricity Generation
5
Buildings
Non-combustion

0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

The emissions originating from the building sector, which
includes direct energy consumption in residential, commercial, and industrial space, grew more slowly. Building related
emissions grew by nearly 32 percent from 1990 to 2005 and
these emissions accounted for 29 percent of New Hampshire’s
total emissions in 2005. The leading cause of this increase was
due to a significant expansion in the use of natural gas which
increased from 14 billion cubic feet in 1990 to 25 billion cubic
feet in 200519.

The electric generation sector experienced significant
growth as well, but was punctuated by sharper increases than
the building and transportation sectors. The greatest single
increase in emissions occurred between 2002 and 2003, when
New Hampshire’s two newest natural gas powered electrical
generation plants, Granite Ridge Energy LLC (Londonderry,
NH) and NAEA Newington Energy LLC (Newington, NH), came
The emissions from the transportation sector increased online. The emissions from these two plants represent nearly
rapidly from 1990 to 2005 and are presently the greatest single 31 percent of the total increase in New Hampshire’s emiscontributor to the state’s total greenhouse gas emissions – ap- sions from 1990 to 2005. These two facilities also account for
proximately 33 percent of the total. This was principally due approximately 64 percent of the total growth in the electric
to an increase in fuel use as gasoline consumption in New generation sector over that time, bringing electric generation’s emission contribution to 34
Table 1.1 - Table of Historical Emissions by Sector
percent of the state’s total. The
emissions increase caused by these
Emissions [MMTCO2e/yr]			
1990
1995
2000
2005
two facilities was not linked to a
Total Energy Related Emissions
14.68
15.08
17.74
21.21
rise in energy consumption by New
Commercial
1.32
1.15
1.44
1.93
Hampshire residents. Instead, the
Industrial
0.83
1.09
1.64
0.98
Residential
2.47
2.76
2.93
3.17
vast majority of this new generation
Transportation
5.21
5.76
7.24
7.43
was exported to other New England
Electric Power
4.85
4.32
4.49
7.7
Total Non-Combustion Related Emissions
1.1
1.05
1.07
1.24
states as the exported portion of
CH4 and N2O emissions
1
0.83
0.65
0.69
New Hampshire’s generation rose
Industrial Emissions
0.1
0.22
0.42
0.55
from 35 percent in 2002 to 54 perPFC, HFC, and SF6				
Total Emissions
15.79
16.13
18.81
22.45
cent in 200420.
total emissions in 1990. As seen in Figure 1.2, greenhouse gas
emissions from each of these sectors have steadily increased
in a roughly linear fashion. Between 1990 and 2005, the state’s
total greenhouse gas emissions increased by 48 percent from
15.79 million metric tons of CO2 equivalents (MMTCO2e) to
22.45 MMTCO2e in 2005§ (Table 1.1).

of applying their own state-specific numbers or using default data
pre-loaded for each state. The default data is gathered by federal
agencies and other sources covering fossil fuel use, agriculture,
forestry, waste management and industry. The SIT provides a
streamlined way to update an existing inventory or complete a
new inventory. The software is accompanied by updated guidance
describing best practices.
EPA State Inventory Tool output using default values for state
emissions.

§

14 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Non-combustion emissions contribute a smaller but significant source of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. The
agriculture, forestry, and waste sectors together contributed
2.3 percent of the state’s emissions in 2005 following a 35
percent decline in direct emissions since 1990. This decline
was principally due to reductions in methane gas emissions
from landfills due to flaring and landfill gas energy projects.
The transportation sector provided a small amount of methane



A significant source of emissions not addressed in the EPA
inventory was the conversion of agricultural and forested lands
to other uses. This conversion, resulting from development
associated with New Hampshire’s rapid rate of population
growth, provided a steady contribution of greenhouse gas
emissions. These emissions resulted from the direct release of
large amounts of carbon that had been stored in agricultural
and forest soils and trees, which form a natural carbon sink.
This development not only releases CO2, but it also reduces
the ability of New Hampshire’s forest and agricultural lands to
absorb more CO2 in the future.
Though population growth has slowed since approximately
2000, New Hampshire had been the fastest growing state in
New England over the past 40 years and even in recent years
the influx of new residents and other development pressures
have resulted in forest lands and agricultural lands being
cleared for residential, commercial, and industrial development. This land use conversion has caused the release of
an additional 0.35 MMTCO2e per year, driven largely be the
complete clearing of 5000 acres of forest land each year**. A
significant factor not addressed by these figures is the permanent loss of the sequestration potential of these natural
lands as the capacity to store carbon naturally in the soil and
forests is lost.

Projected Greenhouse Gas
Emissions
Projections of future greenhouse gas emissions prepared by
Carbon Solutions New England (CSNE) indicate that if current
trends prevail under “business-as-usual” (BAU) conditions,
New Hampshire’s emissions will grow at a rate equal to approximately 2 percent of current emissions per year, roughly
doubling the current emission levels by 2050 (Figure 1.3;
Table 1.2).
The business-as-usual projections of New Hampshire
greenhouse gas emissions due to fossil fuel use for each sec** Based on CSNE analysis (Appendices 6 and 7).

tor were developed by extrapolating historical emissions data
out to 2050. Linear extrapolations of 1990-2005 emissions
data were used to project emissions in the transportation,
residential, commercial, and industrial sectors21. Emissions
from the electricity generation sector were calculated differently because the historical New Hampshire emissions record
is punctuated by large fluctuations due to the expansion and
retirement of major generation plants. Linear extrapolation of
future New Hampshire generation was projected based on the
assumption that New Hampshire will continue to contribute
17.3 percent of New England generation. Projected emissions
were calculated based on the assumption that all future expansion of New Hampshire generation capacity is provided by
natural gas plants.
The transportation sector is anticipated to be the largest
single contributor to the growth in New Hampshire’s greenhouse gas emission as a consequence of population increase
Figure 1.3 Future Projected Emissions by Sector (Business
as Usual)
45
NH Greenhouse gas emissions [MMTCO2e/year]

and nitrous oxide emissions over this time as well. Industrial
process gases also increased steadily from 1990 to 2005, and
contributed nearly 2.5 percent of the states greenhouse gas
emissions in 2005, up from 0.65 percent in 1990. If growth in
industrial emissions continues to expand at its current rate, this
will become an increasingly important source of greenhouse
gas emissions.

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

and sprawl-type development patterns. These two factors
would lead to more cars on the road, each traveling a greater
number of miles and collectively resulting in an annual fuel
consumption increase equal to 2.8 percent of 2008 levels.
By 2012, it is projected that New Hampshire would consume
719 million gallons of gas per year and 124 million gallons of
diesel. By 2025, consumption would rise to 798 million gallons
of gas per year and 166 million gallons of diesel22. This would
contribute to a 30 percent increase in transportation emissions
between 2012 and 2025. Such growth in transportation would
result in this sector generating 40 percent of all greenhouse
gas emissions by 2025.
The second largest contributing factor is the expected
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 15



Table 1.2 – New Hampshire Projected Greenhouse Gas
Emissions (Business as Usual)

Total Energy Related Emissions
Commercial
Industrial
Residential
Transportation
Electric Power
Total Non-Combustion
Related Emissions
CH4 and N2O emissions
Industrial Emissions
PFC, HFC, and SF6
Total Emissions

Emissions [MMTCO2e/yr]
2012
2025
2050
23.76
29.30
39.95
1.47
1.64
1.98
1.53
1.81
2.34
3.38
3.92
4.96
9.74
12.66
18.27
7.63
9.26
12.39
1.58
2.07
3.00
0.73
0.84

0.75
1.31

0.79
2.21

25.34

31.36

42.95

lead to significant emission reductions while avoiding energy
use and the associated costs.

Task Force Process
Governor Lynch established the Climate Change Policy Task
Force through Executive Order 2007-3 on December 6, 2007
(Appendix 2). The Governor charged the Task Force with developing greenhouse gas reduction goals and recommending
specific regulatory, voluntary, and policy actions that the state
should consider to meet these goals. The Task Force consisted
of 29 members (Appendix 2), representing a broad range of
sectors and interests in New Hampshire including:
• The New Hampshire House and Senate

annual load growth in the electricity sector equal to an annual increase of nearly 1.5 percent of 2008 levels with energy
generation rising from 12.6 million MWh in 2012 to 14 million
MWh in 2025. The increase in electric load would result from
an increase in population within the state and region. As noted
above, New Hampshire is a net exporter of electricity with
nearly 50 percent of its total generation currently exported out
of state††. The increase in total generation will also result from
an increase in the per capita energy consumption. Under a BAU
scenario, this additional load is projected to be met largely by
new natural gas-fired generation facilities and would result in a
21 percent increase in electric power emissions between 2012
and 2025. This slower growth relative to the transportation
sector discussed above will result in the electric generation
sector responsible for producing approximately 30 percent of
all greenhouse gas emissions by 2025‡‡ .
Direct emissions from buildings (i.e., residential, commercial
and industrial sources) is expected to grow more slowly, with
non-electric energy use in the residential, commercial and
industrial sectors expected to grow by only 9 percent between
2012 and 2025. This much slower growth relative to other sectors in New Hampshire will reduce the relative contribution of
buildings’ direct emissions to 25 percent by 202523.
Understanding these trends provided the Task Force with
the opportunity to identify those actions with the potential to
Analysis of state energy data supplied by EIA. Energy Information
Administration website (2009), NH Energy Consumption 19602006. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/states/state.html?q_state_
a=nh&q_state=NEW%20HAMPSHIRE (last accessed January 14,
2009).
††

EPA State Inventory Tool output using default values for state
emissions.

• New Hampshire state agencies
• Municipal government
• Business and industry
• Environmental interests
• The forestry sector
• Science/academia
• Public utilities
• The insurance industry
In support of the Task Force, six working groups were formed
to develop a suite of possible strategies for greenhouse gas reductions and to summarize the results in the form of individual
action reports. The six working groups were:
• Residential, Commercial and Industrial (RCI)
• Electric Generation (EGU)
• Transportation and Land Use (TLU)
• Agriculture, Forestry and Waste (AFW)
• Government, Leadership and Action (GLA)
• Adaptation (ADP)
Over 125 individuals, representing a wide range of interests
and expertise, participated in these working groups (Appendix 2). The working groups initially received a list of nearly
220 actions that had been considered in the climate action
plans of other states. The groups reviewed these potential
actions, developed additional or modified emission reduction strategies, and identified the most promising actions
before analyzing their respective impacts and prioritizing the
potential actions.

‡‡

16 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Each reduction strategy, called a potential action report



(complete set in Appendices 4 and 5), was submitted to the
Task Force’s technical consultants, CSNE, for analysis. CSNE
evaluated each of the 80-plus potential action reports developed by four of the six working groups§§ to determine the
potential CO2 emission reductions, costs of implementation,
and cost savings associated with each potential action (Appendices 6 and 7). CSNE conducted its analyses through an
iterative process over a period of seven months to ensure that
the reductions, costs, and savings projections for each analyzed potential action were based on grounded assumptions
and reflected the collective wisdom of the working groups.
CSNE routinely consulted the working groups to discuss the
methodology and assumptions used in the analyses. When
necessary, experts outside of this process were consulted in
a similar fashion. CSNE’s analyses were presented to the Task
Force on two occasions in order to solicit feedback from the
Task Force. All of the assumptions used in the analyses are
detailed in the Approach and Assumption documents which
appear in Appendix 7.
The Adaptation working group was formed to consider
the current and projected impacts of climate change and to
identify potential actions that should be taken to help society
adapt to climate change. While not typically included in the
climate action plans of other states, the Task Force believed
that adaptation was a critical issue to address because the state
is already experiencing the impacts of a changing climate, and
these changes are projected to become more pronounced. The
scale of the global climate system is such that there is a lag in
the climate’s response to increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations. This delayed response means that the full effect of
today’s emissions will not be realized until decades into the
future. At the same time, the full benefit of any emission reductions will not be realized for years to come. Because CO2 emissions remain in the atmosphere for an average of 100 years,
we will continue to experience climate change impacts even
if anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions were significantly
reduced immediately. Consequently, the Adaptation working
group looked at what actions should be considered to prepare
New Hampshire for a changing climate even as the state begins
to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions.
The potential action reports for Government Leadership and
Adaptation (GLA) were not analyzed by CSNE. Those potential
action reports prepared by the Electric Generation (EGU),
Residential, Commercial, and Industrial (RCI), Transportation &
Land Use (TLU), and Agriculture, Forestry & Waste (AFW) working
groups were analyzed by CSNE for carbon reductions and economic
impacts.
§§

The Task Force developed and adopted the following principles as a guide in formulating its action recommendations:
1. Maximize greenhouse gas emission reductions to move
the state, steadily and as quickly as possible, toward the
goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 80 percent
below 1990 levels by 2050.
2. Select actions that provide the greatest net economic
benefits and economic opportunities to New Hampshire,
while also considering energy security, public health, and
environmental benefits.
3. Make investments using a phased approach that first
exploits the most cost-effective, currently available technologies and incorporates more advanced technologies
as they become more available and are shown to be
cost-effective.
4. Ensure that policies (a) do not further disadvantage
already disadvantaged populations, and (b) include
mechanisms to mitigate adverse impacts to disadvantaged populations.
5.	Reduce vulnerability from a changing climate by planning
and taking adaptive measures to address existing and
future impacts to natural resources, the built environment, and New Hampshire’s way of life.
6. Engage the public to take action at the individual, community, state, and national levels.
7. Create a plan that views climate change in a regional, national, and global context, is reviewed on a regular basis
to determine progress, and whose actions can evolve and
develop over time in response to changing technology,
economics, and sociological circumstances.
8. Sustain the state’s resources, both cultural and natural,
that provide opportunities for both mitigation and adaptation.

Public Input
An extensive public process was conducted to gather input
for the plan and allow the public access to the Task Force’s
work, and to assist the Task Force in understanding the issues
and opportunities connected to climate change. On February
19, 2008, an initial public listening session was held to obtain
input on the kinds of actions the Task Force should explore.
After the working groups completed their draft of potential
actions, the 100-plus potential action reports were released for
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 17



public comment. Five additional listening sessions were then
held at locations across the state to solicit public comments.
Two of these sessions were conducted using live interactive
video conferencing through the Granite State Distance Learning
Network, centered at the Seacoast Science Center in Rye and
at the North Country Education Services Center in Gorham.
This video conferencing technology enabled five additional
locations to participate in the listening sessions. Participants
at each video-linked site could interact with all other sites by
providing questions and comments to the host site and watching questions and comments in real time from participants at
the other linked sites. Video conferencing is just one example
of using new technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
– in this case, by reducing automobile travel.
The public listening sessions attracted over 175 attendees
and yielded more than 75 oral comments. A detailed summary of these comments was provided to the Task Force and
is reproduced in Appendix 3. In addition, over 200 letters and
emails were received and turned over directly to the Task Force
(copies included in Appendix 3). Finally, any subsequent actions
or approaches considered by the Task Force after completion
of the public listening sessions were also distributed for public
review and comment separately.

gasoline and diesel fuel that we use, improving public
transportation, and encouraging consumers to select
more fuel-efficient cars, are critical to any plan addressing
climate change.
4. Comprehensive education is needed to inform the public
of actions they can take to reduce energy use, train the
energy services trades in new technologies, and develop
appropriate curricula for our schools.
The Task Force received many other comments on numerous
themes, including promotion of renewable energy resources,
development of bike paths, and ensuring that our forests are
used sustainably. Five out of 100 who commented questioned
the validity of conclusions in the peer-reviewed scientific
literature on climate change. However, even these individuals agreed with the recommendations of promoting energy
efficiency and increasing the state’s use of renewable energy
resources for the many benefits they provide.
The Task Force and its working groups also considered a
number of related and ongoing initiatives, including:
• Governor Lynch’s “25 x ‘25” initiative to obtain 25 percent
of New Hampshire’s energy from renewable resources by
2025.

Four clear themes emerged from among all comments
received:

• Governor Lynch’s Executive Order 2005-04 to reduce
energy use in state operations by 10 percent.

1. The Task Force should recognize the magnitude of the climate change problem and be bold in its decision making.

• The State Development Plan, being prepared by the New
Hampshire Office of Energy and Planning.

2. Significant improvements in energy efficiency in every
sector – but particularly energy efficiency in buildings –
should be a major recommendation and commitment of
the state action plan.

• Efforts of the New England Governors/Eastern Canadian
Premiers Climate Change Steering Committee.

3. Transportation issues, including reducing the amount of

18 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• A Thermal Energy Study being prepared by the Office of
Energy and Planning as required by legislation establishing
an Electric Renewable Portfolio Standard.



Chapter 2: Recommendations

The Task Force identified 10 overarching strategies necessary
to reduce New Hampshire’s annual greenhouse gas emissions
and position the state to achieve long-term emissions reduc*Non-combustion gas is the term used to describe those
greenhouse gases that are not emitted by direct fossil fuel
combustion. They include industrial process gases (e.g., SF6, HFC,
PFC), as well as methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O).

Figure 2.1 – New Hampshire’s Historical and Projected
Greenhouse Gas Emissions (Business as Usual)
45
NH Greenhouse gas emissions [MMTCO2e/year]

N

ew Hampshire’s greenhouse gas emissions have been
growing steadily since 1990 and are projected to
double between 2008 and 2050 under a business-asusual (BAU) scenario (Figure 2.1). These emissions are almost
entirely due to energy consumption related to transportation,
buildings, and electricity generation. A smaller portion of noncombustion-related gases is contributed by the transportation,
industrial, agriculture, forestry and waste sectors*. The Climate
Change Policy Task Force used these historical and projected
(post-2005) trends to identify the best opportunities to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in the future while providing significant economic development potential to the state.

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

tions of 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. These strategies
are necessary to comprehensively address the causes and the
impacts of climate change and include:
1. Maximize energy efficiency in buildings.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 19



2. Increase renewable and low-CO2-emitting sources of energy in a long-term sustainable manner.
3. Support regional and national actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
4. Reduce vehicle emissions through state actions.
5. Encourage appropriate land use patterns that enable fewer
vehicle-miles traveled.
6. Reduce vehicle-miles traveled through an integrated multimodal transportation system.
7. Protect natural resources (land, water, wildlife) to maintain
the amount of carbon fixed or sequestered.
8. Lead by example in government operations.
9. Plan for how to address existing and potential climate
change impacts.
10. Develop an integrated education, outreach and workforce training program.
To achieve these overarching strategies, the Task Force
identified a suite of recommended actions to be implemented
by individuals, businesses and government through a combination of voluntary and regulatory approaches. These recommendations were chosen by the Task Force following extensive discussion of more than 100 potential actions that were
developed by the six technical and policy working groups. Its
deliberations included a review of the detailed and transparent analysis of these actions conducted by Carbon Solutions
New England (CSNE). This analysis provided projections of
the CO2-emission reductions, costs of implementation and
cost savings associated with a majority of the actions†. In addition, the action reports contained qualitative evaluations of
the broader social and environmental impacts associated with
the actions under review. This broad evaluation enabled the
Task Force to recommend specific actions for inclusion in the
action plan based not only on their greenhouse gas emission
reduction potential and economic development potential, but
also their potential to provide other important benefits, and
to avoid unintended consequences.
The identified overarching strategies and their associated
recommended actions constitute a plan to enable New Hampshire to continue to do its part to address climate change;
†
Some of the actions were not quantifiable as they were
supportive of other actions and had no direct emission reductions,
costs or cost savings associated with them. Further detail of the
analysis conducted by CSNE can be found in Appendix 7.

20 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

actions that will in turn benefit the economy, increase state
and regional energy security, improve environmental quality, and position the state and its citizens to implement even
greater greenhouse gas reductions in the future. Many of
the recommended actions can be implemented immediately,
while others require a phased-in approach during which some
steps can be taken immediately and further implementation
occurs as technology evolves, resources become available
and the economic costs and benefits become more favorable.
The resulting plan addresses the State of New Hampshire’s
previous climate change commitments, places the state on a
course to achieve the emission reduction goals established by
the Task Force, and promotes a comprehensive approach to
early adaptation to climate change.

Overarching Strategies &
Recommended Actions
The section below describes the overarching strategies
and the actions recommended by the Task Force to achieve
them. A summary of the recommended actions can be found
in Chapter 5. The complete action reports are provided in
Appendix 4. Each action includes the original reference codes
(e.g., EGU 2.1) used by the technical/policy working groups
during the development of the full range of actions. Abbreviations are as follows:
• ADP

Adaptation

• AFW

Agriculture, Forestry and Waste

• EGU

Electric Generation

• GLA

Government Leadership and Action

• RCI

Residential, Commercial, and Industrial Usage

• TLU

Transportation and Land Use

Actions that were not recommended by the Task Force
have been retained for future consideration and possible
inclusion in subsequent revisions to the Climate Action Plan
(Appendix 5).
All actions selected by the Task Force had consensus support unless otherwise noted (here, consensus means that the
recommendation was supported by all members of the Task
Force). Documentation of the support for each action is provided in Appendix 2. As shown in Appendix 2, some Task Force
members abstained from voting due to their roles on other
boards or for other reasons. One or more Task Force members
abstained from voting on the following actions:



Property Listings (RCI 1.5)

• Implement Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
(EGU 2.2)
• Promote Low- and Non-CO2-Emitting Electric Generation
(EGU 2.4)
• Enable Importation of Canadian Hydro and Wind Generation (EGU 2.6)
• Allow Regulated Utilities to Build Renewable Generation
(EGU 2.7)
• Install Retrofits to Address Black Carbon Emissions (TLU
1.C.3)
1. Maximize energy efficiency in buildings.
The operation of buildings accounts for 48 percent of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States according to the Pew
Center on Climate Change. In New Hampshire, 32.3 percent of
the net energy consumed in 2005 was used to heat buildings
and structures, and another 36.6 percent was used to generate
electricity, much of which is used in buildings3. The construction and operation of buildings, therefore, represents a major
contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. The state can realize
substantial reductions in its energy consumption for heat and
power by maximizing the thermal and electrical efficiency of all
future buildings and extensively retrofitting existing residential,
commercial, industrial and municipal buildings. This will lead
to significant and direct reductions in energy costs and greenhouse gas emissions. Such actions can begin immediately by
implementing the most cost-effective investments in energy
efficiency immediately and incorporating more advanced
technologies when they become economically viable.

• Conserve Embodied Energy in Existing Building Stock (RCI
1.8)
2. Increase renewable and low-CO2-emitting sources of
energy in a long-term sustainable manner.
While expanded energy efficiency will reduce the total demand for energy at the individual site level, there will still be a
need for heat and power. Further emission reductions can be
achieved as New Hampshire meets an increasing portion of its
total energy demand by developing renewable and low- CO2emitting energy resources. This expanded capacity will reduce
overall greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, to the extent
that in-state energy resources can reduce the dependence on
imported fossil fuel, such resources will result in more dollars
staying in New Hampshire, thus having a positive impact on
non-energy sectors of the state economy.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Promote Renewable Energy through the Electric Portfolio
Standard (RPS) (EGU 2.1)
• Increase Renewable and Low-CO2 Thermal Energy Systems
(RCI 3.1)
• Promote Low- and Non-CO2-Emitting Electric Generation
(EGU 2.4)
• Identify and Deploy the Next Generation of Electric Grid
Technologies (EGU 2.8)
• Promote Low- and Non-CO2-Emitting Distributed Generation (EGU 2.9)
• Encourage the Use of Biogenic Waste Sources for Energy
Generation (AFW 2.4)

Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Maximize Efficiency in New Construction (RCI 1.1)
• Maximize Energy Efficiency in Existing Residential Buildings
(RCI 1.2)

Actions recommended by the Task Force with majority
support:
• Implement Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
(EGU 2.2)‡

• Maximize Energy Efficiency in Existing Commercial, Industrial, and Municipal Buildings (RCI 1.3)

• Enable Importation of Canadian Hydro and Wind Generation (EGU 2.6)§

• Install Higher-Efficiency Equipment, Processes, and Systems (RCI 2.1)

• Allow Regulated Utilities to Build Renewable Generation
(EGU 2.7)‡

• Increase the Use of Combined Heat and Power (EGU
1.3)
• Consider Alternative Rate Design (EGU 1.1)
• Upgrade Building Energy Codes (RCI 1.4a)
• Increase Building Energy Code Compliance (RCI 1.4b)
• Establish an Energy Properties Section in Real Estate

‡

This action received one “no” vote.

§

This action received a number of “no” votes due to concerns over
the potential environmental impacts of the imported power and
the effect imported power might have on development of in-state
renewable resources.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 21



3. Support regional and national actions to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
New Hampshire can take significant actions to reduce its
greenhouse gas emissions, but there are measures that need
to be taken at the regional, national, and international levels.
Such measures will ultimately lead to greater overall emission
reductions and will complement the in-state efforts. By working
with the Congressional delegation and participating in regional,
national and international efforts, New Hampshire has the
potential to affect policy that can lead to additional reductions
and leverage greater reductions from in-state actions.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Support Stricter Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (TLU 1.A.1)
• Support Fuel Economy Standards for Heavy-Duty Vehicles
(TLU 1.A.2)
• Adopt a Low-Carbon Fuel Standard (TLU 1.C.1)
• Promote Advanced Technology Vehicles and Supporting
Infrastructure (TLU 1.C.2)
• Support Strong Climate Action at the Federal Level (GLA
1.6)
4. Reduce vehicle emissions through state actions.
The transportation sector is the most significant single
source†† of greenhouse gas emissions in the state, and its
relative contribution is projected to increase further based
on current trends. The state can reduce transportation emissions by taking actions that improve the fuel economy of
vehicles on the road. This objective can be achieved through
technological requirements, improved traffic flow, and policies
and programs that influence vehicle purchase, operation, and
maintenance.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Adopt California Low Emission Vehicle (CALEV) Standards
(TLU 1.A.3)
• Create a Point-of-Sale Financial Incentive for HigherEfficiency Vehicles (TLU 1.B.1)
• Install Retrofits to Address Black Carbon Emissions (TLU
1.C.3)
• Implement Commuter Trip Reduction Initiative (TLU
2.A.1)
††

EPA State Inventory Tool output using default values for state
emissions.

22 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Increase Highway Automobile Efficiency (TLU 1.D.1)
• Address Vehicle Idling (TLU 1.D.2)
• Improve Traffic Flow (TLU 1.D.3)
5. Encourage appropriate land use patterns that reduce
vehicle-miles traveled.
Though New Hampshire’s growth has slowed recently, it
experienced faster growth than any other state in New England
over the past 40 years. Much of this growth occurs as dispersed,
low-density development, characteristically known as “sprawl.”
This type of development leads to an increase in the per capita
annual vehicle-miles traveled as residential and commercial
developments become increasingly dispersed across the landscape8. By adopting strategies that promote compact, mixeduse, walkable-design development, the growth in annual
travel can be significantly reduced. Through careful planning
and development, growth can be concentrated and designed
in such a way that it reduces the length of trips and increases
the viability of walking, biking, and public transportation, while
at the same time enhancing the aesthetics and livability of our
communities. This type of development provides additional
benefits by reducing the amount of CO2 released through forest and agricultural land conversion and helping to retain the
traditional rural and village character of the state. Additional
benefits can be realized through the maintenance of ecosystem
services, such as flood storage, that will mitigate some of the
impacts of climate change.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Assess Greenhouse Gas Development Impact Fees (TLU
2.C.1.a)
• Streamline Approvals for Low- Greenhouse Gas Development Projects (TLU 2.C.1.b)
• Develop Model Zoning to Support Bus/Rail Transit (TLU
2.C.2)
• Develop Model Zoning for Higher-Density, Mixed-Use
Development (TLU 2.C.3)
• Continue/Expand Funding, Education, and Technical Assistance to Municipalities (TLU 2.C.8)
6. Reduce vehicle-miles traveled through an integrated
multi-modal transportation system.
New Hampshire’s annual vehicle-miles traveled and the
resulting transportation-based emissions can be reduced
by changing the manner by which people and freight move
around the state. In particular, substantial gains can be made



by reducing the number of single-occupancy vehicles on the
road through the promotion and expansion of alternative
modes of travel (e.g., walking, cycling, bus, train) and carpooling. At the same time, access and mobility can be improved
for the majority of the population. The successful reduction
of vehicle-miles traveled will require integrated planning that
looks at land use, environment/climate, and transportation
needs simultaneously and the development of an integrated
system that locates transportation hubs near the residential,
commercial, and industrial centers that they serve.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Improve Existing Local/Intra-Regional Transit (Bus) Service
(TLU 2.B.1.b)
• Expand Local/Intra-Regional Transit (Bus) Service (TLU
2.B.1.a)
• Improve Existing Inter-City Bus Service (TLU 2.B.2.h)
• Expand and Improve Bicycle and Pedestrian Infrastructure
(TLU 2.B.1.c)
• Maintain and Expand Passenger Rail Service (TLU
2.B.2.a)
• Maintain and Expand Freight Rail Service (TLU 2.B.2.b)
• Implement a Stable Funding Stream to Support Public
Transportation (TLU 2.B.2.c)
• Expand Park-and-Ride Infrastructure (TLU 2.B.2.e)
7. Protect natural resources (land, water, wildlife) to
maintain the amount of carbon fixed or sequestered.
New Hampshire is the second most forested state in the nation with 84 percent of its landscape covered in trees, an area
encompassing 4.8 million acres of forest9. Forest lands support
the state’s vital natural resource-based economy and provide
essential ecosystem services in the form of soil stabilization,
water cycle regulation, flood mitigation, wildlife habitat, and
nutrient cycling. Soils of agricultural and forest lands and the
trees of forests play a critical role in carbon sequestration. New
Hampshire can maintain and enhance the economic benefits
and ecosystem services, including net greenhouse gas emission
reductions, of agricultural and forest lands by managing them
in a sustainable fashion. In forests, sustainable management
promotes a renewable energy source, protects wildlife, and
ensures long-term ecosystem health.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Invest in Forests to Maximize Carbon Storage and to Avoid
Net Forest Land Conversion (AFW 1.2)

• Optimize Availability of Biomass for Electricity and Heating
within Sustainable Limits (AFW 2.2)
• Promote Durable Wood Products (AFW 1.3)
• Protect Agricultural Land (AFW 1.1.3)
• Maximize Source Reduction, Reuse and Recycling (AFW
3.1)
8. Lead by example in government operations.
The state of New Hampshire has a critical role to play as a
supporter and leader of climate change action in New Hampshire. The state’s agencies and activities can adopt strategies
that reduce the greenhouse gas emissions associated with
heating and cooling buildings, the power used by equipment
and the fuel consumed by its fleet of vehicles. The state can
track the dollar savings associated with these efforts, and share
this information. These actions will provide an economic development model for municipalities and businesses to adopt while
also developing some of the infrastructure, such as alternative
fueling stations, that are necessary for certain technologies
to become viable. All levels and categories of government in
New Hampshire, including counties, municipalities, village
precincts and school districts, can adopt the same measures
as are recommended for the state government and by doing
so they can also be supporters and leaders of climate change
action in their regions or communities.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Establish an Energy Management Unit to Address State
Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GLA 1.1)
• Establish an Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Baseline Inventory for State Government (GLA
1.2 )
• Establish a Self-Sustaining Fund for Energy Efficiency Projects in State Government (GLA 1.3)
• Provide for the Establishment of Local Energy Commissions
(GLA 1.4 )
• Include Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in
Programs and Planning (GLA 1.5)
• Promote Public School Siting and Building Aid to Reduce
Energy Use (GLA 2.6)
9. Plan for how to address existing and potential climate
change impacts.
New Hampshire must continue to plan for the impacts of
climate change even as it works to address its causes. Carbon
dioxide remains in the atmosphere for, on average, 100 years
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 23



once it is emitted. There is also a delay in the climate’s response
to increasing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases
due to the scale of the global climate system. Therefore, climate change will continue for some time even if all man-made
greenhouse gas emissions were be reduced significantly in
the near future. Some level of climate change adaptation is
necessary to ensure that the current and future impacts of
climate change do not significantly impact the health of our
residents, the strength of our economy, or the character of our
natural environment. By preparing for climate change early,
the state can avoid significant costs, whether economic, social
or ecological, in the future.

program would further integrate climate change science and
solutions into all academic levels and disciplines toward the
goals of empowering future generations to take action in their
own lives and developing future leaders in policy, government,
engineering, science, and communications.
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
• Develop an Overarching Outreach and Education Plan (RCI
4.6)
• Include Energy Efficiency and Conservation in School Curriculum (RCI 4.1)

Actions recommended by the Task Force:

• Increase Energy Efficiency through Building Management
Education Programs (RCI 4.2)

• Develop a Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the State
of New Hampshire (ADP 8)

• Reduce Residential Energy Demand through Education
and Outreach (RCI 4.3)

• Develop and Distribute Critical Information on Climate
Change (ADP 1)

• Establish a Comprehensive Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Education Program (RCI 4.4)

• Promote Policies and Actions to Help Populations Most at
Risk (ADP 2)

• Create an Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy Systems Web Portal (RCI 4.5)

• Charge and Empower Public Health Officials to Prepare
for Climate Change (ADP 3)

Projected Emission Reductions of
Recommended Actions

• Strengthen Protection of New Hampshire’s Natural Systems (ADP 4)
• Increase Resilience to Extreme Weather Events (ADP 5)
• Strengthen the Adaptability of New Hampshire’s Economy
to Climate Change (ADP 6)
10. Develop an integrated education, outreach, and
workforce training program.
Critical to achieving the overarching strategies and implementing the recommended actions will be a comprehensive
education program for the state that ranges from grade schools
to universities and colleges, households to communities, and
small businesses to large corporations, and also includes
churches and not-for-profit organizations. This program would
focus on raising the awareness of climate change causes and
impacts, the wide variety of solutions to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, and the potential economic and environmental
benefits of energy efficiency and the development of renewable and low-CO2-emitting energy resources. It should also
focus on the development of a workforce trained in the installation, operation, and maintenance of advanced technologies
and proficient in the design and construction of residential,
commercial, and industrial buildings incorporating advances
in energy efficiency and renewable energy. The education
24 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Detailed and transparent analysis was performed by CSNE
to determine the potential CO2 emission reductions associated
with the various actions considered by the Task Force. The
analysis of the emission reduction potential was determined
through an integrated and holistic approach, which accounted
for many of the interactions among recommended actions. This
analysis provided the Task Force with the means to compare a
variety of scenarios. The Task Force chose the scenarios that
achieved the most progress towards the long-term goal of
reducing greenhouse gases 80 percent by 2050.
Based on this analysis, implementation of the Task Force’s
recommended actions is expected to yield a significant reduction in New Hampshire’s greenhouse gas emissions (Table 2.1).
These reductions will be achieved by using less fossil fuel as
a result of increased energy efficiency, avoided vehicle travel
and expanded use of renewable energy resources.
The CSNE analysis indicates that the recommended actions
would reduce greenhouse gas emissions below the businessas-usual scenario by 18.69 MMTCO2e by 2025, a reduction of
nearly 20 percent below 1990 levels of 15.79 MMTCO2e. Based
on these projections for the recommended actions, the Task
Force has chosen a mid-term goal of reducing greenhouse



Table 2.1 – Projected Emissions Reductions Resulting from
the Task Force Recommended Actions
Emissions [MMTCO2e/yr]
 Year
2025
2050
Total Projected Emissions (BAU)
31.36
42.95
Projected Emission Reductions from
Recommended Actions
Building Actions
8.43
13.02
Electricity Generation Actions
3.44
6.57
Transportation Actions
5.01
7.91
Natural Resource Actions
1.81
2.25
Total Potential Emission Reductions
18.69
29.75
Total Projected Emissions for Action Plan
12.67
13.20
Percent Reduction from BAU
59.6% 69.3%
Percent Reduction from 1990
19.7% 16.4%
Emissions (15.79 MMTCO2e)
BAU – Business as Usual
MMTCO2e – million metric tons CO2 equivalents

gas emissions 20 percent below 1990 by 2025. Considerably
greater emission reductions of about 40 MMTCO2e below the
BAU scenario will be required by 2050 to reach the longer-term
goal – equal to the emission reductions projected for this plan
which will be made feasible by technology innovation.
The Task Force recognized the need to focus on early action
to reach its mid-term goal which will lay the foundation for the
longer term goals. The sooner New Hampshire takes action to
reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, the less costly it will be for
the state, and the less CO2 that will be emitted into the atmosphere. Delaying action will necessitate greater reductions in
the future, which will come at higher cost, to achieve the same
emission reduction goals10. Delaying action may also place the
state at a disadvantage in terms of responding to any federal
policies requiring reductions in greenhouse gas emissions that
may be forthcoming from the Obama Administration.
While the recommended actions in this plan alone will not
be sufficient to achieve the Task Force’s long-term reduction
goal by 2050, they constitute critical steps that would enable
emission reductions to occur using a phased-in approach.
Moreover, the recommended actions will meet the target
emissions reduction by 2025, a time period which represents
common planning horizons for states (e.g., 10 to 15 years).
As previously described, a phased-in approach, whether at
the scale of individual actions or the entire Climate Action
Plan, will allow New Hampshire to focus its resources early on
those opportunities that are currently most cost-effective and,

subsequently, to consider other opportunities as technology,
political will, and public support evolve and markets develop.
Therefore, the following interim targets (Table 2.2) will be used
to evaluate progress towards its goal to move the state toward
early and progressive increases in emission reductions.

Achieving the Long-Term Goal
The Task Force recognizes that there are limitations to the
impact that this Climate Action Plan can and will have on the
state’s emissions out to 2050. While the emission reductions
associated with the recommendations included in this plan alTable 2.2 – Interim Emission Reduction Targets
Interim Targets
2012 2015 2018
21.00 19.08 17.16

2021
15.24

2024
13.32

Percent Change
Relative to 1990

33.1%
above

20.9%
above

8.7%
above

3.5%
below

15.6%
below

Percent Reduction
from BAU

10.9%

19.0%

27.2%

35.3%

43.5%

Year
Annual Emission
Targets [MMTCO2e]

low the state to meet the 2025 target and position the state to
meet the 2050 target reductions, the actions are not sufficient
to achieve all of the reductions that need to be made from 2025
to 2050. By 2050, the recommended actions are projected to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions below business-as-usual
levels by a total of 29.8 MMTCO2e, a reduction of nearly 70
percent below BAU but only 16 percent below 1990 levels
(Figure 2.2). In fact, many of the recommended actions, such
as those directed at building energy use, will realize reductions
over the next decade but will produce few additional reductions beyond 2025. This action plan contains those measures
that the Task Force believes will be most effective in rapidly
addressing the state’s greenhouse gas emissions over the next
one to two decades while positioning the residents, government, businesses, industries, and not-for-profits to achieve still
greater future reductions as technological, economic, political
and social changes allow.
This Climate Action Plan, therefore, will require periodic
review and revision (as discussed in greater detail in Chapter
6) to track progress against emission reduction targets, to take
advantage of advances in technology and to adapt to cultural
shifts and the changing climate. The Task Force recognizes
that future conditions may eventually lead to the adoption
of actions originally considered as part of this process but
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 25



not selected as recommendations. Actions that do not have
a positive cost-benefit today may prove to be appropriate actions in the future. For this reason, additional potential actions
developed by the six working groups, but not incorporated into
this action plan as recommendations, have been retained to
facilitate their future reconsideration (Appendix 5). These ac-

Summary

NH Emissions [Million metric tons CO2 per year]

By implementing the recommended actions of the Task
Force, New Hampshire will achieve substantial emission reductions, beginning immediately, using cost-effective, available technology. The greatest reductions would come from
improvements in the building
Figure 2.2 - Projected Emission Reductions from Implementation of All Recommended Actions
sector, followed by the transportation and the electric
45
generation sectors.
These emission reductions
are associated with significant
35
reductions in energy consumption. Energy efficiency
ings
30
Build
in buildings will significantly
impact the electric genera25
tion sector. Implementation
of the recommended actions
20
is projected to lead to a 59
15
percent drop below BAU by
Natural Resources
2025, from 14 million MWh
Mid-Term Goal
10
to 5.8 million MWh. Direct
energy consumption (e.g.,
5
oil and natural gas for heat)
Long-Term Goal
in buildings is projected to
0
fall by 59 percent below BAU
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
in 2025. In the transportation
NH Annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions [Million metric tons CO2 per year]
sector, implementation of
the plan is expected to avoid
the
consumption
of
374
million
gallons
of gas and 81 million
tions should be reviewed periodically to ensure that the most
appropriate actions are being implemented at any given time. gallons of diesel, a reduction of 52 percent and 33 percent
below BAU by 2025.
In addition, new actions will need to be considered.
40

Going forward, the State of New Hampshire will also need to
work within the larger Northeast Region and with the federal
government to reduce its emissions. As a relatively small state,
New Hampshire’s emissions from the electricity generation
and the transportation sectors are affected by trends and actions taken at the regional and national levels. By working to
coordinate its actions with those of other states, as it has with
the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, New Hampshire can
leverage greater reductions not only within its own borders
but also across state and even national boundaries.

26 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

The total impact of the recommended actions will be sufficient to place New Hampshire on a track to achieve substantial
reductions in the mid-term and to be well placed to achieve
the more aggressive reductions over the long-term. Additional
measures will be needed in the long-term to achieve the 80
percent below 1990 reduction target. Such measures are likely
to be based on the widespread adoption of new and advanced
technologies.



Chapter 3: Adapting to Change

C

limate change is projected to have significant impacts
on important economic, health, and natural resource
sectors throughout New Hampshire in the 21st century.
New Hampshire must continue to plan for these impacts even
as it works to address its causes. Carbon dioxide (CO2), the main
driver of climate change, has an atmospheric residence time
ranging from decades to hundreds of years and will remain
in the atmosphere for, on average, 100 years once released.
There is also a delay in the climate’s response to increasing
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases due to the
scale of the interdependent physical, chemical, and biological processes that compose the global climate system in the
ocean and atmosphere and on land. Therefore, climate change
is expected to continue for some time even if all man-made
greenhouse gas emissions were be reduced significantly in
the near future.
Because New Hampshire’s climate is already changing, and
will continue to change over the next several decades, some
level of climate change adaptation is necessary to ensure that

the current and future impacts of climate change do not significantly impact the health of our residents, the strength of
our economy, and the character of our natural environment.
Adaptation actions and responses should be evaluated and
where necessary, implemented, in order to couple actions
to reduce carbon emissions with adaptation. By preparing
for climate change early, the state can avoid significant costs,
whether economic, social or ecological, in the future.

Purpose of Climate Change
Adaptation
Climate change adaptation is defined as action taken to
avoid or minimize the negative impact of, or take advantage
of, new opportunities created by a changing and increasingly
variable climate. By contrast, actions to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions (i.e., mitigation) avoid or minimize climate change by
limiting the accumulation of atmospheric greenhouse gases.
Adaptation actions fall into several categories. Some actions
may increase natural resilience in species, ecosystems, and
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 27



communities to facilitate recovery from climate disturbances
or adjust to new patterns of climate variability and climate
extremes1. Other actions may also entail proactive steps to
facilitate responses to climate change that help human communities and ecosystems persist under new conditions in place
or elsewhere2. Finally, other adaptation actions could build
resistance to climate change by helping human communities
and ecosystems resist impacts and maintain valued resources3.
In some cases, the best approach may be to employ multiple
actions simultaneously.

Economic Impacts of Climate
Change
Anthropogenic climate change is already underway and
is projected to continue to impact New Hampshire’s human
health, man-made infrastructure, coastal settlements, and
agricultural, forest and water resources 4. These impacts are
already affecting the state’s economy5 and without efforts to
adapt, these impacts are anticipated to have a more significant
influence on our economy in the future6. Globally, the cost of
inaction has been estimated to be the equivalent to losing at
least 5 percent of global gross domestic product each year,
now and into the future 7.
Adopting a “wait-and-see” approach to climate change adaptation is anticipated to be more costly than taking early adaptation actions that anticipate and prepare for specific types
of climate disruption. The damage caused by Hurricane Katrina
illustrates the vulnerability of long-lived assets and infrastructure (e.g. dams, bridges, coastal and floodplain development)
to the types of extreme weather events that are projected to
occur by climate change models. A “wait-and-see” approach
would be especially inadequate in responding to:
• Irreversible impacts, such as species extinction or unrecoverable ecosystem changes.
• Unacceptably high costs and damages that could result
from inappropriate development in the coastal zone or
100-year floodplain that could expose lives and property
to intense storms and flooding.
• Damage to long-lived investments and infrastructure
(e.g., bridges, water and wastewater treatment facilities)
that may be costly (or prohibitive) and time-consuming
to repair or replace following intense storms.
To plan for the potential impacts from a changing climate,
society requires updated and decision relevant information
28 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

combined with mechanisms to educate and engage decision
makers and the public. Without accurate information, appropriate decision-making can be more challenging. We could
begin this process by:
• Investing in the assessment of existing sources of information, updating information and identifying gaps; actions
that could include the development of updated coastal
and freshwater 100-year floodplain maps, which reflect
current conditions and potential future flooding under
different climate change scenarios, LIDAR mapping of
coastal and estuarine systems, built infrastructure risks.
• Disseminating reliable and decision-relevant information
about the economic, environmental, and social impacts
of climate change to decision makers and the general
public.
See: Invest in the Development and Distribution of Critical
and Decision Relevant Information (ADP Action 1). Discussed
in detail in Chapter 5 and Appendix 4.9.
At the state and local level, we need to create policies to
support economic development that accounts for the changWinter Storm Response
New Hampshire’s current response to winter storm events
could provide a model for coordinating state-wide efforts
to extreme weather events (e.g., flooding, hurricanes) that
are projected to increase in the future. The development
of more extensive projections of extreme weather (e.g.,
frequency, magnitude) can be provided to decision-makers
to facilitate integrated planning and coordination of event
response by state and local entities. This development
would include the communication channels over which
event forecasts could be disseminated to state and local
authorities and to the public to enhance preparation in
advance of storms.
ing climate and attracts climate friendly employers. This would
include developing new technologies for adapting to climate
change and fostering new opportunities in adaptive technologies and services. Implementation may require the development of infrastructure to support businesses adapting their
business model to climate change. We can do this by:
• Anticipating the effects of climate change on current
industries (e.g., skiing, agriculture, tourism, forestry and
logging, etc.) and assisting in stabilizing and enhancing
their income.



• Developing “green collar” training and education programs.
• Attracting alternative energy and other “clean-tech” industries.
• Taking advantage of any new economic opportunities
where New Hampshire might create a niche for itself in
sustainable economic development.
See: Strengthen the NH Economy for Adaptability to Climate
Change (ADP Action 6). Discussed in detail in Chapter 5 and
Appendix 4.9.

Human Health Impacts of Climate
Change

of heat stress, respiratory illness, and infectious diseases (Figure 3.2). Climate change may also increase the incidence of
injury and death from severe weather events. Incresing our
public health capacity and working with community planners
would help society prepare for the myriad health impacts for
climate change and expand access to healthcare and reliable
havens from heat, air pollution, air-borne allergens, and extreme weather.
Specific Health Impacts and Stressors
Thermal Stress/Heat Waves – Humans are susceptible to
high temperatures and heat waves are a major public health
threat. The combined death toll from the blistering heat wave
in Europe in August 2003 reached over 32,0009. The 1995 heat

wave in the Midwest led to nearly 700 heat related deaths in
Challenges currently faced by at-risk populations are pro- less than a week10. Under a higher-emissions scenario, which
jected to increase in any climate change scenario. As a state relies primarily on high-CO -emitting fossils fuels as an energy
2
we need to focus policies and actions to help the most at risk source, the Concord/Manchester area is projected to experipopulations (e.g., elderly, low income, chronically ill, children) ence nearly 65 days per year when the heat index is above
as well as the general population to prepare for the impacts of 90oF11. The elderly, young children, pregnant women, the
of climate change and related social impacts. These considerFigure 3.2 - Potential Health Effects of Climate Variability and Change8
ations behind these preparations could include:
the cost and availability of transportation; the
ability to heat and cool homes; access to “cool
shelters;” the availability of food and potable
water; access and affordability of healthcare;
and the potential need to relocate. To accomplish
this we need:
• Public health and emergency response
agencies to collaborate with the appropriate agencies and organizations to develop
effective public outreach.
• Partnerships between these organizations
to share relevant data and information.
• Education and empowerment of public
health officials in New Hampshire to prepare
for health related and social impacts resulting from climate change.
See: Focus Policies and Actions to Help At
Risk Populations Prepare for Impacts of Climate Change (ADP
Action 2)
Charge and Empower Public Health Officials to Prepare for
the Public Health Impacts of Climate Change (ADP Action 3).
Discussed in detail in Chapter 5 and Appendix 4.9.
Without action, climate change could increase the incidence

chronically ill, and essential service workers are particularly
vulnerable to heat stress of this nature. Heat-related risks and
vulnerabilities to New Hampshire’s population can be alleviated by increasing public health capacity in the state through
actions such as community partnerships and increased access
to healthcare as well as modifying buildings and having early
warning systems in place and functional.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 29



Air Quality – Air quality in New Hampshire is related to
weather conditions, with many of the worst air quaility days
occuring during hot summer days. Under high-emissions
scenarios, the Concord/Manchester area could experience
a quadrupaling of poor air quality days above present levels
(from 4 to 16) as defined by the EPA. Air quality is a significant
health concern, especially for sensitive populations such as
children, the elderly, and people with respiratory disease.
Decreased air quality has been linked to the onset of asthma,
and to increased frequency of asthma symptoms. In addition, increased temperatures and CO2 levels would lead to
increased pollen production in several key allergenic species
such as ragweed12.
Infectious Diseases – An increase in hot weather would
likely facilitate the spread of vector-borne infectious diseases
such as Lyme disease, eastern equine encephalitis and West
Nile virus. Intense public health monitoring programs have
already been implemented for vector-borne disease. The role
of climate change in the spread and incidence of other infectious diseases is poorly understood. In general, many of these
diseases can be effectively avoided with prevention and control
programs and adequate financial and public health resources,
including training, surveillance, and emergency response.
Storms and Flooding – More frequent and extreme weather
events projected by climate change models would damage
property and threaten public safety. The settlement pattern
in New Hampshire has taken place largely around rivers and
lakes with floodplain areas often being the easiest areas to
develop. Floodplains, however, are where the most flood losses
occur. Development in these areas puts people, buildings and
infrastructure in harms way, and increases the rate and amount
of floodwater forced downstream causing more damage13.
Flooding would also diminish public health by spreading toxins,
comtaminating water supplies, disabling local septic systems,
wastewater treatment systems and combined sewer overflows,
in addition to damaging roads and buildings.

Natural Systems Impacts of
Climate Change
Agriculture and Forestry
From July 2001 through June 2002, New Hampshire’s agriculture industry generated $930 million in direct spending,
representing over 2 percent of the state GDP, and supported
almost 12,000 jobs14. In addition, the state’s forests provide a
wealth of ecosystem services that include recreation, tourism,
30 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

wildlife habitat, timber and other forest products, protection
of watersheds and drinking water supplies, carbon storage,
nutrient cycling and soil conservation15. As a result, forests are
a critical part of the New Hampshire economy. In 2005, forestbased manufacturing and forest-related recreation and tourism
in the state contributed over $2.3 billion16. These industries will
face significant challenges as the climate continues to change.
Climate models project decreases in the number of frost days,
where temperatures dip below freezing, and increases in the
length of the frost-free growing seasons. Tree species composition is likely to change17. Warmer winter temperatures would
also allow for the northward migration of the hemlock woolly
adelgid that has decimated hemlock forests to the South18.
The eventual changes in forest composition and function could
profoundly alter the scenery and character of New Hampshire,
as well as the ecosystem services our forests provide.
The Northeast’s agricultural economy is dominated by dairy
and high-value horticultural crops. Over the course of the
century, rising temperatures and erratic weather conditions
generated by climate change could threaten the productivity
and economic viability of some crops and livestock that have
been important historically but that are adapted to a cooler
climate19. Some of the agricultural issues we face include
changes in growing season and crop productivity, summer heat
stress, increased rainfall and drought, and greater growth in
weeds and insect pests20.
Sustaining New Hampshire’s agricultural and forest industries require evaluating strategies that:
• Alter the timing of planting dates in response to changing
growing conditions.
• Maintain local agricultural lands.
• Alter crop mix and forest species to better match the
changing climatic conditions.
• Breed new plant species and crops more tolerant of
changed climate condition.
• Promote fire suppression practices inresponse to increased fire risk.
• Adopt forestry practices that enhance carbon storage.
• Maintain forest reserves for species and genetic diversity.
Coastal Areas and Sea-Level Rise
Relative sea level rose at an average rate of 2.0-2.7 mm per
year over the last century in New Hampshire, nearly a foot per



century21. Sea-level rise is likely to accelerate in the future. The
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) projects that, based primarily on increases in water
volume due to increases in sea surface temperatures, global
sea level is projected to rise into the twenty first century. It is
projected that seal levels will rise between 7 and 14 inches if
greenhouse gas emissions are reduced significantly and between 10 and 23 inches if greenhouse gas emissions continue
to increase at their present rate. A recent study suggests that
if current rates of ice discharge from the Greenland and West
Antarctic ice sheets are taken into account, sea levels could rise
as much as 2.6 to 6.6 feet (31 to 79 inches) by 210022.

Protecting New Hampshire’s coastal areas requires
actions that:

guard against the risk that some sites may be irretrievably
altered in the future.
In addition, effective conservation in the face of a rapidly
changing climate requires consideration of the current location
of plants, animals and natural communities as well as where
they might be located in the future. Presently, fragmentation of
natural systems by roads, infrastructure and other alterations
has created obstacles to potential migration. Adaptation may
require the addition of corridors between protected areas or
stepping stones of reserve networks across gradients to ensure
that species can continue to move toward their optimal climatic
zones in all directions.
Protecting New Hampshire’s ecosystems and wildlife requires evaluating strategies that:

• Analyze the environmental consequences of shore protection.

• Encourage development and growth in existing urban
areas while avoiding natural areas.

• Promote shore protection techniques that protect habitat.

• Develop a system of intact protected natural areas to
foster resiliency, to allow for species movement and also
to protect ground water.

• Identify land use measures to ensure that wetlands migrate inland as sea level rises in some areas.
• Engage state and local governments in defining responses
to sea-level rise.
• Educate decision-makers about the importance of changing zoning regulations.
Ecosystems and Wildlife
There are many significant implications of climate change
for New Hampshire’s ecosystems and wildlife populations.
Many species are already stressed by land-use change, pollution, invasive species, and habitat fragmentation. These
non-climatic stressors interact synergistically with climate
stressors and result in greater overall impacts23. For example,
when brook trout are exposed to pesticides, their nervous and
reproductive systems can be affected. Those impacts increase
as water temperature rises. Warmer water also reduces the
amount of oxygen available to fish and can also result in less
offspring being produced. The combined impact of climate
change and existing environmental stressors therefore can
compromise species’ resilience and their opportunity for successful adaptation to climate change24, 25.
The key to ensuring ecosystem and wildlife adaptation is to
maintain overall ecosystem health and to conserve important
areas. An intact ecosystem is a more resilient ecosystem, capable of recovering from perturbation (e.g., storms, heat waves).
Multiple examples of each habitat type must be protected to

See: Strengthen the Protection of New Hampshire’s Natural
Systems (ADP Action 4). Discussed in detail in Chapter 5 and
Appendix 4.9.

Infrastructure Impacts of
Climate Change
New Hampshire’s critical infrastructure includes roads,
buildings, drinking-water treatment and distribution systems,
wastewater systems, communications systems, and electricity
distribution networks. Storm-related damage poses the greatest threat to the state’s infrastructure and can significantly
disrupt daily life, affect the state’s economy, and threaten the
health and safety of New Hampshire residents.
Since 1986, New Hampshire has spent $138 million in total
repairing the damages due to severe storms and flooding associated with Presidentially Declared Disasters (Figure 3.4)26.
Over this time, severe storms increased in frequency and severity, causing more damage and leading to higher recovery costs
for the state. The state incurred more than half of these costs,
$87 million, in the last seven years. Riverine flooding is the
most common disaster event in the State of New Hampshire27.
Over the past three years, New Hampshire has experienced
three 100-year flood events; with one event costing the state
$35 million28.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 31



Figure 3.4 – Costs Related to Presidentially Declared Disasters in New
Hampshire Individual Storm Event Damage (Cost in Millions of Dollars)

30

• Utilize municipal ordinances, building codes,
zoning regulations, land use practices, infrastructure planning, and incentives to protect
against risks.
See: Increase Resilience to Extreme Weather Events (ADP Action 5). Discussed in detail
in Chapter 5 and Appendix 4.9.

25
20

Understanding the Risks
of Climate Change

15

J-04

J-02

J-00

J-98

J-96

J-94

J-92

J-90

J-88

J-86

0

Projections of future impacts from climate change include
increases in overall precipitation, an increase in extreme
precipitation events, and more flooding. New Hampshire’s
municipal water and wastewater utilities are largely unprepared for increased flood frequency and volume. Even modest
disruptions can have significant impacts on daily life. Potential
disruptions include alteration to the hydrological regime resulting in pressure on wastewater and stormwater systems in their
ability to handle large volumes of water in short time.
Protecting New Hampshire’s infrastructure requires evaluating strategies that:
• Create a policy for coastal and floodplain properties that
plans for residents and structures needing to relocate due
to flooding or inundation.
• Guide future development away from flood prone areas
and maintain adequate setbacks.
• Render the existing environment more resilient to weather
related impacts.

32 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

J-08

5

Adaptation planning involves many uncertainties. State and local government
must establish transparent climate change
adaptation planning procedures that are
fully integrated with other aspects of their
work. They must ensure that their short-term
and long-term commitments allow for and
encourage adaptive management in an effort to establish a
“no regrets” strategy for New Hampshire to adapt to climate
change. By preparing for climate change early, the state can
avoid significant costs, whether economic, social or ecological,
in the future.

J-06

10

Climate change poses a threat to all aspects of New Hampshire. Going forward the state will need to better understand
the risks and vulnerabilities that the human and natural communities face as projections of climate change impacts become
more refined and detailed. The state will need to plan for these
impacts with the best understanding of the resources that
are available to address the issue at the state, regional and
national level. This would require more comprehensive and
integrated planning with a variety of stakeholders and should
begin immediately and continue into the future.
See: Develop a Climate Change Adaptation Plan for New
Hampshire (ADP Action 8). Discussed in detail in Chapter 5
and Appendix 4.9.



Chapter 4: Economic Opportunities

T

he CSNE economic team conducted an assessment of
the cost of implementation and economic benefits associated with approximately 80 of the more than 100
potential actions developed by the working groups. The objective of the economic assessment was to estimate the approximate “level of magnitude” of the economic impacts, and to
provide an indication of the expected timing and distribution of
the impacts and benefits for each action. The detailed modeling assumptions and conclusions of CSNE’s analysis for each
potential action are provided in Appendices 6 and 7.

Climate Change Policy Economic
Impacts
Economic considerations of climate change policies are
important. Policies that address climate change have costs.
However, for many climate change policies there are significant
net economic benefits1. The keys to realizing these economic
benefits are to first identify policies that reduce greenhouse
gases at a relatively low cost, and then to ensure that a signifi-

cant portion of the costs are investments that reduce energy
use and expenditures over time, and also reduce spending on
imported energy sources.
The primary benefits of the potential climate change policy
actions analyzed can be categorized as:
• Reduced spending by consumers, businesses and government on imported fossil fuels.
• Redirection of spending (from the above) directly into the
state’s economy, which increases state output and creates
jobs.
• Reduced exposure to volatile imported energy prices,
enabling a more stable business cost and investment
environment in the state.
• Business development opportunities and job creation
related to energy efficiency and generation of renewable
sources of energy.
• Avoidance of costs associated with degradation of the
natural environment and ecosystems and related decline
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 33



in natural resources, tourism and related industries.
• Avoidance of costs associated with health care and related
costs related to toxic emissions and climate change.
While New Hampshire cannot avoid climate change impacts
by in-state actions alone, New Hampshire’s actions can help
spur other states and the federal government to take steps to
mitigate climate impacts which can positively further impact
all of the above.
New Hampshire’s economic well-being has long been heavily
dependent on tourism businesses related to summer, autumn,
and winter outdoor recreation in the natural beauty of our
mountains, lakes, rivers and seacoast. It has also been recognized for many years that economic vitality and environmental
protection are inextricably linked, and there is no reason to
believe that addressing climate change should be different. This
becomes even clearer when considering the high and volatile
cost of imported energy sources and the burden that high usage of energy places on the New Hampshire economy.
The state is favorably positioned to benefit economically
from policies to address climate change. Nationally, the most
negative economic impacts from potential climate change
policies are expected to be with fossil fuel producers and energy intensive industries. New Hampshire does not have fossil
fuel natural resources and, because of the state’s historically
high energy costs, energy intensive industries have tended
not to concentrate in the state. The state is well positioned to
benefit from climate change policies that reduce energy use
and lead to lower expenditures on energy by New Hampshire
businesses and residents. Reduced energy costs will enable
more New Hampshire dollars to stay in the nation, region and
state rather than being “exported out” to fossil-fuel producing
areas. Reducing energy use, principally fossil fuels and other
sources imported into the state, will result in more money
spent in and recycled (with multiplier benefits) in the New
Hampshire economy; a process leading to job creation and
other economic benefits.
In the current context of declining economic prospects
nationally and in New Hampshire, climate change policies can
provide an economic bright spot. There are many different
types of jobs in the so-called green economy. Green jobs can
be segmented into five different categories: Energy Efficiency
(EE), Environmental Services (ES), Green Transportation (GT),
Renewable Energy (RE), and Smart Tech (ST)2. Each of these
aggregates includes a cluster of industries, which contribute to
34 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

environmental improvement and sustainability. Most relevant
to climate change policies and discussion below is the Energy
Efficiency category. This category consists of industries applying
measures or practices to help use energy more effectively or
efficiently. Environmental Services consists of industries that
provide services directly or indirectly linked to the sustainability and improvement of the environment (not directly linked
to energy use). Green Transportation consists of industries
that provide or produce relatively “environmentally friendly”
transportation. Renewable Energy consists of industries that
produce energy from sources that can be renewed. Smart
Tech consists of industries that research, produce, or provide
services that directly or indirectly relate to the improvement
of technology in the four other green industry categories.
Using this classification in 2007, there were 3.6 million
green jobs in the U.S. (3.2 percent of employment). Green jobs
tend to be well paid. Nationally, green jobs averaged $57,000
in annual wages. This is about 25 percent above the average
for all industries. New Hampshire with 17,000 green jobs has
approximately the U.S. average concentration of green jobs
also at 3.2 percent of total employment as green jobs3. The
average annual earnings in green industries in New Hampshire is $54,400. This is 23 percent above the (all industries)
average annual wage in the state. New Hampshire has well
above average concentrations of green jobs in Smart Tech.
New Hampshire has below the average concentration of green
jobs in energy efficiency, green transportation, environmental services and renewable energy. If New Hampshire had a
similar percentage of green jobs as Maryland, there would be
an increase of about 6,000 green jobs adding about 1 percent
to the state’s employment base. There are opportunities for
public policies, such as those associated with climate change
action, to build on the strong base of smart tech employment
and encourage growth in energy efficiency, renewable energy,
green transportation and environmental services.
The main types of business development and employment
opportunities associated with policies to address climate
change in New Hampshire will be in such areas as: energy
auditing; energy efficient building construction/construction
trades; and research and development in the design of buildings, infrastructure and systems to be more energy efficient
and with minimal environmental impact. The state has a
particular strength in the development side of R&D and also
in architectural and environmental engineering. For example,
Autodesk in Manchester provides software to help design



buildings to minimize energy use and environmental impact.
Another business and employment development area is in the
field of alternative energy system/source design and production including developing more efficient uses of wind, wood,
water, and other natural resources in the state.

Low

$0 to $2.5 million

Moderately Low

$2.5 million to $25 million

Moderate

$25 million to $125 million

Moderately High

$125 million to $500 million

New Hampshire climate change policies can also position the
state to take advantage of President Barack Obama’s expected
Green Jobs Proposal. President Obama’s forthcoming plan
for the green economy included federal investment of $150
billion over 10 years even before the September-December
2008 sharp decline in the U.S. economy. This had been anticipated to generate 5 million jobs nationally by the campaign.
Now the administration plans to accelerate this as part of its
economic recovery proposal to as much as $100 billion in the
next two years. This amount is significant. For New Hampshire,
it could represent 16,000 jobs in the near term and 25,000
jobs over ten years on top of the current green job base. The
total green jobs in New Hampshire in 2018 could be well over
40,000, or about 8 percent of total state employment, about
the current percentage in financial services. Implementation
of climate change policies could position New Hampshire well
for leveraging and tapping into the new administration’s green
jobs initiatives.

High

$500 million to $1 billion

Very High

Greater than $1 billion

Economic Assessment
Methodology
To understand the costs of implementation and cost benefit, and therefore the economic development potential of
many of the potential actions under review, CSNE performed
detailed and transparent economic analyses to complete the
analysis of the potential CO2 emission reductions. The CSNE
economic assessment was limited by available data and the
short time frame for the analysis and Task Force work. As a
result all potential actions could not be evaluated adequately
for economic costs and benefits. CSNE engaged in some original
research and also drew on the investigators’ previous analysis
of the potential economic impacts of the Renewable Portfolio
Standard4 and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)5
in New Hampshire. Investigators also drew on existing research
and inquiry undertaken for other states and internationally
when appropriate.
Annual costs and benefits in 2025 for individual actions were
reported using the following scale:

For some actions, costs and benefits were determined to be
uncertain without significant additional research or not estimated (e.g., costs and benefits were generally not estimated
for policy actions or studies not expected to result in direct
CO2 reductions). Actions were evaluated taking into account
who is expected to experience the costs and/or benefits (e.g.,
consumers, government, business) and whether the impacts
would be evenly distributed across each sector or concentrated
on a particular subset (e.g., on lower-income consumers).
The analysis was limited to direct costs and benefits to the
New Hampshire economy, and did not include consideration
of regional or national economic costs or benefits associated
with actions taken within New Hampshire. As much as possible,
direct employment impacts and cost savings, such as those
from reduced fuel consumption, were estimated.
The costs and benefits of adaptation actions, as described
in detail in Chapter 3, were not specifically quantified as part
of the economic analysis; however, net benefits are expected
from avoided impacts of climate change within our state. Many
additional benefits associated with various potential actions,
such as avoided health costs resulting from improved local air
quality and economic benefits of reduced traffic congestion,
also were not able to be estimated as part of the economic
analysis, but are identified in the detailed consideration of each
potential action report provided in Appendices 4 and 5.

Overview of Results
New Hampshire’s Climate Action Plan is expected to have a
net positive impact on New Hampshire’s economy as many of
the recommendations evaluated are projected to have a net
positive economic benefit by policy year 2025 (Figure 4.1).
While the assessment of economic benefits of various policy
actions was conducted for all years, the year 2025 benchmark
was selected to reflect, as highlighted above, that up-front
costs in many cases are investments that can have a positive
return but that it would take some time for that positive return
to be realized.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 35



CSNE identified that much of the economic benefit of actions to address climate change stem from the reduction in
expenditures on energy and the reinvestment of these savings
in New Hampshire’s economy. Although not always specifically
quantified, additional economic benefits are expected as a
result of new job creation and local economic expansion resulting from investments in New Hampshire’s green economy and
opportunities created by actions to reduce CO2 emissions.
Of all the actions considered, the greatest economic and
environmental benefits come from reducing residential energy
use 70 percent. The next most favorable action is increasing CAFE standards to 50 mpg, followed by fuel efficiency
rebates.
The following briefly summarizes the economic assessment
of the actions associated with each of the ten overarching
strategies described in Chapter 2. Detailed projections of the
economic costs of implementation and the cost benefits associated with each action can be found in Appendix 6. Descriptions
of the economic assessment for each potential action can be
found in Appendix 7.
1. Maximize energy efficiency in buildings:

rofit existing buildings and build more energy efficient new
buildings, and are also projected to be incurred immediately.
Improved energy efficiency of buildings is expected to greatly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to provide high to very
high economic benefits, generally exceeding initial implementation costs, and these benefits would occur every year once
the improvements in building efficiency were made . Exemplary
of this category, as shown in Figure 4-1, is Making Existing
Residential Buildings 70 percent More Efficient, which exhibits
both very high projected reductions in CO2 emissions and very
high projected overall net economic benefit.
2. Increase renewable and low-CO2-emitting resources in a
long-term sustainable manner:
Implementation costs are projected to be moderate to
low. These actions are projected to provide moderate to high
economic benefits and result in high reductions in greenhouse
gas emissions. Costs and benefits are projected to be evenly
distributed over time and across all sectors.
3. Support regional and national actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions:

Economic Benefits (Savings - Costs) [Million $]

Implementation costs are projected to be generally modImplementation costs are projected to generally be high erately high and spread out over time, primarily due to the
to very high, due to high estimated construction costs to ret- high cost of technological improvements to increase average
vehicle gas mileFigure 4.1 – Annual Economic Benefits and Avoided Emission Reductions of Selected Actions in 2025
age, which are
$1,600
projected to be
Buildings
passed on to conExisting residential
$1,400
Electricity Generation
sumers through
60% less energy use
Transportation
higher vehicle
$1,200
Natural resources
prices. The direct cost to New
CAFE 50
$1,000
Hampshire to supExisting commercial
6 Individual VMT
50%
less
energy
use
port national and
reduction actions
$800
regional policy
changes are pro$600
Fuel efficiency
jected to be low,
feebate
New
construction
but incurred im$400
Zero-net energy needs
mediately. These
Lower highway speeds
Integrated forestry
$200
VMT-based registration fees
and wood use plan
actions are proRegional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative (RGGI)
jected to result in
Heavy duty fuel efficiency
$0
substantial CO2 reAvoid forested land conversion
Promote durable wood products
ductions, with po-$200
tential economic
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
benefits ranging
Avoided emissions [MMTCO2e]
from moderate
36 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan



to very high and occurring over time. Figure 4.1 illustrates
these results for increasing vehicle CAFÉ standards (i.e., raising
average vehicle fuel efficiency) and incentives to encourage
purchases of higher fuel efficiency vehicles by consumers (e.g.
, rebates); both of these actions are projected to provide high
emission reductions and high net economic benefit.
4. Reduce vehicle emissions through state actions:
Implementation costs for the recommended actions supporting this overarching strategy are projected to be low to
moderately low, while potential economic benefits are also
projected to be low to moderately low. Most implementation
costs are projected to occur over time. Some benefits occur
evenly over time and some take longer. Costs and benefits
are projected to be evenly distributed across the sectors affected.
5. Encourage appropriate land use patterns that reduce
vehicle-miles traveled:
Implementation costs for these actions are projected to
be low, to occur over time, and to be largely borne by state
government, although direct action by local municipalities
and developers would also be required. Potential economic
benefits were not estimated due to high uncertainty.
6. Reduce vehicle-miles traveled through an integrated multimodal transportation system:
The recommended actions to improve New Hampshire’s
transportation system are projected to have low to moderate implementation costs, with moderate to moderately low
benefits, generally resulting in positive net economic benefits.
Although requiring substantial public funding, most costs
and benefits would affect consumers and are projected to be
evenly distributed.
7. Protect natural resources (land, water, and wildlife) to
maintain the amount of carbon fixed or sequestered:
Implementation costs are projected to range from low to
moderately high, to occur evenly over time, and to be borne
by government or business depending on the specific action.
Benefits are generally projected to be moderate, to range from
being evenly distributed over time to longer term, and to be

more evenly distributed across sectors, with some actions
providing higher benefits to business. Note that the wide range
of ecosystem services provided by forested landscapes were
not included in this analysis.
8. Lead by example in government operations:
Costs and benefits of recommended actions under this
overarching strategy are generally projected to be low. They
are expected to result in positive net financial benefits for
state government over time. Most implementation costs are
projected to occur immediately, while most benefits occur over
time as energy efficiency measures are put in place.
9. Plan for how to address existing and potential climate
change impacts:
Immediate implementation costs of the recommended
actions are projected to be low, while future implementation
costs are uncertain at this time. Potential economic benefits
were not specifically estimated.
10. Develop an integrated education, outreach and workforce
training program:
Implementation costs are projected to be low to moderately
low, to be concentrated early on in implementation and to fall
on state government. Benefits are projected to be moderate
to moderately high, to be realized soon after implementation
and to continue over the long term, and to benefit consumers
and businesses.

Summary
There are costs associated with policies to address climate
change. A significant portion of the costs are concentrated at
the initial stages of implementation. Over time, however, many
of the policies considered result in net economic benefits.
The details of CSNE’s cost of implementation and cost benefit
analysis are summarized in the tables in Appendix 6. The key
to capturing net economic benefits is to give priority to policies that reduce CO2 emissions at relatively low costs and view
the costs as investments that over time reduce energy use and
expenditures on energy sources imported into the state. The
best example of this is reducing residential energy use.

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 37



Chapter 5: Summary of Actions

E

ach action recommended by the Task Force to support
the 10 overarching strategies is summarized below in
cluding an overview of short-term and mid-term
implementation steps. It is clear from these summaries that
a significant amount of resources will be required to develop
these recommended actions and to coordinate the various
parties involved in implementation. The first steps in this
development process will be to determine those parties responsible for coordinating the implementation of the entire
plan and its individual recommendations and to obtain the
resources necessary to support this process. This broader
implementation process is detailed in Chapter 6, and, as can be
observed from the recommended actions below, will require
the collaborative effort of government, business, non-profit
and educational entities.

Overarching Strategy 1: Maximize
Energy Efficiency in Buildings
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
38 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

◆ Maximize Efficiency in New Construction (RCI Action 1.1)
Develop a program to maximize energy efficiency and
minimize net CO2 output in new residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial building construction with a phased-in
goal for new buildings to use produce as much energy as they
consume. New construction should incorporate state-of-the
art energy efficiency and renewable energy systems into the
design of the building envelope, operating systems (e.g., heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC)), and energy consuming appliances and devices. This action could be developed in
conjunction with the national level Architecture 2030 initiative,
which targets similar energy use goals for new buildings.
Overall Implementation:
• Develop probable legislation for building codes, zoning
regulations, and possible tax code incentives.
• Develop program details, create financial incentives, and
begin state outreach and education.
• Develop sustainable funding mechanisms.



• Implementation can begin immediately.

• Develop program details, create financial incentives, and
begin state outreach and education.

• Scaling up will continue into the future.

• Develop sustainable funding mechanisms.

Timeframe:

◆ Maximize Energy Efficiency in Existing Residential Buildings (RCI Action 1.2)

• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.

Develop a program to retrofit existing New Hampshire
housing stock to minimize or eliminate net CO2 output, and
further, to ensure that current and future investments minimize embedded CO2 output with a phased-in goal to retrofit
30,000 homes annually in order to reduce their net energy
consumption by 60 percent. Program elements should include:
1) building shell and window upgrades, including instrumented
air sealing and thermographic inspections; 2) space conditioning equipment upgrades/replacements, including ductwork
and duct sealing; 3) domestic hot water system upgrades; 4)
Energy Star lighting upgrades/replacements; 5) water saving
measures; 6) Energy Star appliances upgrades/replacements;
and 7) use of renewable energy systems.

• Implementation can begin immediately.

Overall Implementation:
• Develop program details, create financial incentives, and
begin state outreach and education.
• Develop sustainable funding mechanisms.
• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.
Timeframe:
• Implementation can begin immediately.
• Scaling up will continue into the future.
◆ Maximize Energy Efficiency in Existing Commercial, Industrial, and Municipal Buildings (RCI Action 1.3)
Develop a program to retrofit existing commercial, industrial, and municipal buildings in New Hampshire to minimize
or eliminate net-CO2 emissions, and further, to ensure that
current and future retrofit projects maximize the use of
the “embodied energy” in buildings with a phased-in goal
to reduce existing buildings net energy consumption by 50
percent by 2030. Program elements should cover the following: 1) lighting; 2) heating, ventilating and air conditioning
(HVAC) systems; 3) processes (e.g., air compressor equipment
and variable frequency drives); 4) control equipment and
technologies; 5) refrigeration equipment; 6) building shell
and windows; 7) hot water systems; 8) water usage; and 9)
renewable energy systems.
Overall Implementation:

Timeframe:

• Scaling up will continue into the future.
◆ Install Higher-Efficiency Equipment, Processes, and Systems (RCI Action 2.1)
Create incentives to increase the installation of higherefficiency equipment and the adoption of higher-efficiency
processes. Commercial, industrial, and municipal processes
can reduce net-CO2 output by properly designing process lines
and using high-efficiency lighting and equipment. Currently,
the CORE Programs offered by the electric utilities provide
these services for electricity-saving measures, and the gas
utilities have comparable services for reducing natural gas
consumption. Programming should be expanded to cover all
cost-effective measures that reduce CO2 emissions regardless
of fuel type, including the use of renewable generation and use
of combined heat and power, also called cogeneration. A combination of targeted and comprehensive energy audits could
be used to identify efficiency improvements and opportunities to reduce CO2 emissions from manufacturing processes.
Incentives could be offered to retrofit inefficient processes and
equipment and to help offset the additional costs of premium
efficiency equipment in new construction.
Overall Implementation:
• Develop program details, create financial incentives, and
begin state outreach and education.
• Develop sustainable funding mechanisms.
• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.
Timeframe:
• Implementation can begin immediately.
• Scaling up will continue into the future.
◆ Increase the Use of Combined Heat and Power (EGU Action 1.3)
Develop mechanisms to promote the use of combined heat
and power (also known as CHP and cogeneration) systems for
use as an on-site power plant or boiler to generate both electricity and useful heat simultaneously. This technology may
be applicable where a thermal load (e.g., for space heating or
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 39



industrial process heat) already exists or is planned. Combined
heat and power would be appropriate for new boilers and for
retrofits of existing boilers using cleaner-burning fuels that
are not already co-generating electricity. For consistency with
the goal of reducing overall emissions, any program designed
around combined heat and power would need to define the allowable emission limits and might also specify allowable fuels
for program eligibility. Mechanisms could include regulatory
changes, incentives and portfolio standards.
Overall Implementation:
• Consider incentives to promote voluntary development
of combined heat and power installations.
• Consider implementing a renewable portfolio for combined heat and power (separate from the existing RPS –
see EGU Action 2.1) requiring utilities to obtain a fraction
of their energy supply from this technology, with flexibility
to meet requirements through a market-based trading
program.
• Determine eligibility requirements and necessary emission limits to ensure that the desired emission reductions
would be achieved.
• Provide funding to establish and administer the program.
• Develop outreach, education and training programs
required to support the integration of combined heat
and power into siting and planning, building designs and
operation.
Timeframe:
• Enactment could be as early as 2009 with implementation
in 2010.
◆ Consider Alternative Rate Design (EGU Action 1.1)
To the extent that it reduces or does not raise electricity
costs and manages the risk to the utilities, consider identifying and implementing appropriate alternative rate designs
(e.g., decoupling) for utilities in order to remove obstacles
to increasing energy efficiency. Existing rate structures may
conflict with the State’s energy efficiency and alternative
energy goals, in that traditional rate design is based upon
“throughput” incentives for utilities to sell more energy
(e.g., kWh, therms) in order to increase their annual profits.
Advocates of alternative rate structures believe that these
mechanisms are a necessary ingredient to obtain strong utility
support for energy efficiency and would complement other
40 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

demand side management programs. Consumer advocates
have raised issues regarding rate impacts and the potential
for customers unfairly bearing all risks related to providing
electricity. New Hampshire should explore these issues and
develop a fair approach to new rate mechanisms that protect
consumers and provide appropriate incentives to utilities to
promote energy efficiency.
Overall Implementation:
• Evaluate and establish an alternate rate design as part of
the existing PUC open docket investigating decoupling
and other rate mechanisms (DE 07-064).
• Alternative rate designs either as general policies, or on
a utility-specific basis.
Timeframe:
• Consideration of possible mechanisms could be developed in the current PUC docket.
• Full implementation of a changed rate structure would
likely take several years due to the complexity.
◆ Upgrade Building Energy Codes (RCI Action 1.4a)
Update New Hampshire’s building energy code to require
improved energy efficiency in new construction and building
renovations. Building energy codes represent one of the more
cost-effective ways to reduce energy use and related carbon
emissions. The state should participate in the International
Energy Conservation Code (IECC) update process, either on
its own, or by providing input through other regional partners that do participate such as Northeast Energy Efficiency
Partnerships (NEEP). There is considerable evidence that if
New Hampshire is to achieve deeper greenhouse gas emission reductions, the state’s building energy code should be
more stringent than the current IECC. In addition to updating
its mandatory building energy code, the state could define a
preferred “stretch code” that sets even higher, but voluntary,
“green” building energy performance standards to advance
the state’s policy objectives.
Overall Implementation:
• Adopt latest revision to IECC.
• Begin consideration of higher performance standards in
the near term for either mandatory or “stretch” codes to
support RCI Actions 1.1 – 1.3.
• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.



Timeframe:
• The latest revision to the IECC may be available for adoption in January 2009.
• The code development community appears to have
adopted a three-year cycle as reasonable for code updates.
◆ Increase Building Energy Code Compliance (RCI Action
1.4b)
Consider mechanisms that would result in stricter enforcement of energy codes. Building energy codes – either mandatory or voluntary – are among the more cost-effective ways to
reduce energy use and related carbon emissions. Mandatory
energy codes can be used to set minimum requirements
for energy use in both new construction and major building
renovations. However, any effort to capture savings from
mandatory energy codes is only as good as compliance with
the codes. Consideration should be given to creating a system
to promote stricter enforcement of the state’s building energy
code to ensure compliance in all affected structures, including
those in rural communities where resources are often lacking. Such programming could include required third party
certification, the fee for which could be included as a cost of
construction. The state should consider a formal certification
process for inspectors beyond the current voluntary process
offered through the International Code Council (ICC).
Overall Implementation:
• Evaluate current barriers to effective enforcement of
building energy code; begin state outreach to municipalities to improve code compliance rates.
• Legislation likely needed to require mandatory training
and certification of all municipal building inspectors on
the state building energy code.
• Consider revenue sources to support the inspector certification program and local enforcement of the state’s
energy code.
Timeframe:
• Initiatives to enhance energy code compliance can begin
immediately.
◆ Establish an Energy Properties Section in Real Estate
Property Listings (RCI Action 1.5)
Establish an energy section in the Multiple Listing Service
(MLS) real estate listings. This measure would create a specific,
defined set of energy-related criteria/ratings for properties

presented in the MLS listings. The concept behind an MLS
energy section is to reinforce the fact that energy is a major
factor in home buying and to provide the consumer with a
means for comparing energy usage between homes. Presumably, properties that are energy-efficient would be favored,
and market pricing would reflect this advantage.
Overall Implementation:
• Adopt building energy rating standards.
• Design and implement an energy section for MLS listings
of New Hampshire properties.
• Perform outreach to build awareness of this new feature
available to buyers and sellers.
Timeframe:
• Design and implementation of an energy section for MLS
listings can begin immediately.
◆ Conserve Embodied Energy in Existing Building Stock (RCI
Action 1.8)
Develop state-wide policies and programs that recognize,
quantify, and encourage the conservation of the energy embodied in the New Hampshire’s older building stock. “Embodied energy is the total expenditure of energy involved in the
creation of the building and its constituent materials,”1 and
the energy invested in it throughout its use. Embodied energy
is a key component of life-cycle analysis, which examines the
environmental impact of building materials and systems from
raw materials, through use within a building, to demolition and
disposal. A typical house in New Hampshire contains about 1.5
billion Btu of embodied energy, enough to power the family
vehicle for about 25 years. When older buildings are preserved
or reused their embodied energy is conserved, new material
needs are minimized, and massive carbon emissions from
new construction are avoided (in addition to the unspecified
historical value that is retained). The concept of embodied
energy is not widely recognized, even among professionals
in the building and construction industries. If the potential
energy savings and reductions in carbon emissions are to be
realized, the proposed action will require education, research,
and incentive programs.
Overall Implementation:
• Establish a technical committee to conduct research and
quantify potential energy savings and emission reductions
associated with the conservation of embodied energy in
New Hampshire’s building stock.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 41



• Develop outreach and education to promote the concept
of embodied energy conservation and to dispel myths
about the use and reuse of materials.
• Prepare a list of best practices and implement demonstration projects.
• Consider creation of incentives at the state and local levels
to preserve/reuse existing building stock.
• Provide funding to establish and administer the program.
Timeframe:
• A study commission could be created in the current legislative session.
• Research and education programs could be initiated at
the same time.

Overarching Strategy 2: Increase
Renewable and Low-CO2-Emitting
Resources in a Long-Term
Sustainable Manner
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Promote Renewable Energy through the Electric Portfolio
Standard (RPS) (EGU Action 2.1)
Implement New Hampshire’s Renewable Portfolio Standard,
enacted in 2007, which mandates that 23.8 percent of retail
electricity sales to in-state customers be provided by renewable energy sources by 2025. The potential renewable generation capacity in New Hampshire alone is 4,447 megawatts
(MW) with a generation potential of 12,819,000 megawatthours (MWh) by that date. The Renewable Portfolio Standard
would capture nearly 3.5 million MWh of this potential with
the following mix of renewable sources of in-state retail electricity sales: existing small hydro, 1 percent; existing biomass
and landfill methane, 6.5 percent; new solar, 0.3 percent; and
new other (wind, geothermal, tidal, etc.), 16 percent.
Overall Implementation:
• Program development complete and ongoing.
Timeframe:
• Program has commenced and will run through 2025.
◆ Increase Renewable Energy and Low-CO2-Emitting Thermal
Energy Systems (RCI Action 3.1)
Create an incentive program to promote the expanded use
of renewable and low-CO2-emitting thermal energy systems to
42 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

reduce fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions. In New
Hampshire, the energy used for space heating, hot water,
and process conditioning makes up about one-third of total
energy consumption. This proposal would provide incentives
and attractive financing for the use of cost-effective, renewable energy resources and high-efficiency/low-CO2-emitting
thermal systems. The incentive levels and financing would be
directly tied to the magnitude of the efficiency improvements
and energy savings. Other considerations would include the
potential of particular new systems for market transformation
and peak demand reduction.
Overall Implementation:
• Identify new thermal energy systems worthy of special
consideration in this program.
• Evaluate potential current and new funding sources to
support incentives and project financing.
• Develop incentive program details and create sustainable
funding mechanisms.
• Legislation likely needed to establish stable funding
streams.
Timeframe:
• Program could start ramping up in 2009.
• Incentives and financing could continue until maximum
penetration of thermal renewable systems is achieved.
◆ Address Barriers to Low- and Non-CO2-Emitting Electric
Generation (EGU Action 2.4)
Identify and remove obstacles to siting and constructing
low- and non-CO2-emitting energy facilities and transmission infrastructure in the state. These actions would better
facilitate the development of new low- and non-CO2-emitting
facilities in the state, to enable the state to move away from
carbon-based supply-side resources (i.e., fossil-fuel-fired
power plants) while offsetting the impact of any potential
load growth. The development of the new low-and nonCO2-emitting facilities could enable older high-CO2-emitting
facilities to be gradually retired and facilitate the achievement
of New Hampshire’s Renewable Portfolio Standard targets
and the goal to meet 25 percent of the state’s energy from
renewable power by 2025. However, to do so it is imperative
that electrical transmission capability within the state also be
enhanced to enable power to be exported from those areas
where hydro, solar photovoltaic, wind, geothermal, tidal and
biomass technologies could best be deployed in order to serve



the New England load. These two goals could be accomplished
by seeking methods to expedite the ISO-NE interconnection
application review and approval for these types of facilities,
and by establishing appropriately streamlined state and local
permitting processes. In addition, New Hampshire’s planning
efforts cannot stand in isolation and should be coordinated
with other states and Canada.
Overall Implementation:
• Influence ISO-NE to expedite interconnection application
review and approval for these types of facilities.
• Establish streamlined state and local permitting processes.
• Include siting standards to protect environmental quality
and siting procedures that provide for appropriate public
participation in state process.
Timeframe:
• Policy development could begin in 2009
◆ Identify and Deploy the Next Generation of Electric Grid
Technologies (EGU Action 2.8)
Work at the state and Regional level to facilitate the adoption of the next generation of electric grid standards, technologies, and practices through a phased-in approach in order to
increase the efficiency of the grid and expand the integration
of renewable distributed power generation to reduce total
greenhouse gas emissions from the electric generation. This
transition will include the modernization of the electricity
transmission and distribution system to incorporate digital
information and controls technology, deployment of energy
storage devices, and sharing of real-time pricing information
with electricity customers and “smart” technologies in homes
and businesses. Deployment of the technology and adoption
of standards would occur in a step-wise fashion in which initial
investments would first exploit the current most cost-effective
technologies while more advanced technologies would be
employed as they become more cost-effective. This transition
would occur across New Hampshire and the entire ISO-NE grid
to the point of general adoption and ongoing market support
in the electric generation sector. Such action would lead to
the creation of a self-monitoring, adaptive system capable
of semi-automated restoration and higher energy efficiency
through reduced line losses and better integration of renewable resources through energy storage capacity and the deployment of end use technologies that are able to shift electric
use to times when renewable generation is greatest.

Overall Implementation:
• Coordinate efforts at the state and regional levels to facilitate the adoption of smart grid standards, technologies,
and practices.
• Assess the current state of smart grid technology market
penetration and any obstacles to smart grid development.
• Identify needed legislation, NH Public Utilities Commission
orders, and incentives to initiate smart grid development.
• Identify sustainable funding mechanisms.
• Require that electric utility rates be aligned with incentives for the delivery of cost-effective energy efficiency
(i.e., consider rate decoupling to promote energy efficiency).
• Require electric utilities, before investing in conventional
grid technologies, to demonstrate that investments in
advanced grid technologies have been considered.
• Require electric utilities to provide customers with direct
access to daily information regarding prices, usage, intervals and projections, and sources.
• Perform demonstration projects using advanced technologies for the power grid, including integration of
demand-side resources into grid management.
• Address transmission infrastructure limitations.
Timeframe:
• The required technology already exists and could be
deployed within a year.
◆ Promote Low- and Non-CO2-Emitting Distributed Generation (EGU Action 2.9)
Encourage the development of customer-sited low- and
non-CO2-emitting distributed generation (DG) through a combination of regulatory changes and incentives as begun with
the passage of Senate Bill 451 (SB 451) in the 2008 Session.
These distributed generation resources can include renewable
power sources such as solar photovoltaic systems, wind power
systems, biogas and landfill gas-fired systems, geothermal
generation systems, and systems fueled with biomass, as well
as extremely efficient fossil fuel fired cogeneration or combined heat and power. The distributed electricity generating
systems provide electricity system benefits such as avoided
capital investment and avoided transmission and distribution
losses, while also displacing fossil-fueled generation and thus
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. SB 451 authorizes rate
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 43



recovery for electric public utilities investments in distributed
energy resources located on the premises of a retail customer
of the electric public utility. Additional policies designed to encourage and accelerate the implementation of customer-sited
renewable distributed generation could include direct incentives for system purchase, market incentives, including “net
metering,” education and training, state goals or directives,
and favorable rules for interconnecting renewable generation
systems with the electricity grid.

Overall Implementation:
• Assess the viability of a regional approach to biogenic
waste-to-energy projects and the attendant economies
of scale.
• Develop incentive program details and create sustainable
funding mechanisms.
• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.
Timeframe:

Overall Implementation:

• Program development can begin immediately.

• Assess the current state of renewable distributed generation in New Hampshire.

• Implementation could begin as early as 2010.

• Identify regulatory and institutional opportunities and
obstacles affecting expansion of this network.
• Develop appropriate legislation and rules to expand the
use of renewable distributed generation.
• Develop an outreach and education program with provisions for technical assistance.
• Develop a financial incentive program.
• Provide sustainable funding mechanisms.
Timeframe:
• The required technology already exists and is currently
being implemented. More widespread implementation
would occur once the necessary regulations, programs,
and incentives have been put into place.

Actions recommended by the Task Force with
majority support:
◆ Implement Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
(EGU Action 2.2)
Implement the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, beginning in 2009, to stabilize CO2 emissions from power plants at
188,076,976 tons (regional three-year average) through 2014.
Reduce CO2 emissions by an additional 2.5 percent per year for
four years (10 percent total) through 2018. In 2012, evaluate
the feasibility of further reductions after 2018.
Overall Implementation:
• Complete RGGI rulemaking process.
• Continue to participate on regional implementation
workgroup with other states.

◆ Encourage the Use of Biogenic Waste Sources for Energy
Generation (AFW Action 2.4)

• Continue to implement program.

Create incentives for the development of facilities and processes that utilize biogenic waste streams as energy sources
to reduce New Hampshire’s reliance on fossil fuels. These
wastes, which may be generated in municipal, residential,
agricultural, institutional, or industrial settings, can provide
heat, power, and fuel through any number of applications.
Examples include: anaerobic digesters, microbial fuel cells, and
direct conversion of organic wastes to fuel. Among the possible energy sources are sludge, septage, municipal and industrial wastewater, brown grease, residential and institutional
food waste, leaf and yard waste, and manure. Development
incentives could be provided by means of 1) a loan program to
assist livestock and industrial operations, and 2) modification
of existing municipal funding mechanisms to cover the higher
initial costs of these projects, to be offset by long-term reductions in operating costs and fossil fuel consumption.

• Implementation is on-going.

44 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Timeframe:

◆ Enable Importation of Canadian Hydro and Wind Generation (EGU Action 2.6)
To the extent that it reduces or does not raise electricity
rates to the consumer, high voltage transmission lines should
be built to import clean power generated from Canadian hydro
and wind sources as a complementary policy to developing
non-CO2-emitting generation in New Hampshire. Canada is
developing vast new hydro and wind generation resources,
which are greater than their local needs. This creates an opportunity for New Hampshire and the entire Northeast to
obtain clean power. This could provide new power sources to
offset future local and regional growth and facilitate retiring
or curtailing the operation of fossil fuel-fired plants in New
England. Contracts made for this renewable energy should be
developed with consideration for the broader environmental



impacts of the power sources as well as the impacts that this
imported power would have on the development of in-state
renewable resources.
Overall Implementation:
• Begin administrative and legislative procedures to clarify
issues and enable construction of a new transmission
system.
• Identify program developers to find and align potential
sellers and buyers for clean Canadian power. A positive
regulatory or legislative signal would be essential.
Timeframe:
• This action could be implemented soon after 2012, following necessary review and approval.
◆ Allow Regulated Utilities to Build Renewable Generation
(EGU Action 2.7)
To the extent that it increases New Hampshire’s overall
renewable energy capacity and the rate at which those resources are brought online and helps to reduce CO2 emissions,
regulated utilities should be provided with limited authority
to construct and/or acquire renewable generating assets. The
only regulated electric utility that currently owns generation
is Public Service of New Hampshire (PSNH), and under existing
law PSNH and other utilities* are only specifically authorized to
invest in or own new small-scale distributed generation under
a new 2008 law. As noted in the summary below, this issue
has been an area of intense debate within the Legislature and
a wide range of opinions exist among the various stakeholder
groups across the state. However, in the interest of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and reducing vulnerability to global
energy price volatility, New Hampshire’s energy planning efforts should consider the significant resources and experiences
that utilities can provide in the development of new renewable
generation, in conjunction with a strategy of aggressively encouraging new low-CO2 generation sources so that ultimately
less fossil fuel generation plants are needed in New England.
The key element to achieve the greenhouse gas reductions is
to adopt legislation that gives regulated utilities the authority to construct and/or acquire renewable generating assets.
This authority should be provided with consideration to the
impact that it will have on the benefits of market competition
provided by non-utility owned merchant generating plants.
* This excludes the New Hampshire Electric Cooperative and
municipal electric utilities, which are not subject to the restrictions
placed on other utilities in the state.

Overall Implementation:
• Establish clear legislation authorizing regulated utilities to
construct or acquire generation facilities that are based
exclusively on renewable energy resources.
• Address obstacles to speedy and efficient project review
at the state and local levels by:
o Considering an expedited permit process for smaller
generation facilities using renewable resources.
o Providing for an expedited PUC proceeding schedule
so that project review may begin prior to project
commencement.
• Address transmission infrastructure limitations, including
the Coos County loop in northern New Hampshire.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented during the 2008-2009
legislative session.

Overarching Strategy 3: Support
Regional and National Actions to
Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Support Stricter Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (TLU Action 1.A.1)
Support more stringent, near-term Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards for all passenger vehicles and light
trucks up to 10,000 lbs. gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR).
CAFE is the sales-weighted average fuel economy, in miles per
gallon, of a manufacturer’s light-duty vehicles and light-duty
trucks. Current standards apply to vehicles manufactured for
sale in the United States with a GVWR of 8,500 lbs. or less.
The higher limit would allow for inclusion of large sport utility
vehicles and pick up trucks in these standards. In addition,
the state should support the adoption of CAFE standards for
vehicles greater than 10,000 lbs. GVWR in the near term. New
standards recently proposed by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA)2 would raise the required corporate average to 35 mpg by model year 2020, up from the
current 27.5 mpg for light cars and 22.2 mpg for light trucks.
Existing analyses indicate that higher fuel economy is achievable with currently available technology and that significant
improvements could be made by model year 2015.

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 45



Overall Implementation:
• Support more stringent fuel efficiency standards through
New Hampshire’s Congressional Delegation. (Fuel economy standards may be established only by the federal
government.)
• Continue public outreach and education to build public
support for more fuel-efficient vehicles.
• A legislative resolution could be passed to demonstrate
support.
Timeframe:
• Immediate efforts are needed as, under current rules,
manufacturers would be required to meet the new standards within three years after their adoption.
• NHSTA is required to review the existing standards periodically. As new technology is developed, the standards
should be made increasingly stringent.
◆ Support Fuel Economy Standards for Heavy-Duty Vehicles
(TLU Action 1.A.2)
Support fuel economy standards for all new vehicles greater
than 8,500 lbs. gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) to achieve
greater CO2 reductions from future vehicles. Also, support
programs such as EPA’s SmartWay Transport Partnership
program to increase the fuel economy of existing heavy-duty
vehicles. Tractor-trailers consume about two-thirds of all truck
fuel consumed in the U.S. today. Tougher fuel economy standards for new trucks would have a significant impact on fuel
consumption, but those standards are probably 10 or more
years away from implementation. On the other hand, using
available technology to improve the fuel economy of existing
trucks would have an immediate impact. The current truck
fleet can be made more fuel-efficient through aerodynamic
retrofits, low-rolling-resistance tires, and idling reduction
technology. Actions taken to improve the fuel economy of
existing and future trucks would provide both short- and
long-term CO2 emission reductions.
Overall Implementation:
• Support more stringent fuel efficiency standards through
New Hampshire’s Congressional Delegation. (Fuel economy standards may be established only by the federal
government.)
• A legislative resolution could be passed to demonstrate
support.
• Consider legislative action to initiate an EPA SmartWay
46 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Transport partnership/financing program.
• Identify potential funding sources and staffing requirements for such a program.
Timeframe:
• Retrofit improvements to the existing fleet can begin
immediately.
• Federal Fuel Economy Standards would require10 or more
years to implement.
◆ Adopt a Low-Carbon Fuel Standard (TLU Action 1.C.1)
Adopt a Low-Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) to reduce vehicular greenhouse gas emissions. This action would establish an
emission standard measured in CO2-equivalent mass per unit
of fuel energy sold. The standard would be based on lifecycle
analysis to account for all emissions deriving from fuel production, distribution, and consumption. This approach recognizes
that the “upstream” emissions associated with production
and distribution – not just those from fuel combustion – are
significant contributors to the overall climate impact of transportation fuels.
Overall Implementation:
• Work with Northeast states and eastern Canadian provinces to develop a regional standard.
• Adopt the regional standard by legislation or executive
order.
• Identify potential funding sources and staffing requirements to enable participation in planning, administration,
and enforcement of the fuel standard.
Timeframe:
• Work should begin now to ensure that a standard is available for adoption by the region in the next 3 to 5 years.
• Phase-in of the standard would occur over the next 10 to
15 years.
◆ Promote Alternative Fuel and Advanced Technology Vehicles and Supporting Infrastructure (TLU Action 1.C.2)
Promote development and deployment of alternative fuel
vehicles, advanced technology vehicles, and associated fueling
and powering infrastructure in order to speed market penetration of such vehicles and reduce transportation related greenhouse gas emissions. Alternative fuel vehicles (AFV), which
will require adequate fueling infrastructure, include vehicles
powered by fuels such as natural gas, propane, ethanol and
biodiesel. Advanced technology vehicles, such as hybrid elec-



tric vehicles (HEV), plug-in hybrids (PHEV), advanced electric
vehicles, and fuel cell vehicles (FCV), will require infrastructure
in the form of electric plug-in ports, pricing and load signals
from the grid. While these technologies promise dramatic
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions associated with the
transportation sector, planning across energy sectors will be
needed to ensure that emission reductions in the transportation sector are not offset by increases elsewhere. For example,
plug-in hybrid vehicles could increase peak electrical loads
that draw from high-CO2-emitting generators. Use of “Smart
Grid” technology would allow plug-in hybrids to be recharged
at optimal times. Although government is well positioned to
promote the use of alternative fuel and advanced technology
vehicles, the demand for these vehicles will continue to be
driven at least in part by the economy. New Hampshire can
hasten their deployment by investing in research and development where needed, seeking early adoption for state vehicle
fleets, and providing financial resources and incentives to
develop the required refueling infrastructure.

mechanism for greenhouse gases. The national legislation
should also support comprehensive adaptation planning that
integrates the enhancement of the state’s significant existing
built and natural infrastructure. In the event that legislation
results in a cap and trade program, the national program
should return a significant portion of any collected pollution
allowance revenues to New Hampshire to fund the emission
reduction, clean energy, energy efficiency, and adaptation
priorities contained in this Climate Action Plan. Adaptation
priorities would include protecting natural systems, which
provide significant ecosystem services to the state, as well as
maintaining and enhancing built infrastructure affected by
extreme storm events. Properly structured national climate
legislation could provide the needed funding to implement
many of the capital-intensive, higher-impact priorities identified in this plan. Funds generated by passage and enactment of
a national climate law could drive the large emissions reductions needed while growing the New Hampshire economy if
directly returned to the states and properly targeted.

Overall Implementation:

Overall Implementation:

• Seek federal funding to support infrastructure development.

• Pass a legislative resolution to support efforts by the
New Hampshire congressional delegation to encourage
passage of a national climate bill that would:

• Commit the state fleet to new technology.
• Develop and deploy smart-grid technology.

o Complement efforts at the state level.

• Continue to work with stakeholders and regional entities
to develop market.

o Return generated revenue to the states in order to
support the implementation of state Climate Action
Plans.

Timeframe:
• The Granite State Clean Cities Coalition has been promoting these vehicles and fuels since 2002, with growing
interest each year.
• The timing of public acceptance and demand will be affected by market forces.
• PHEVs are expected to be on the market in 2010 to
2012.
• The timing for FCVs is unknown and would occur against
stiff competition from PHEVs.
◆ Support Strong Climate Action at the Federal Level (GLA 1.6)
The Task Force endorses strong national climate legislation
to complement state efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and prepare for the projected impacts of climate change.
Such action could include increased vehicle fuel economy standards, appliance energy efficiency standards, investment in
regional transportation networks and a national cap and trade

• State level funding resulting from national legislation
should be directed towards:
o Tax credits to support residential and business investment in measures consistent with this Plan.
o State and local government, non-governmental
organizations, and privately-administered matching
grant and loan funds.
o Direct grants or tax rebates to low-income households least able to adjust to potentially higher energy
prices and designed to migrate participants as rapidly
as possible to greater energy efficiency.
o Loans and grants for student and worker green jobs
training.
Timeframe:
• A legislative resolution could be passed in the 2009 session.
• It is anticipated that a national climate bill will be introNew Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 47



duced in Congress in the 2009 Legislative session with
passage likely in the next two years. The incoming Obama
administration has made a national climate bill one of its
top priorities.

Overarching Strategy 4: Reduce
Vehicle Emissions through State
Actions
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Adopt California Low Emission Vehicle (CALEV) Standards
(TLU Action 1.A.3)
Adopt California Low-Emission Vehicle (CALEV) standards,
including the tailpipe greenhouse gas emissions standards.
Under the Clean Air Act, Section 209, states may not develop
their own vehicle emission standards. The exception to that
rule is the state of California, which may set its own standards
provided they are at least as stringent as federal standards.
California standards are typically more stringent than federal
standards. The remaining 49 states have the option of either
following federal emission standards or adopting the CALEV
standards. The CALEV requirements include a tailpipe greenhouse gas emission standard that does not exist for federal
emission standards. CALEV also includes a zero-emissionvehicle requirement (e.g., electric vehicles). States that adopt
CALEV standards may choose to include the greenhouse gas
and zero-emission-vehicle requirements or not. CALEV states
allow only the sale of vehicles certified to CALEV standards.
Unlike states that operate under federal vehicle emission
standards, where the standards are enforced by EPA, any state
that adopts CALEV is responsible for enforcing the program
provisions by itself.
Overall Implementation:
• Draft and pass legislation to adopt CALEV standards.
• Provide funding for economic and air quality analyses to
support legislative action.
• Allocate staffing and financial resources to develop, implement, and administer the program.
Timeframe:
• Approximately three years would be required to pass
legislation and an additional one to two years to develop
and implement the state program.
• Fleet saturation with CALEV vehicles would occur in about
48 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

10 years.
◆ Create a Point-of-Sale Financial Incentive for High-Efficiency Vehicles (TLU Action 1.B.1)
Create a new vehicle point-of-sale “feebate,” which would
provide financial incentives to purchase vehicles that are
high in fuel-efficiency and low in greenhouse gases emissions, accompanied by financial disincentives to purchase
low-efficiency, high-CO2-emitting vehicles. A buyer of a new
high-efficiency vehicle would be rewarded with a rebate, but
a buyer of a low-efficiency vehicle would have to pay a fee or
surcharge (hence the name “feebate”). An effective feebate
would be about 5 percent of the vehicle price. The feebate
could be administered in either of two ways: 1) at the point of
sale (e.g., at the automobile retailer), or 2) at the initial vehicle
registration. The program could be made virtually revenueneutral by using the surcharges paid on low-efficiency vehicles
to cover the rebates on high-efficiency vehicles.
Overall Implementation:
• Pass legislative amendment to RSA 261 (Registration of
Vehicles).
• Revise NH Department of Safety Rules pertaining to registration (Chapter Saf-C 500 Vehicle Registration Rules).
• Provide resources to support program administration.
• Provide outreach and education before and during program rollout.
Timeframe:
• The feebate program would require one year to pass
legislation, followed by six to 12 months to begin program
implementation.
• Full benefits of emission reductions would be realized in
about 10 years.
◆ Install Retrofits to Address Black Carbon Emissions ( TLU
Action 1.C.3)
Install retrofit technologies on diesel trucks with a model
year of 2006 and older, or retire diesel trucks and replace
them with new technology and cleaner operating engines for
the purpose of reducing black carbon particulate matter (PM).
Similarly, install retrofit technologies on diesel non-road equipment, including construction equipment, diesel generators,
and the like. Black carbon is formed through the incomplete
combustion of organic fuels and is a major component of PM,
or soot, produced by diesel engines. This substance has been
identified as having a large and fast-acting warming effect on



the atmosphere. Diesel trucks built after model year 2006
include technology that dramatically reduces PM emissions
and do not need retrofitting.
Overall Implementation:
• Establish executive order to require retrofits for all state
vehicles and for all equipment working on state contracts,
as feasible.

on state and interstate highways and to improve driving habits
to improve overall vehicle fuel efficiency. This could occur
through enforcement of existing speed limits and through
driver education programs to increase driver awareness of
the potential fuel savings from changes in driving behavior.
Evaluation of a lower speed limit should also be conducted.
Overall Implementation:

• Provide outreach and education to promote voluntary
retirement or retrofits of other pre-2007 diesel trucks
and non-road equipment.

• Establish and implement driver education programs.

• Provide funding to implement program.

Timeframe:

Timeframe:

• Development and implementation of driver education
programs could begin immediately.

• This action can begin immediately using available diesel
retrofit technologies and funding.
• Emission reduction benefits will accrue through 2025, by
which time most of the pre-2007 diesel truck fleet will
have been retired.
◆ Implement Commuter Trip Reduction Initiative (TLU Action 2.A.1)
Establish a state-supported initiative to increase the number of employers implementing commuter trip reduction
programs. These programs use a variety of strategies to promote commuting and work options that reduce greenhouse
gas emissions in comparison with single-occupancy-vehicle
travel. Possible strategies include parking “cash-out,” car/van
pooling, flex time, and telecommuting. The proposed state
initiative would use mechanisms such as targeted education
and outreach, awards and recognition, and business tax incentives to promote more widespread availability of commuter
trip reduction programs.

• Increased enforcement of speed limits.
• Evaluate attitudes and impacts of a lower speed limit.

• Increased enforcement is dependent on state resources.
◆ Address Vehicle Idling (TLU Action 1.D.2)
Implement a robust idling reduction program for all motor
vehicles. Vehicle idling wastes fuel, damages engines, and results in excessive emissions. The program would set an overall
idling reduction target of 80 percent by 2010 for all vehicle
classes, but a specific idling reduction target of 100 percent by
2020 for heavy trucks. Anti-idling program options for cars and
light-duty vehicles include public education, fines for unnecessary idling, and targeted enforcement in designated areas
or locations. Program options for freight haulers and other
heavy-duty vehicles include outreach, technology retrofits
to the existing fleet, and fines based on vehicle type. Special
consideration would be given to truckers who sometimes need
to run their engines to maintain comfortable cabin conditions
during work breaks or to keep refrigerated cargo cold.
Overall Implementation:

Overall Implementation:

• Pass legislation to establish an anti-idling program.

• Provide resources to develop informational materials and
market the program.

• Develop program details and issue anti-idling program
regulations.

• Evaluate obstacles to implementation, especially lack of
alternative travel options.

• Provide outreach and education to promote the program.

• Consider possible tax credits for participating businesses.
Timeframe:
• Commuter trip reduction programs could be implemented
immediately.
◆ Increase Highway Automobile Efficiency (TLU Action 1.D.1)
Explore ways to maximize efficiency in highway vehicle
travel, including mechanisms to reduce average travel speeds

• Provide staff and financial resources to implement the
program, including funds for enforcement and possible
loans or incentives to assist with the necessary vehicle
retrofits.
Timeframe:
• An anti-idling program can be implemented immediately
for light-duty vehicles.
• A reasonable time limit should be imposed for heavy-duty
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 49



trucks requiring retrofit technology to reduce idling.
◆ Improve Traffic Flow (TLU Action 1.D.3)
Revise state guidance and policies to promote the use of
appropriate measures to reduce congestion, improve traffic
flow, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with
motor vehicle travel. Although the New Hampshire Department of Transportation and local municipalities have control
of intersection design and coordination, the public maintains
a vital role in the development of traffic management solutions. Practical measures could include modern roundabouts
at intersections, coordination of signalized intersections, and
reduction of access points through improved access management. Policy options available to the state to promote improved traffic flow include outreach and education, issuance
of technical guidance documents, and provision of funding
assistance for the best examples of publicly supported projects. Selected actions would be developed with input from
the professional planning/design community.

Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Assess Greenhouse Gas Emission Impact Fees (TLU Action
2.C.1.a)
For any new development project seeking a state permit,
assess a state impact fee based on the estimated greenhouse
gas impact of the project, and/or enable municipalities to
adopt similar programs. The size of the impact fee would
be determined from the estimated transportation demand
generated by the project and would be administered through
a statewide permit program. The new impact fees would encourage development that has lower greenhouse gas impacts,
e.g., projects designed around compact, mixed-use, walkable
environments in existing community centers. Funds raised
through impact fees could be used to support public transit
or promote other greenhouse offsets with the goal of achieving “carbon neutrality” or, at the very least, reduced carbon
footprints for new state-permitted development projects.
Overall Implementation:

Overall Implementation:

• Conduct feasibility study.

• Provide outreach and education to the general public
to explain modern design concepts for improved traffic
flow and to foster community involvement in project
planning.

• Pass enabling legislation to require a transportation-based
greenhouse gas emission permit for projects that will generate above a certain vehicle-miles-traveled threshold.

• Revise state guidance on best traffic management and
design practices; disseminate this information to planning/design professionals and municipal officials.
• Provide staff and financial resources to implement outreach, education, and technical support.
• Consider funding assistance for qualified traffic flow improvement projects.

• Develop rules to establish greenhouse gas emission
impact fees and to determine how the revenues may be
used.
• Make appropriate revision to RSA 674:21, if impact fees
are to be reduced or waived for developments within
existing community centers.

Timeframe:

• Provide funding for development and initial implementation of the program - After setup, the program would be
self-funded through permit fees.

• Outreach and education can begin immediately.

Timeframe:

• On average, intersection/signal coordination projects require two to three years to design, approve, and construct.

• Appropriate legislation could be introduced in the next
legislative session.

• On average, four to five traffic signalization projects on
state roads are constructed each year. Most new signalized intersections are the result of new commercial
development projects.

• Rulemaking, permit program setup, and project implementation could begin by 2010.

Overarching Strategy 5: Encourage
Appropriate Land Use Patterns That
Reduce Vehicle-Miles Traveled

◆ Streamline Approvals for Low-Greenhouse-Gas Development Projects (TLU Action 2.C.1.b)

50 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Municipalities would be expected to take appropriate
actions within 2 to 5 years thereafter.

Adopt new policies to streamline permit review processes,
apply alternative requirements, or otherwise reduce barriers



for development projects in existing community centers with
low-greenhouse-gas footprints. Conduct a broad evaluation of
state permit processes and requirements to identify barriers
that now deter development from locating in low-greenhousegas impact areas – including existing downtowns and community centers – and develop practical solutions to removing such
barriers. Encourage municipalities to adopt similar strategies
in their development ordinances and permit processes.
Overall Implementation:
• Pass legislation to establish a greenhouse gas program
within the NH Office of Energy and Planning or the NH
Department of Environmental Services to coordinate with
existing permit programs and create rules for the new
permit review process.
• Revise applicable state agency administrative rules to
allow expedited permit review under the new program.
• Conduct a broad evaluation of state permit processes
and requirements to identify barriers that now deter
development from locating in low-greenhouse-gas impact
areas.
• Provide funding for development and initial implementation of the program. After setup, the program would be
self-funded through permit fees.
Timeframe:
• Appropriate legislation could be introduced in the next
legislative session.
• Rulemaking, permit program setup, and project implementation could begin by 2010.
• Municipalities would be expected to take appropriate
actions within two to five years thereafter.
◆ Develop Model Zoning to Support Bus/Rail Transit (TLU
Action 2.C.2)
Develop a model zoning ordinance governing land use
around bus/rail service access points to promote ridership and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Encourage, assist, or require
municipalities to adopt and implement this zoning around
bus/rail stations. The model language would define criteria
for minimum development density; mix of land uses; and
interconnected, walkable street patterns. Grants for specific
technical assistance to support implementation of the model
zoning ordinance could be awarded to communities, and/or
incentives could be provided to encourage adoption.

Overall Implementation:
• Prepare a model zoning ordinance under the direction of
the NH Office of Energy and Planning or the NH Department of Environmental Services, with input from other
entities.
• For a voluntary program: Begin outreach and education
to promote the model ordinance; consider grants and
financial incentives.
• For a mandatory program: Issue an executive order or
pass legislation requiring adoption of the model ordinance; this action would be tied to investment in rail and
bus service extensions.
• Provide resources to develop the model zoning ordinance
and implement the program.
Note: The mandatory program would also require capital
and operating funds to implement an expanded rail and
bus system as a separate action.
Timeframe:
• A model zoning ordinance could be developed within one
year.
◆ Develop Model Zoning for Higher-Density, Mixed-Use
Development (TLU Action 2.C.3)
Develop a model zoning ordinance to promote and facilitate
higher-density, mixed-use, walkable development (including affordable housing) in designated areas of a community.
Encourage, assist, or require municipalities to adapt and
implement the model zoning. The model ordinance would
specify what “smart growth” means to the state and would
provide for the designation of compact “growth centers,”
which have lower greenhouse gas impacts than other forms
of development. A growth center program could be either 1)
a voluntary program with incentives to encourage designation of municipal growth centers at locations deemed to be
desirable, or 2) a mandatory state-legislated process requiring
that communities (perhaps of a certain minimum size) designate municipal growth centers. Grants for specific technical
assistance to support implementation of the model zoning
ordinance could be awarded to communities, and/or incentives could be provided to encourage adoption.
Overall Implementation:
• Prepare a model zoning ordinance under the direction of
the NH Office of Energy and Planning and the NH Department of Environmental Services, with input from other
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 51



entities.
• For a voluntary program: Begin outreach and education
to promote the model ordinance; consider grants and
financial incentives.
• For a mandatory program: Issue an executive order or
pass legislation requiring adoption of the model ordinance.
• Provide resources to develop the model zoning ordinance
and implement the program.
Timeframe:
• A model zoning ordinance could be developed within one
year.
• For a mandatory program, the necessary legislation, associated rulemaking, and initial program implementation
would take two to three years.
◆ Continue/Expand Funding, Education, and Technical Assistance to Municipalities (TLU Action 2.C.8)
Support/expand technical assistance and funding made
available through existing programs to promote: 1) coordinated local planning for land use, transportation, and the
environment; and 2) associated policy changes that result in
reduced greenhouse gas impacts. This action would include
updating existing publications to incorporate greenhouse gas
considerations and preparation of new materials as appropriate. This action would also provide increased coordination
among, and expansion of, existing programs now implemented
by various government agencies such as the NH Office of Energy and Planning, the NH Department of Environmental Services, the University of New Hampshire Cooperative Extension,
the Regional Planning Organizations, and other organizations
such as the New Hampshire Planners Association, the Local
Government Center, and Clean Air-Cool Planet.

• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.
Timeframe:
• It will take one to two years to evaluate existing resource
materials, educational opportunities, and grant programs; identify needed changes; and implement those
changes.

Overarching Strategy 6: Reduce
Vehicle-Miles Traveled through
an Integrated Multi-Modal
Transportation System
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Improve Existing Local/Intra-Regional Transit (Bus) Service
(TLU Action 2.B.1.b)
Improve local bus service within New Hampshire on existing
routes by providing more frequent service, better passenger
amenities and facilities, and increased marketing to expand
ridership. This action would 1) increase the frequency of
service on existing routes to reduce wait times and provide
greater flexibility for passenger travel; 2) provide additional
passenger amenities; and 3) expand marketing and provide
easier access to schedules and service information to attract
additional ridership.
Overall Implementation:
• Identify and implement service improvements and education/outreach efforts likely to increase ridership most
significantly.
• Develop outreach/ marketing plan.
• Coordinate assistance and grant funding.
• Legislative action is likely required to provide for increased
funding.

Overall Implementation:

Timeframe:

• Establish a clearinghouse of available resources including, but not limited to, publications, fact sheets, planning
tools, model ordinances, geographic information system
(GIS) data, grant programs, and educational programs.

• Outreach and education efforts could begin immediately.

• Develop a system to facilitate easy access to this information.
• Continue/expand outreach and education on the connections among land use, transportation, and environmental
planning; begin targeted outreach designed to jump start
local greenhouse gas planning initiatives.
52 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Improved services and amenities could be phased in
over time beginning in 2010-2012 as state/local funding
becomes available with an initial focus on increasing/
improving service for higher-population areas (e.g., Manchester, Nashua, and Seacoast).
◆ Expand Local/Intra-Regional Transit (Bus) Service (TLU
Action 2.B.1.a)
Expand the service areas of existing local and intra-regional
transit (bus) systems and create new systems to: 1) provide



service for all communities with 20,000 or more population;
2) provide service connections for all communities having
10,000 or more population and a defined, walkable, mixeduse central area (of at least 100 acres); 3) provide connections
to smaller satellite communities by extending existing local/
intra-regional transit systems serving New Hampshire’s largest
cities and population centers (Manchester, Nashua, Concord
and Seacoast); and 4) identify and implement additional local
transit options over time.
Overall Implementation:
• Create a task force, under the guidance of the NH Department of Transportation, to investigate opportunities and
develop recommendations for expanded local and intraregional bus service.
• Quantify potential capital and operating costs of expanded service and identify sustainable funding mechanisms
(with the realization that any system is likely to require
public subsidies).
• Provide resources for initial planning studies and technical
assistance to local communities.
Timeframe:
• Expanded service could be phased in, starting in 20102012, as funding becomes available; initial focus would
be directed toward higher-population areas that currently
lack fixed-route transit (especially the Salem-Derry area
and the regions surrounding Manchester and Nashua).
◆ Improve Existing Inter-City Bus Service (TLU Action
2.B.2.h)
Improve the quality of facilities and increase the frequency
of service on current inter-city bus routes in New Hampshire
to increase ridership levels and reduce vehicle-related carbon
emissions. Enhancements would include 1) higher-quality bus
stops and terminals with additional services and amenities; 2)
improved and additional public intermodal facilities, shared by
local and inter-city transit providers to facilitate connections;
3) increased frequency of service; and (4) better connections
to surrounding areas through improved walkability and easier
access to local transit.
Overall Implementation:
• In a collaborative effort of the NH Department of Transportation and commercial bus companies, investigate opportunities and develop recommendations for expanded
local and inter-city bus service.

• Quantify potential capital and operating costs of expanded
service and identify sustainable funding mechanisms.
• Provide resources for initial planning studies.
Timeframe:
• Expanded service could be phased in, starting in 20102012, as funding becomes available; initial focus would
be directed toward higher-population areas that currently
lack fixed-route transit (especially the Salem-Derry area
and the regions surrounding Manchester and Nashua).
◆ Expand and Improve Bicycle and Pedestrian Infrastructure
(TLU Action 2.B.1.c)
Improve and expand bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure
to increase the viability of these travel modes as options for
shorter-distance local trips, particularly within existing community centers, around transit-access points, and in other
areas of higher-density, compact, mixed-use development.
Improving the availability of biking and walking as a viable
travel option would help reduce single-occupancy vehicle use
and total vehicle miles traveled, particularly for short-distance,
local trips within compact areas and around transit-access
points.
Overall Implementation:
• Expand existing bike-ped program, along with implementing “complete streets” approaches that ensure that all
modes of travel are accommodated and supported.
• Assistance and grant funding could be coordinated by the
Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) or Regional
Planning Commissions (RPCs), together with NHDOT.
• Legislative action is likely required to provide for increased
funding and technical assistance to identify and implement appropriate actions.
Timeframe:
• On-going beginning in 2010-2012 as state/local funding
becomes available with an initial focus on increasing facilities in higher-population areas (e.g., community centers
within southern New Hampshire) and where roadway/
streetscape improvements are planned.
◆ Maintain and Expand Passenger Rail Service (TLU Action
2.B.2.a)
Maintain and expand passenger rail service within New
Hampshire as part of a balanced, state-wide, multi-modal
transportation system that keeps the state competitive with
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 53



and accessible to the region. Initial actions would focus on
sustaining and improving existing passenger rail service.
Near- to mid-term actions would focus on improving and expanding New Hampshire’s primary travel corridors (I-93 from
Salem through Manchester to Concord, and the full traverse
of I-95 on the Seacoast). Long-term actions would address
the goal of expanding passenger rail service throughout New
Hampshire.
Overall Implementation:
• Sustain and improve existing passenger rail service and
plan for future service immediately through dedicated,
long-term financial support, strategic improvements to
service, and protection of active/inactive rail corridors.
• Study and implement additional extensions and restorations of service with the goal of establishing a state-wide
passenger rail system.
• Improve/restore lost rail connections to support both
freight and passenger service to Canada.
• Develop the legislation, zoning ordinance changes and
regional coordination necessary to develop a regionally
integrated rail system.
Timeframe:
• Immediate actions can be taken to sustain and improve
existing service.
• Service extensions now under study can/should be implemented within 10-20 years.
• State-wide passenger service will take 20-30 years to
restore.
◆ Maintain and Expand Freight Rail Service (TLU Action
2.B.2.b)
Maintain and expand freight rail service within New Hampshire as part of a balanced, state-wide, multi-modal transportation system that keeps the state competitive with and accessible
to the rest of the region. Initial actions would focus on sustaining
and improving existing freight rail service. Near- to mid-term
actions would include strategic improvements and expansions
to increase freight rail usage – for example, track upgrades and
restoration of lost rail connections to Canada, New Hampshire’s
major trading partner. Long-term actions would address the
goal of expanding freight rail service throughout the state. Because any substantial improvements to rail service will almost
certainly require expenditure of public monies, attention to
sustainable funding sources will be a priority.
54 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Overall Implementation:
• Protect active/inactive rail corridors.
• Provide resources for initial planning studies and consider
options for long-term financial support.
• Conduct an economic study for expanded rail service
(consider a 10-year rail investment plan).
• Make strategic improvements to existing service, e.g.,
increase tunnel clearances for freight passage, improve
intermodal facilities, and make track upgrades to support
higher speeds.
Timeframe:
• Improvements to freight rail service could begin immediately and be expanded over time.
◆ Implement a Stable Funding Stream to Support Public
Transportation (TLU Action 2.B.2.c)
Identify and implement a stable funding stream to support
significant expansion of public transportation in New Hampshire. Public transportation is essential to establishing a balanced, less carbon-intensive transportation system within the
state. Public transportation also complements, promotes, and
supports low-greenhouse-gas-impact development. However,
the current lack of adequate funding is a major impediment
to the expansion and operation of public transportation. A
dedicated funding stream to support this purpose could be
established by implementing or enabling one or more of several possible funding mechanisms. Options include an increase
in the state gasoline tax, local gasoline taxes dedicated to
public transportation, increases in vehicle registration fees,
and revenues from a statewide feebate program or a carbon
fuel surcharge. Any of these actions would require legislative
action. An amendment to Article 6-a of the New Hampshire
Constitution would be required to remove current restrictions
on the use of gas tax revenues for public transportation.
Overall Implementation:
• Conduct a study to identify and evaluate possible mechanisms for dedicated funding.
• Initiate legislative action, if indicated, to establish a dedicated funding stream or to amend Article 6-a.
• Provide resources to support the required studies and
legislative action.
Timeframe:
• The timeframe for implementation will be tied to the



legislative process.
• Legislation for a study could be introduced in the next
legislative process.
◆ Expand Park-and-Ride Infrastructure (TLU Action
2.B.2.e)
Expand and improve New Hampshire’s park-and-ride infrastructure to support public bus transit and carpooling. In
our rural/suburban state, park-and-ride lots are essential to
providing effective inter-city bus service and increasing the
incidence of car/van pooling to reduce the number of singleoccupancy vehicle trips. The proposed action would 1) create
park-and-ride lots in new locations, 2) expand existing facilities
nearing capacity, 3) improve the services provided at these
facilities (e.g., better shelters and restroom facilities, greater
security, walkable connections to adjoining developed land
uses), and 4) strengthen education and outreach efforts to
increase the use of park-and-ride facilities.

capacity to remove CO2 from the atmosphere. Through photosynthesis, New Hampshire’s forests take up the equivalent of
25 percent of the state’s manmade CO2 emissions annually† .
Minimizing forest land conversion to non-forested uses will be
a key component of any successful emission reduction strategy. Note that 20 percent of global manmade CO2 emissions
are caused by conversion of forest land to non-forested uses.
Public policy objectives should include encouraging forest
land owners to manage their forests sustainably for the dual
purposes of producing forest products and maximizing carbon
storage. Available tools include conservation easements, carbon easements and leases, new forest management strategies,
and land use regulation. New Hampshire has had considerable
success in conserving large blocks of contiguous forest land
through perpetual easements – an important tool in maintaining the carbon sink that New Hampshire’s forests presently
provide and one which should be aggressively promoted in the
presence of growing, competing land use pressures.

Overall Implementation:

Overall Implementation:

• Expand education and outreach activities to increase the
use of underutilized park-and-ride lots.

• Create a new state initiative to invest public financial resources to protect the carbon storage capacity of New Hampshire
forests with perpetual conservation easements.

• Conduct a study to identify and evaluate locations for
new and expanded park-and-ride facilities.

• Create new incentives for forest landowners to enroll in
market certification programs to promote sustainable
forestry and to assure access to carbon credit markets.

• Provide funding to support the site studies and promotional efforts.
• Consider potential funding sources for an expanded parkand-ride program.

• Evaluate the benefit of enrolling state forests in a market
certification program to facilitate state participation in
the carbon credit markets.

Timeframe:

• Create a pilot program within the NH Department of Treasury to test the marketability of leases on privately owned
forestland with the primary objective of sustaining and expanding the carbon storage capacity of working forests.

• Education and outreach activities can commence immediately.
• Improvements to existing park-and-ride facilities and the
addition of new park-and-ride lots could begin in 20102012 as funding becomes available.

• Create new incentives to forest landowners to manage
commercial timber over longer rotations.

Overarching Strategy 7: Protect
Natural Resources (Land, Water,
and Wildlife) to Maintain the
Amount of Carbon Fixed and
Sequestered

• Develop a carbon-friendly model zoning ordinance and
provide municipalities with statutory incentives to adopt
this ordinance.
• Develop sustainable funding sources for these efforts.
Timeframe:
• All program aspects can commence immediately, would
be continuous, and could be expanded as funding allows.

Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Invest in Forests to Maximize Carbon Storage and to Avoid
Net Forest Land Conversion (AFW Action 1.2)
Sustain the natural carbon sink provided by forests and their

†

EPA State Inventory Tool output using default values for state
emissions.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 55



• Develop sustainable funding sources for these efforts.
◆ Optimize Availability of Biomass for Electricity and Heating
within Sustainable Limits (AFW Action 2.2)
Develop and maintain the policies and infrastructure
necessary to sustainably manage the state’s forests as an
essential carbon sink, for energy and timber supply, for its
recreational value, and for the provision of irreplaceable
ecosystem services. The forest industry has long been one
of the cornerstones of New Hampshire’s economy. Relatively
new end-uses, such as the production of electricity from
wood chips and the production of wood pellets for heating
residential and public buildings, are providing the need for
low-grade wood and improved logging infrastructure. It is
important to note, the biomass stock necessary to support a
growing demand is not unlimited and intact tracts of forest
are better able to sustain biological diversity and play a role in
the provision of ecosystem goods and services such as water
supply. Planners, loggers, timber owners, investors, government officials and regulators, and consumers need a strong
understanding of sustainable forest management principles
as well as the underlying state of the forests, including growing conditions, soil productivity, tree species composition,
and forest age, to make good decisions about the efficient
use of the available resource for traditional and new forest
products in order to sustainably manage this critical economic
and ecological resource.
Overall Implementation:
• Review policies, laws and rules relative forestry practices
and revise as needed.
• Inventory of forest resources.
• Develop education and outreach strategies.
• Review wood supply studies and establish state policy.
• Promote third-party green certification.
• Promote voluntary forest management practice.

have a choice between a product made from petroleum or
mineral base and one made from wood. The purchase decision
is often formed around price and a short-term, throw-away
mentality. An effective education campaign could be mounted
to change consumer thinking that favors durable wood
products over other materials when buying homes, building
materials, furniture, and other accoutrements of modern
living. Durable wood products are often more economical
in the long run – if not initially – and, unlike petroleum- or
mineral-based products, are environmentally sustainable. The
proposed program would provide additional benefits to New
Hampshire’s economy while improving product manufacturing
and transportation efficiency.
Overall Implementation:
• Design a well-researched program to promote the use of
locally made wood products.
• Initiate a promotional campaign led by a collaboration of
state government and private interests.
• Provide funding for program development and promotional activities.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately and continue over time.
◆ Protect Agricultural Land (AFW Action 1.1.3)
Promote policies and practices that preserve existing agricultural land. The conversion of agricultural land to developed
land affects its carbon absorption capacity. New Hampshire
should place greater emphasis on applying policies and practices that avoid releases of carbon stored in soils, preserve the
carbon absorption capacity of existing agricultural lands, and
enable continued carbon sequestration from the atmosphere.
Available measures include acquiring and preserving open
space, reducing sprawl through smart growth measures, and
encouraging the reuse of existing infrastructure.

Timeframe:

Overall Implementation:

• Work in several areas could begin immediately. Inventory
of forest resources would be dependent on resources.

• Continue to fund the New Hampshire Land and Community Heritage Investment Program (LCHIP) and consider
increasing the acreage of agricultural land protected
biannually through this program.

◆ Promote Durable Wood Products (AFW Action 1.3)
Create a program to develop a market for durable wood
products. When wood is used to make products that have
lasting value and are held for long periods of time, carbon is
stored and not released into the atmosphere. Consumers often
56 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Provide education and outreach directed toward preserving existing land as a means to reduce sprawl, encourage
smart growth, and reuse infrastructure.
• Develop sustainable funding sources for these efforts.



Timeframe:
• Promotional activities and LCHIP expansion can commence immediately as funding allows.

• Provide staffing and financial support for outreach/education and technical assistance.
Timeframe:

◆ Maximize Source Reduction, Reuse and Recycling (AFW
Action 3.1)

• Education, outreach, and technical assistance can begin
immediately.

Establish a state-operated revolving loan fund to increase
commercial and residential source reduction and recycling
programs in New Hampshire municipalities. Source reduction
and recycling reduce greenhouse gas emissions by recapturing
a high percentage of the embodied energy‡ content of the
solid waste stream. A net reduction in emissions occurs when
reused or recycled materials displace virgin raw materials in
the manufacturing process and when solid waste is diverted
from disposal. The current recycling rate in New Hampshire
is less than 21 percent, well below the national average of 32
percent. However, for most households, the amount of waste
that can be reduced, reused, recycled, or composted is a major
portion of the original total waste volume. The revolving loan
fund would help to rectify the current imbalance in solid waste
practices by providing financing for the initial capital costs of
public source reduction and recycling programs. Mechanisms
available to communities wishing to increase their reuse/
recycling rates include pay-as-you throw (PAYT) programs,
resource management contracting with waste haulers, joint
municipal ventures for transfer and recycling centers, salvage
of reusable building materials, and commercial/municipal
composting.

• The revolving loan fund and source of monies can be
established in the next legislative session.

Overall Implementation:
• Conduct outreach and education to promote source
reduction and recycling programs in New Hampshire.
• Provide technical assistance to municipalities to establish
or expand their own programs. (Some programs and
funding arrangements could be established through
local ordinances while others would require state-level
involvement and legislative action.)

• Municipalities would follow their own timetables for
adopting ordinances and setting up local programs.

Overarching Strategy 8: Lead by
Example in Government Operations
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Establish an Energy Management Unit to Address State
Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GLA
Action 1.1)
Form an Energy Management Unit within state government
to implement and oversee the recommended actions of the
Climate Change Policy Task Force as well as the Governor’s
Energy Efficiency Initiative. This entity would be responsible
for tracking state government efforts to reduce energy use
and costs, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, achieve state
energy reduction/climate change goals, and provide assistance
on energy efficiency matters to local and regional government
entities. In addition to the existing State Energy Manager,
the proposed Energy Management Unit would consist of a
project manager, a data manager, a fleet manager, and an
energy education and outreach specialist. This action would
also require that the state adopt and implement consistent
document and reporting procedures for energy purchases,
equipment purchases, and energy usage.
Overall Implementation:
• Establish a project manager position as the highest priority; phase in other positions as resources allow.

• Create and pass legislation to establish a revolving loan
fund for municipal source reduction and recycling programs.

• Develop consistent procedures for documentation and
reporting of energy purchases, equipment purchases,
and energy usage.

• Revenue for the revolving loan program could be generated from mechanisms such as a one-cent fee on all
bottles sold in the state.

• Work plan to include remainder of GLA Actions that were
retained for further consideration (Appendix 4.8).

‡
Embodied energy in this case refers to the energy that is required
to extract, process, package, transport, install, and recycle or
dispose of materials and products.

• Legislation likely needed to enact these measures.
Timeframe:
• The establishment of this unit can be taken up in the next
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 57



Legislative Session.

Overall Implementation:

◆ Establish an Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Baseline Inventory for State Government (GLA
Action 1.2)

• Prepare and adopt legislation for the Energy Efficiency
Fund.

Establish a baseline inventory of energy consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions for state government for the year
2005 or other year if more appropriate. The inventory would
profile the specific types and sources of energy used and
would quantify the amounts of energy consumed and emissions released on a quarterly and annual basis. This baseline
inventory would assist in identifying opportunities having
the greatest potential to reduce state government’s energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions and would serve
as a benchmark by which to track progress in specific energy
efficiency and renewable energy projects. The baseline inventory and subsequent updates would be the responsibility of
the new Energy Management Unit.

• Prepare administrative and technical guidelines (e.g.,
calculation of emission reductions and project payback)
for fund applications.

Overall Implementation:
• Design a uniform data collection and reporting protocol for
all state agencies to use in tracking energy consumption.
• Provide staffing and financial resources to collect the
data, perform quality assurance, undertake the necessary
analyses, and generate regular reports.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately.
◆ Establish a Self-Sustaining Fund for Energy Efficiency
Projects in State Government (GLA Action 1.3)
Create a non-lapsing Energy Efficiency Fund, overseen by
the Director of Plant and Property Management and the State
Energy Manager (unless or until an Energy Management Unit
is formed and becomes operational). State agencies could
request monies from this fund to cover the costs of their
energy efficiency projects. The fund would be financed and
replenished with monies equal to 2 percent of each agency’s
utility budget from the previous year. Monies would be distributed to subsidize requested energy efficiency projects
using technologies shown to reduce energy consumption. The
Energy Efficiency Fund would boost the efforts of state agencies to find ways to conserve energy and lower their utility
bills. By charging a single entity to administer the distribution
of these funds, consistent procedures could be maintained for
the benefit of small and large agencies alike.

58 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Develop criteria for allocation and application of funds.

• Provide staffing and financial resources to develop and
administer the funding program.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented during the 2008-2009
Legislative Session.
◆ Support the Establishment of Local Energy Commissions
(GLA Action 1.4)
Support the newly forming Local Energy Committees by
providing the statutory and programmatic resources needed
to make these committees a working part of municipal governance. In March 2007, 164 New Hampshire municipalities
passed a historic Climate Resolution that called on state
and federal elected officials to address climate change. The
resolution also called for the establishment of Local Energy
Committees to address greenhouse gas emissions associated
with municipalities’ activities. Since then, nearly 100 cities
and towns have established Local Energy Committees. New
Hampshire can support this groundswell of civic action by 1)
passing legislation that authorizes municipalities to establish
Local Energy Commissions with specific powers, thus formalizing their role and mission; and 2) providing resources to
regional planning commissions and state agencies to assist
municipalities in setting up Local Energy Commissions.
Overall Implementation:
• Pass legislation to amend RSA 674 to grant New Hampshire towns the authority to establish formal energy
committees with specific authority.
• Provide staffing and financial resources to regional planning
commissions and designated state agency(ies) to assist
municipalities in forming Local Energy Commissions.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented during the 2008-2009
Legislative Session.
◆ Include Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in
Programs and Planning (GLA Action 1.5)



Establish a policy requiring that climate change adaptation
and mitigation be considered in all planning and programmatic
activities of state government agencies. Climate change has
impacts that could affect the entire spectrum of activities
(e.g., economic, recreational, agricultural) within the state.
Likewise, the vast majority of activities are contributing to climate change in large and small ways. Because New Hampshire
state government has the capacity to influence these activities
regardless of origin – governmental, residential, commercial,
or industrial – all state agencies should take the initiative in
seeking solutions to climate change. A logical starting point is
to incorporate consideration of climate change into all state
planning and programming functions. The state’s proactive
response to climate change will help to engender climate
change action as a necessary and normal part of life in New
Hampshire.

up to 2 percent (resulting in a total bonus of up to 5 percent)
may also entice more school districts into pursuing energy
efficiency improvements that are part of major renovation
projects or new construction.
Overall Implementation:
• Review existing school siting policies to identify opportunities to strengthen emphasis on renovation.
• Develop resources and support for coordinated planning
and feasibility studies to support school construction
decision making.
• Pass legislation necessary to expand the CHPS funding
bonus.
• Develop the education and outreach necessary to increase awareness of the CHPS program and the expanded
funding benefit in order to increase participation.

Overall Implementation:

Timeframe:

• Issue an executive order to require consideration of climate change in all government planning and programs.

• This action can be implemented immediately.

• Begin outreach/education activities to build greater understanding of the science of climate change within the
ranks of state government and to assist state employees
in shaping an effective response to climate change.
• Provide resources to support internal outreach/education
efforts.
• Publicize the state initiative to the population at large.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately.
◆ Promote Public School Siting and Building Aid to Reduce
Energy Use (GLA Action 2.6)
Revise state public school siting and building aid policies
to more effectively and cogently encourage the renovation of
existing schools and the creation of high performance schools
(through renovation or new construction) that both meet current educational standards and further the goals of RSA 9B
and similar local and regional smart growth objectives. New
emphasis on renovation through comprehensive feasibility
studies, meaningful coordination between affected municipal bodies, adequate maintenance, and effective disposition
processes can reinforce existing trends, take advantage of
new opportunities for energy efficiency upgrades, and help
alleviate conflicts in local school construction decision-making.
For high performance schools, an additional funding bonus of

Overarching Strategy 9: Plan
for How to Address Existing and
Potential Climate Change Impacts
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Develop a Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the State
of New Hampshire (ADP Action 8)
Develop a Climate Change Adaptation Plan to support public
and private partners and state agencies in the planning and
preparation for the episodic and chronic events in New Hampshire that are projected to result from climate change. This
Plan should identify actions that proactively prepare for these
incidents and minimize their impacts on human health, the
natural environment and the built environment (e.g., homes,
businesses, roads, bridges, dams). The Plan should include the
methodologies for making sure all necessary data are available to decision makers. There is a general lack of urgency for
planning for adaptation to climate change. This Plan should
provide the necessary education and information to keep New
Hampshire moving in a proactive manner as we continue to
face developing climate change impacts. The Plan will help
our state and our decision makers identify and implement
additional critical adaptation strategies.
Overall Implementation:

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 59



• Issue an executive order to establish the necessary body
and define the scope of their responsibilities.
• Assemble the necessary bodies to develop the Adaptation
Plan including members from various interests including,
but not limited to, environmental, natural resources,
public health, municipal and regional governance, built
infrastructure, academia (UNH) as well as groups gathering data necessary for decision makers.
• Identify data gaps and explore ways to fill those gaps.
• Ensure that the plan is a living document that can change
as needed.
Timeframe:
• Development of the Adaptation Action Plan can begin
immediately.
• Allow six months for the Plan’s development.
• Once completed implementation can occur in a phased-in
approach.
◆ Develop and Distribute Critical Information on Climate
Change (ADP Action 1)
Invest in the analysis and dissemination of accurate and
understandable information about the economic, environmental, and social impacts of climate change to policy makers
and decision makers in the public and private sectors. Desired
outcomes are policies and decisions that are fact-based, easy
to achieve, and effective. This action is critical because of the
complexity and volume of the information involved and the
need to synthesize and graphically illustrate key concepts and
facts to make them understandable and relevant. The action
would be implemented through a broadly representative collaboration of public and private entities. Their charge would
be to assess existing sources of information to identify data
gaps and develop a strategic plan to address those gaps, with
a focus on getting the information into the hands of persons
responsible for protecting public safety and environmental
integrity. Outputs would include maps, reports, modeling
tools, data sets, fact sheets, and other information useful to
planners, decision makers, and the public.
Overall Implementation:
• Develop a memorandum of understanding among affected interests within and outside government. (The
governor could issue an executive order relative to participation of state officials).
• Identify and make available financial and staff resources
60 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

to support initial efforts.
• Develop and obtain commitments for a sustained program.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented over the next one to two
years.
◆ Promote Policies and Actions to Help Populations Most
at Risk (ADP Action 2)
Target policies and actions to help prepare populations
that are most at-risk from the adverse impacts of climate
change and related social effects – especially the elderly, lowincome, chronically ill, and families with small children. What
is currently difficult for at-risk populations is likely to become
even more difficult under climate change conditions. Many
of these people live in the most vulnerable areas; some will
have limited access to communications networks or will be
non-English-speaking. Impacts may be associated with the
costs and availability of commuting/transportation, energy
for heating and cooling homes, “cool shelters,” food and potable water, health care, and the need for relocation. The NH
Division of Public Health Services and NH Homeland Security
and Emergency Management should work together and participate in climate change discussions. The NH Department of
Environmental Services should continue its work in the areas
of public health outreach and health-related impacts deriving
from changes in air quality. Public health agencies at all levels
should continue to identify individuals at risk and coordinate
their efforts.
Overall Implementation:
• Develop partnership agreements among state and local
public health officials, environmental officials, emergency
planning officials, and organizations that work with at-risk
populations.
• Develop a comprehensive public outreach and education
program for at-risk populations.
• Assess the strength of state and local emergency response, recovery plans, and mitigation plans.
• Assess the capacity of the public/private health system
to respond to the effects of climate change.
• Assess the mental health consequences and sociological
effects of climate change.
• Provide financial and staff resources to support initial
efforts.



Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented over the next one to two
years.
◆ Charge and Empower Public Health Officials to Prepare
for Climate Change (ADP Action 3)
Provide direction and authority to public health officials to
increase the state’s preparedness against existing and emerging infectious diseases and other health-related conditions as
climate change advances. Scientists project a higher incidence
of certain diseases and other health affects associated with
global warming in the decades ahead. Topics requiring public
health action include 1) vector borne infectious diseases, 2)
heat-related injuries, and 3) respiratory illnesses. In particular,
public health officials need better data/analysis for vectorborne infectious disease forecasting and an understanding
of what indicators to track (e.g., weather patterns, mosquito
pools, tick populations).
Overall Implementation:
• Create a coalition of state agencies to develop, update,
consolidate, and/or integrate, data collection systems
for health facts and indicators, health and disease surveillance, demographics, population vulnerability, and
resilience.
• Strengthen the ability of local emergency services to
respond to heat waves, temperature extremes, and air
quality action days.
• Develop an outreach/education program via mass media
to prepare the public for climate-related events and provide information on response options.
• Provide financial and staff resources to support initial
efforts.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented over the next one to two
years.
◆ Strengthen Protection of New Hampshire’s Natural Systems (ADP Action 4)
Strengthen state and local protection of New Hampshire’s
natural resources to improve resilience to climate change, with
particular attention to preservation of agricultural soils, floodplains, wetlands, drinking water supplies, and wildlife habitat
connectivity. To help achieve this goal, new development
should be directed toward already-built areas, at possibly
higher densities, so as to avoid stresses on undisturbed natural

areas. Actions items include 1) identification of ecological hubs
and corridors, 2) prioritization of places to protect or restore,
3) region-wide examination of the fragmentation of aquatic
systems, 4) improved management of groundwater resources
and potable water supplies, 5) more comprehensive monitoring to detect environmental responses to climate change,
and 6) specific measures to reduce environmental stressors.
Implementation of this action would necessitate a greater
emphasis on regional planning and development strategies
than currently exists.
Overall Implementation:
• Assemble a statewide database inventory of natural
systems and resources; develop a method for prioritizing
which systems and resources to protect or restore.
• Consider legislation to allow or require changes in environmental and land use regulations as necessary.
• Require climate change impacts to be considered in all
state and local planning, zoning, and facility siting.
• Identify and allocate resources to support planning and
monitoring activities.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented within one to four
years.
◆ Increase Resilience to Extreme Weather Events (ADP Action 5)
Begin measures to increase the state’s resilience to extreme
weather events. Because climate change forecasts include
more frequent drought punctuated by more intense precipitation events and rising sea level, our built environment may
be at increased risk of inland and coastal flooding. More succinctly, today’s weather-related problems will be made worse
by a changing climate. Future development could put more
people and property at risk and could exacerbate the problem
if sited in the wrong locations. Consequently, adaptation policies should be established that 1) steer future development
away from the most vulnerable flood-prone areas, 2) render
the existing built environment more resilient to weatherrelated impacts, and 3) move existing development out of
harm’s way where feasible. Mechanisms to accomplish these
outcomes focus on municipal ordinances, building codes, land
use practices, infrastructure planning, and incentives. Costs
of inaction are potential loss of life, property, and economic
activity – especially in flood-prone inland and coastal areas.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 61



Overall Implementation:
• Create a legislative commission to study the issue of resilience to climate change and make recommendations.
• Prepare and pass legislation, as necessary, to:
o Prohibit development in vulnerable areas.
o Improve existing flood plain maps.
o Tighten existing regulations regarding floodplains.
o Assist communities in creating and enforcing tougher
land use requirements and building codes.
• Provide financial and staff resources to support initial
efforts.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented over the next one to two
years.
◆ Strengthen the Adaptability of New Hampshire’s Economy
to Climate Change (ADP Action 6)
Create policies to support economic development that
will reduce or mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, introduce
climate considerations into the economic growth model, and
attract environmentally responsible employers. The proposed
action would help businesses and agricultural interests prepare for and adapt to the impacts of climate change and the
potential impacts of its solutions. Sample measures include
anticipating the effects of climate change on important current industries (e.g., skiing, tourism, agricultural); assisting
businesses with reducing their energy costs, developing
“green collar” training and education programs; and attracting alternative energy and other “clean-tech” industries. New
Hampshire should embrace this task proactively by taking
advantage of any new economic opportunities where the
state might create a niche for itself in sustainable economic
development. Implementation may require improvements to
infrastructure and creation of appropriate tax incentives to
support businesses adapting to climate change. Additionally,
New Hampshire may need to develop disaster recovery plans
in advance of anticipated climate-related events to ensure that
assistance will be available throughout the recovery phases
of increasingly frequent extrem
Overall Implementation:
• Consider tax incentives to businesses for installation of
energy reducing features.
• Consider tax incentives to attract “green” industry in62 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

volved in the production of environmentally friendly products and climate-change-related goods and services.
• Provide technical assistance to help existing businesses
adapt to climate change.
• Provide technical assistance to businesses implementing
proven technologies that reduce energy use and greenhouse gas emissions (free energy audits, training, etc.).
• Expand higher education curricula on sustainable development and green energy technologies.
• Provide financial and staff resources to support initial
efforts.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented over the next two to four
years.

Overarching Strategy 10: Develop
an Integrated Education, Outreach,
and Workforce Training Program
Actions recommended by the Task Force:
◆ Develop an Overarching Outreach and Education Plan
(RCI Action 4.6)
Implement a comprehensive climate change outreach and
education program that elevates the awareness, knowledge
and skill in the state in order to support action at all levels
and in all sectors. This program would coordinate and develop
educational programs in New Hampshire in order to engage
residents, students, businesses and industry to take action
now, while simultaneously expanding the capacity of the state
to develop and implement advanced mitigation and adaptation solutions in a phased-in approach in the future. This broad
education program must rely upon, and build partnerships
with, existing educational and outreach organizations including, but not necessarily limited to, K-12 schools, colleges and
universities, museums and science centers, environmental
and climate change focused not-for-profits, state programs,
and professional associations and groups (e.g., architects,
planners, builders). Critical to this effort would be marketing
the existing Climate Action Plan in order to foster the support
necessary for wide-spread implementation.
Overall Implementation:



• Inventory existing climate and energy related educational/outreach/training programs and success of those
programs.
• Identify working group to consult with responsible parties
and develop plan for overall program and integration.
• Invest and enhance existing educational programs that are
working (e.g., NH Carbon Challenge, Clean Air-Cool Planet,
Local Energy Committees, UNH Cooperative Extension
Energy Answers program).

of multi-disciplinary teaching modules/workshops on
climate change and energy efficiency.
• Begin educator workshops in targeted communities/
school districts and extend these workshops to different
communities each year. Provide continuing professional
development credits to teachers who complete the workshops.
• Create a diverse committee of educators to begin the task
of revising the K-12 curricula.

• Collaborate with professional associations to enhance/
grow existing professional training programs.

• Provide resources to support program development and
curriculum revision.

• Identify and pursue resources to support broader, integrated program.

Timeframe:

Timeframe:
• Identification of working group should begin immediately.
• Plan framework and development over the next year and
initiate implementation in 2010.
◆ Include Energy Efficiency and Conservation in School Curricula (RCI Action 4.1)
Revise New Hampshire’s K-12 school curriculum standards
to promote development of a citizenry that has a comprehensive understanding of climate change and the opportunities to
engage in energy efficiency and conservation measures. Goals
would be developed from a multi-disciplinary perspective,
including topics in science, mathematics, and social studies.
As a short-term goal, partnerships between educators and
experts on energy and the environment would be created to
develop educator workshops to train New Hampshire teachers
in the nuances of climate change and energy efficiency. The
long-term goal would be to amend the New Hampshire Curriculum Frameworks at all grade levels with particular emphasis on curricula for grades 9 through 12, including both open
enrollment and advanced studies. Greenhouse gas emission
reductions would be achieved as students carry their growing
knowledge of climate change and sustainable behaviors back
to their families and communities. Sustainable behaviors can
happen as part of daily habits, life-long decisions, individual
advocacy, and community involvement.
Overall Implementation:
• Provide resources to support outreach/education efforts.
• Establish partnerships, assemble resource materials,
and develop educator training program. Look to existing programs in other states for guidance in the design

• Teaching modules/workshops for educators could be
developed by a suggested target date of June 2010. Training in targeted communities/school districts would begin
thereafter.
• Amendment of the New Hampshire Curriculum Frameworks and new teacher certification requirements would
be longer-term, with a suggested target date of 2015.
◆ Increase Energy Efficiency through Building Management
Education Programs (RCI Action 4.2)
Continue and expand energy efficiency education for building maintenance and energy management staff. The industrial,
commercial, and government sectors should make use of
the many training opportunities provided by utilities, energy
companies (e.g., oil and propane distributors), and private
consulting firms. Training should focus on energy audits as a
proven method for identifying energy efficiency opportunities
to minimize or eliminate net CO2 output in existing buildings.
For new construction, “beyond code” certification would assure that buildings produce the lowest possible environmental
impacts.
In addition, encourage the creation of building energy
manager positions within organizations that are still without
these positions. The concept of placing one person in charge of
energy efficiency within an organization should be promoted
even for small businesses. This action would result in regular
reviews of energy use and identification of energy saving opportunities. Building energy managers should be given the
responsibility and budgetary tools to implement energy saving
measures as they are identified.
Overall Implementation:
• Direct the NH Office of Energy and Planning (or other
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 63



state agency) to create, perhaps in conjunction with the
energy utilities, an initiative to 1) promote energy efficiency education to facilities management staff and 2)
encourage the establishment of building energy managers
in government and business.
• Coordinate efforts with the NH Public Utilities Commission and the NH Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy
Board to investigate funding opportunities to support the
program.
Timeframe:
• Action to create initiative can occur immediately.
• Implementation of the initiative would be ongoing.
◆ Reduce Residential Energy Demand through Education
and Outreach (RCI Action 4.3)
Develop a community-based outreach and education
program aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions in
the residential sector. Because residential greenhouse gas
emissions account for roughly half of all such emissions
(when personal vehicles are included), an organized effort to
engage residents in voluntary reductions of their household
energy use would be effective. This program would provide
the needed information, tools, and support to help residents
understand how they use energy and how to map out strategies that would reduce their household energy consumption
and energy costs. The program should make use of existing
networks and communities (e.g., towns, neighborhoods, civic
groups, faith-based organizations, businesses, environmental
organizations) to maximize participation. Research-based
behavioral change strategies targeting the root causes of climate change inaction should be employed through outreach
activities that strengthen communities and do not rely solely
on information-based campaigns.
Overall Implementation:
• Develop program details; consider adopting the New Hampshire Carbon Challenge. (http://nhcarbonchal-lenge.org) as
a platform to reduce residential energy consumption.
• Consider an executive order to encourage all state employees and all New Hampshire citizens to take the challenge.
• Create a database to quantify emission reductions and
chart participation rates and progress toward emission
reduction goals.
• Publicize progress at the community and state levels.
• Provide resources to support the program.
64 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately and would
be ongoing.
◆ Establish a Comprehensive Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Education Program (RCI Action 4.4)
Establish a comprehensive education program on energy
efficiency and renewable energy to help close the tremendous gap that exists between knowledge and practice. It is
estimated that just by using current technology correctly
and efficiently we could cut building energy consumption
and associated greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent. In
the proposed action, state government, utility companies,
colleges, professional and building trade organizations, would
sponsor ongoing training and offer demonstration sites for
energy-efficient and renewable energy practices. The program
would provide accessible resources and educational opportunities to any individuals and organizations that design, build,
evaluate/rate, maintain, sell, own, and occupy buildings. It
would be of particular value to contractors, code officials, and
energy raters, and would establish working groups for building managers and real estate agents. The program would be
established and administered at various settings throughout
the state, including demonstration centers, community colleges, training seminars.
Overall Implementation:
• Create partnership agreements to develop and administer
the education program.
• Evaluate existing resources and possible training locations.
• Design the program by building upon existing training
programs and/or using successful programs as models.
(Experience with the CORE Efficiency Programs could
prove useful.)
• Publicize and roll out the program at a limited number
of settings; expand and adjust the program as resources
become available and experience is gained.
• Develop a sustainable funding mechanism.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately and would
be ongoing.
◆ Create an Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy Systems Web Portal (RCI Action 4.5)
Develop a searchable, web-based clearinghouse to hasten



the adoption of energy efficiency and sustainable energy
products and technologies. The portal would serve a range
of specific New Hampshire audiences, including local energy
committees, city and town managers, business owners, industrial and commercial facility managers, and residents. The
portal would provide each specific target audience with the
resources needed to make informed decisions concerning the
available options to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions
(e.g., currently available products/services/technologies,
costs, projected savings, installers or contractors, online calculators, and tax and/or rebate incentives). Although numerous websites give information of this sort, there is currently
no web-based clearinghouse for those who are evaluating
purchasing sustainable energy products and technologies or
have decided to buy products or services and need additional
information.

Overall Implementation:
• Designate a state agency and a program coordinator
within the agency to lead this action. The program coordinator would be responsible for development and
maintenance of the portal with assistance from internal
and external experts in energy efficiency and sustainable
energy systems.
• Issue a request for proposals to create a searchable, webbased clearinghouse for energy-efficient and renewable
products and services.
• Publicize the existence of the web portal when ready.
• Provide resources to support development and maintenance of the web portal.
Timeframe:
• This action can be implemented immediately.

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 65



Chapter 6: Moving the Plan Forward
The NH Energy & Climate Collaborative

T

he New Hampshire Climate Action Plan will not be successful unless it is well implemented. Accordingly, the
Task Force identified the development of an implementation plan as a critical component of its work. Implementation of this Climate Action Plan must occur at multiple levels
across all sectors of society, and in an ongoing fashion. It will
require a high degree of coordination and integration, as well
as flexibility, accountability, transparency, communication,
and ongoing assessment and reporting.

and general public on progress toward achieving the desired
outcomes. Activities and responsibilities would include:

To accomplish those goals, the Task Force recommends
formation of a public/private partnership, the New Hampshire Energy and Climate Collaborative, to oversee and guide
implementation of the NH Climate Action Plan. Effectively, the
Collaborative will be “the keeper of the Plan.”

• Serve as a clearing house of actions, including helping to
facilitate communications among and between implementing partners and working groups in New Hampshire.

Purpose
The primary purpose of the Collaborative will be to track
and facilitate implementation of the Climate Action Plan’s
recommendations, and to report to the Governor, Legislature,
66 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

• Inventory the activities already occurring in the state
relative to the recommendations.
• Identify barriers and gaps to the successful implementation of specific recommendations and ways to remove or
fill them.
• Guide efforts toward implementation.

• Track and report annually on progress meeting the Plan’s
recommendations.
• Interact and coordinate with other states, especially in
the New England region, as time allows.
As previously described in this Climate Action Plan, all potential actions were retained to be reconsidered over time as



economics, technologies or public policies change. However,
the initial primary mission of the Collaborative will be to focus
on prioritizing and facilitating the implemention of the 67
recommendations of the Task Force and not to re-evaluate or
revisit the year-long process the Task Force just completed or
to revise the Task Force’s recommendations. The Collaborative
will likely hold at least four meetings a year, each of which
will also provide time for the public to provide input into the
process. The Collaborative will produce an annual report and
hold an annual summit to report on progress and bring key
stakeholders together.

Proposed membership
Implementation will require continued cooperation and
leadership from the public, business, educational institutions,
and the nonprofit sectors. Accordingly, the Collaborative
will consist of major institutions and leading individuals
representing:
• Six members from the business community.
• Six members from the public sector.
• Six members from the education and nonprofit sectors.
Due to the need for continuity with the previous Task Force
process, the founding chairman will be the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Services. Leading roles are
also envisioned for: the University of New Hampshire/Carbon
Solutions New England; the New Hampshire Charitable Foundation; and a leading business organization or individual. An
executive committee of these four key partners will be formed
to manage and facilitate activities in between Collaborative
meetings.

Staff
It is anticipated that, contingent on obtaining funding, four
staff members would support the initial phase of the Collaborative: a part-time director, provided by NH Department
of Environmental Services; a full-time technical coordinator;
a part-time CSNE manager, provided by UNH/CSNE; and a
full-time technical analyst at UNH/Carbon Solutions New
England.
The director will be responsible for the following:
• Communicating with the executive committee and the
full Collaborative. Providing day-to-day supervision of
the technical coordinator.

• Directing the priorities and scope of work provided by
the technical analyst.
• Reviewing communications.
The technical coordinator will be responsible for a range
of activities, such as:
• Preparing an inventory of actions relative to implementation of the Climate Action Plan.
• Identifying and interfacing with existing organizations
who could serve as implementing partners or working
groups.
• Identifying gaps in implementation for consideration by
the Collaborative.
• Maintaining and administering the clearinghouse of actions to facilitate communications among and between
implementing partners and working groups.
• Planning for and preparing materials for Collaborative
meetings.
• Planning the annual summit.
• Preparing a draft of the annual report, including reporting
on emissions tracking by CSNE, for Collaborative consideration.
• Developing a communications plan for review by the Collaborative.
• Tracking and preparing financial reports.
• Meeting any grant obligations.
The manager and technical analyst at Carbon Solutions New
England will be responsible for a range of activities, such as:
• Tracking progress annually, by sector, against Task Force
targets and providing an annual report and presentation
on such progress to the Collaborative.
• Prioritizing potential technical support to implementing
partners, including activities listed below, with the technical coordinator.
• Quantifying the reductions associated with work conducted by implementing partners working on the front
lines to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
• Developing case studies of organizations to document
greenhouse gas emissions reductions and associated
costs, including cost savings.
• Tracking and reporting on green jobs in New Hampshire
and New England and training opportunities.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 67



• Continuing to update the analyses conducted for the
Climate Action Plan.

Implementing Partners
It is important to emphasize that the Collaborative will not
be directly responsible for implementation of the Climate
Action Plan; it is far too large an agenda for any one entity.
Rather, the Collaborative’s job is to facilitate, coordinate, and
support the activities of dozens of implementing partners from
the public, private, and nonprofit sectors. As opportunities
are identified, Collaborative members would be expected
to serve as chairs or leaders of working groups made up of
these partners. At this time, it is not anticipated that there
will be Collaborative staff support to assist the Collaborative
members in this role.
For illustrative purposes only, a partial list of implementing
partners might include:
• Business Council(s) – to help direct the implementation
of the plan toward maximizing economic development.
• Regional Planning Commissions – to assist in the implementation of actions at the regional and local levels.
• Local Energy Committees and Regional Coalitions – to
assist in implementation at the community level.
• Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy Board – to ensure
the coordination of energy efficiency, demand response,
and sustainable energy programs in the state.
• Educational Institutions – Colleges, universities, professional associations, and not-for-profits to ensure that
broad based education, outreach and workforce training

68 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

programs are developed and integrated.
• Hospitals and health care organizations – to implement
adaptation measures for public health protection.
• Interstate and Regional organizations (such as the New
England Governors/Eastern Canadian Premiers) – to
ensure that New Hampshire’s efforts are integrated with
regional plans.
• Municipal, state, and federal agencies.
• Private for-profit businesses and associations.
• Nonprofit organizations representing environmental
expertise, low-income residents, energy efficiency, and
related concerns.

Establishing the Collaborative
The Collaborative will be formed through a Memorandum
of Understanding signed by all of the initial members. The
Collaborative will also seek “endorsing members” who will
actively support the activities of the Collaborative but will
not serve as voting members. The procedural rules of the
Collaborative will be provided in the Memorandum of Understanding.
It is estimated that approximately $200,000 to $250,000
will be needed to support the level of effort recommended
for the Collaborative. The goal is to obtain roughly one-third
of the funding from government sources (likely through inkind services), one-third from private sources, and one-third
from the business sector. A number of organizations have
already expressed interest in providing financial support for
this effort.



Climate Action Plan Glossary
AFW: The Agriculture, Forestry and Waste working group.
Biomass: When referring to fuel, means plant-derived fuel
including clean and untreated wood such as brush, stumps,
lumber ends and trimmings, wood pallets, bark, wood chips or
pellets, shavings, sawdust and slash, agricultural crops, biogas,
or liquid biofuels, but shall exclude any materials derived in
whole or in part from construction and demolition debris.
CAFE: The federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy program,
which sets minimum fuel economy for cars and light trucks,
including sport utility vehicles.
Capacity: The maximum power capability of a system.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2): The major heat-trapping gas whose
concentration is being increased by human activities. It also
serves as the yardstick for all other greenhouse gases. The
major source of CO2 emissions is fossil fuel combustion. Carbon
dioxide emissions also result from clearing forests and burning biomass. Atmospheric concentrations of CO2 have been
increasing at a rate of about 0.5 percent a year, and are now
more than 30 percent above pre-industrial levels.
Carbon Sequestration: The uptake and storage of carbon.
Trees and other plants, for example, absorb CO2 then release
the oxygen while storing the carbon.
Carbon Sinks: The processes or ecological systems that take
in and store more carbon than they release. This process is
called carbon sequestration. Forests and oceans are large
carbon sinks.
CCPTF: Climate Change Policy Task Force.
Climate Change: A significant change from one climatic condition to another, often used in reference to climate changes
caused by increase in heat-trapping gases since the end of
the 19th century.
Climate: The average state of the atmosphere, including typical weather patterns for a particular region and time period
(usually 30 years). Climate is not the same as weather, but

rather the average pattern of weather for a particular region.
Weather describes the short-term state of the atmosphere;
climate is longer-term. Climatic elements include average
precipitation, temperature, wind, and seasonal phenomena
such as length of the growing season among others.
CO2e: Carbon dioxide equivalent, a measure that is used to
express the concentration of all heat-trapping gases in terms
of CO2.
Combined Heat and Power: Also referred to as cogeneration
is the process by which two different and useful forms of
energy are produced at the same time. For example, water
may be boiled to generate electricity in a turbine, with the
leftover steam used to drive industrial processes or captured
for space heating.
CSNE: Carbon Solutions New England.
DES: New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services;
the state agency with primary responsibility for environmental
permitting and enforcement.
DOT: New Hampshire Department of Transportation; the state
agency with the responsibility to construct and maintain the
transportation system and facilities in the state.
DSM: Demand-side management includes end-use measures
that conserve electricity. They include energy efficient products and design, and load management strategies.
EGU: The electric generation working group.
EIA: United States Energy Information Administration, a division of the United States Department of Energy that focuses
on data collection and analysis.
Embodied Energy: The total expenditure of energy involved
in the creation of the building and its constituent materials.
In terms of a full lifecycle of a product, it can also refer to the
energy that is required to extract, process, package, transport,
install, and recycle or dispose of materials and products.
EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 69



Executive Order 2007-3: Order signed in 2007 by Governor
John Lynch establishing the Climate Change Action Plan and
charging that body to develop climate change goals and a
plan for the state.

nations have helped the IPCC prepare periodic assessments
of the scientific underpinnings of global climate change and
its consequences.

FHWA: The Federal Highway Administration is a major
agency of the United States Department of Transportation
and is charged with the broad responsibility of ensuring that
America’s roads and highways continue to be the safest and
most technologically up-to-date.

LEED: The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
program of the United States Green Building Council.

FIA: The Forest Inventory and Analysis Program of the United
States Forest Service provides the information needed to assess America’s forests.
Fossil Fuel: A general term for combustible geologic deposits
of carbon in reduced (organic) form. Fossil fuels are of biological origin, and include coal, oil, natural gas, oil shales and tar
sands. A major concern is that they emit CO2 when burned, significantly contributing to the enhanced greenhouse effect.
Generation: The process of making electricity. The term may
also refer to energy supply.
Greenhouse Effect: The thermal effect that results from
heat-trapping gases allowing incoming solar radiation to pass
through the Earth’s atmosphere, but preventing most of the
outgoing infrared radiation from the surface and lower atmosphere from escaping into outer space.
Greenhouse Gas: Any gas that absorbs infrared radiation
(traps heat) in the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases include
water vapor, carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous
oxide, (N2O), halogenated fluorocarbons (HCFCs), ozone (O3),
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).
GWh: Gigawatt-hours (1 million kilowatt-hours).
HFC: Hydrofluorocarbon compounds; a man-made greenhouse gas generated by industrial processes.
ICLEI: International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives,
a nonprofit organization that partners with local governments
on environmental and sustainable development projects,
particularly climate change.
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Established in 1988, the IPCC assesses information in the scientific
and technical literature related to all significant components
of the issue of climate change. It draws on hundreds of the
world’s leading scientists to serve as authors, and thousands as reviewers. Key experts on climate change and the
environmental, social and economic sciences from some 60
70 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

KWh: Kilowatt-hour.

Methane (CH4): A hydrocarbon that is a heat-trapping gas
carrying a global warming potential recently estimated at
24.5. Methane is produced through anaerobic (without
oxygen) decomposition of waste in landfills, animal digestion,
decomposition of animal wastes, production and distribution
of natural gas and oil, coal production and incomplete fossil
fuel combustion.
MMtCO2e: Million metric tons of CO2 equivalent.
Mt: A metric ton equivalent to 1.102 short tons (2000 lbs.)
MW: Megawatt, A measure of electricity capacity. One MW
is sufficient to provide power to 700 to 1,000 homes.
MWh: Megawatt-hours (1 thousand kilowatt-hours).
NEG/ECP: New England Governors/Eastern Canadian Premiers,
the regional inter-governmental organization responsible for
releasing the NEG/ECP Climate Change Action Plan in 2001.
NESCAUM: Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management, a nonprofit regional air quality policy organization
whose directors are the top air pollution control officials in all
six New England states, New York and New Jersey.
Nitrous Oxide (N2O): A powerful greenhouse gas with a global
warming potential of 310. Major sources of nitrous oxide include soil cultivation – especially from use of commercial and
organic fertilizers – fossil fuel combustion in vehicles, nitric
acid production and the combustion of biomass.
NOX: Oxides of nitrogen, both nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen
dioxide (NO2). They are key in forming ground-level ozone
smog, and contribute to acid rain and particulate pollution.
OEP: New Hampshire Office of Energy and Planning; this is an
executive-level office that is responsible for guiding the state’s
future growth through public policy development, education,
research, and partnership building.
PFCs: Perfluorocarbons; a man-made greenhouse gas generated by industrial processes.
PPM: Parts per million.
PUC: The Public Utilities Commission, whose mission it is to
ensure that customers of regulated utilities receive safe, ad-



equate and reliable service at just and reasonable rates.
PV: Photovoltaic; a treated semiconductor material that converts sunlight to electricity.
RCI: The residential, commercial and industrial working
group.
REC: Renewable energy certificates which are marketable/
tradable entities that represents one megawatt hour (1,000
kWh) of power generation from a renewable energy source.
RPS: Renewable Portfolio Standard; a policy designed to influence the development of renewable resources and technologies by requiring electricity providers to obtain a minimum
percentage of the power they supply to their customers from
renewable energy resources by a certain date.
SBC: System benefit charge; a charge on a consumer’s bill
from an electric distribution company to pay for the costs
of certain public benefits such as low-income assistance and
energy efficiency.

SF6: Sulfur hexafluoride; a man-made greenhouse gas generated by industrial processes.
Sink: Removals of carbon from the atmosphere, with the
carbon stored in forests, soils, landfills, wood structures, or
other biomass-related products.
SIT: USEPA State Greenhouse Gas Inventory Tool.
Source: Any process or activity that releases into the atmosphere a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor to a
greenhouse gas.
SUV: Sports utility vehicle, considered under federal gas mileage standards to be a light-duty truck, and subject to a lower
average mile per gallon requirement: 20.7 mpg.
TLU: Transportation and land use working group.
UNH: University of New Hampshire
VMT: Vehicle-miles traveled.

New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 71



Endnotes
Excutive Summary
EPA (2009). State Targets and Caps, Climate Change - State and
Local Governments, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/
stateandlocalgov/state_target_cap.html (Last Accessed January
14, 2009).
1

IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change
2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A. (eds.)] IPCC,
Geneva, Switzerland, 1-22. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessmentreport/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_spm.pdf.

2

Overview – A Call to Action
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) (2006). Climate
Change in the U.S. Northeast. A Report of the Northeast Climate
Impacts Assessment. Cambridge, Mass.: Union of Concerned
Scientists (UCS), 33 pp. http://www.climatechoices.org/assets/
documents/climatechoices/NECIA_climate_report_final.pdf.

1

Wake, C. P. et al. (2008). Special Issue: Assessment of Climate
Change, Impacts, and Solutions in the Northeast United States.
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(5-6),
419-660.

2

Burakowski, EA, CP Wake, B. Braswell, DP Brown (2008)
Trends in Wintertime Climate in the Northeast United States,
1965-2005. Journal of Geophysical Research 113, D20114,
doi:10.1029/2008JD009870.

3

Gittell, R. et al. (2009). “New Hampshire’s Green Economy and
Industries: Current employment and future opportunities.”
Whittemore School of Business & Economics. University of New
Hampshire, Durham, N.H.

4

Klein, Joe (2008). Why Barack Obama Is Winning” Time Magazine
(October 22, 2008). http://www.time.com/time/politics/
article/0,8599,1853025-4,00.html.

5

Gittell, R. and Magnuson, M. (2007). Economic Impact of a
New Hampshire Renewable Portfolio Standard. UNH Economic
Analysis, 74 pp. http://des.nh.gov/organization/divisions/air/tsb/
tps/climate/documents/unh_rps_report.pdf.

stateandlocalgov/state_target_cap.html. (Last Accessed January
14, 2009).
10
IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change
2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A. (eds.)] IPCC,
Geneva, Switzerland, 1-22. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessmentreport/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_spm.pdf.
11
IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Pane l
on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M.
Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, N.Y.,
1-18. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4wg1-spm.pdf

Frumhoff, P.C. et al. (2007). Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis report
of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge,
Mass.: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 145 pp. http://
www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/
confronting-climate-change-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf.

12

Governor’s New Hampshire Forest Products Industry Task
Force Report, August 2008, 7 pp. http://www.nhtoa.org/
ForestIndustryTaskForceReportAug.pdf.

13

Chapter 1 Introduction
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) (2006). Climate
Change in the U.S. Northeast. A Report of the Northeast Climate
Impacts Assessment. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of
Concerned Scientists (UCS), 33 pp. http://www.climatechoices.
org/assets/documents/climatechoices/NECIA_climate_report_
final.pdf.

1

2

6

Gittell, R. and Magnuson, M. (2008). Economic Impacts in New
Hampshire of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI): An
Independent Assessment, 69 pp. http://des.nh.gov/organization/
divisions/air/tsb/tps/climate/rggi/documents/unh_rggi_study.
doc.

7

Friedman, Thomas L. (2008). “Flush with Energy,” New
York Times, 9 August 2008, Opinion. http://www.nytimes.
com/2008/08/10/opinion/10friedman1.html?em.

8

9
EPA (2009). State Targets and Caps, Climate Change - State and
Local Governments, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/

72 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

Ibid.

Stern, Nicholas Herbert (2007). The Economics of Climate
Change: The Stern Review, Great Britain Treasury, Cambridge
University Press. 692 pp. http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/
sternreview_index.htm.

3

4

Ibid

EPA (2009). State Targets and Caps, Climate Change - State and
Local Governments, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/
stateandlocalgov/state_target_cap.html. (Last Accessed January
14, 2009).
5

IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F.
Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds.,

6



Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 7-22. http://www.
ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-spm.pdf.

Sinks: 1990 – 2006. Washington, D.C. 692 pp. http://www.epa.
gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html

Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) (2006). Climate
Change in the U.S. Northeast. A Report of the Northeast Climate
Impacts Assessment. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of
Concerned Scientists (UCS). http://www.climatechoices.org/assets/
documents/climatechoices/NECIA_climate_report_final.pdf.

Energy Information Administration website (2009). NH Energy
Consumption 1960-2006. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/states/
state.html?q_state_a=nh&q_state=NEW%20HAMPSHIRE (Last
Accessed January 14, 2009).

7

Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) (2006). Climate
Change in the U.S. Northeast. A Report of the Northeast Climate
Impacts Assessment. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of
Concerned Scientists (UCS), 33 pp. http://www.climatechoices.
org/assets/documents/climatechoices/NECIA_climate_report_
final.pdf.

22

23

Ibid.

8

Frumhoff, P.C. et al. (2007). Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis report
of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge,
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 145 pp. http://
www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/
confronting-climate-change-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf.

9

10
Hamilton, L.C. (2003). Warming winters and New Hampshire’s
lost ski areas: An Integrated Case Study. International Journal of
Sociology and Social Policy 23: 52-73.
11
Hamilton, L.C. et al. (2007) Ski areas, weather and climate: time
series models for New

England case studies. Int. J. Climatol. 27: 2113 – 2124. http://
pubpages.unh.edu/~lch/Hamilton_et_al_IJOC.pdf.
Wake, C. P. et al. (2006) Winter Recreation and Climate
Variability in New Hampshire: 1984 – 2006. Produced for the
Carbon Coalition and Clean Air-Cool Planet, Portsmouth, NH,
37 pp. http://www.carboncoalition.org/education/documents/
NHWinterTourismandClimateVariability_Feb_2007.pdf.

12

13
Ackerman, F. and E. A. Stanton (2008). The Cost of Climate
Change: What We’ll Pay if Global Warming Continues Unchecked.
Produced for Natural Resources Defense Council, 33 pp. http://
www.nrdc.org/globalwarming/cost/contents.asp.
14
Conference of New England Governors and Eastern Canadian
Premiers (2007). Resolution Concerning Energy and the
Environment (31-1). http://www.negc.org/documents/NEGECP_31-1.pdf.

Luers et al. (2007). How to Avoid Dangerous Climate Change:
A Target for U.S. Emissions Reductions. Union of Concerned
Scientists (UCS), Cambridge, MA. 26 pp. http://www.ucsusa.org/
assets/documents/global_warming/emissions-target-report.pdf.

15

Hansen, J. et al. (2008). Target atmospheric CO2: Where should
humanity aim? Open Atmos. Sci. J.Vol. 2, pp. 217-231. Draft PDF http://www.columbia.edu/%7Ejeh1/2008/TargetCO2_20080317.
pdf.

16

Luers et al. (2007). How to Avoid Dangerous Climate Change:
A Target for U.S. Emissions Reductions. Union of Concerned
Scientists (UCS), Cambridge, MA. 26 pp. http://www.ucsusa.org/
assets/documents/global_warming/emissions-target-report.pdf.

17

Energy Information Administration website (2009). NH Energy
Consumption 1960-2006. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/states/
state.html?q_state_a=nh&q_state=NEW%20HAMPSHIRE (Last
Accessed January 14, 2009).
18

Chapter 2 Recommendations
NH Office of Energy and Planning, (2008). New Hampshire
Energy Facts website, http://www.nh.gov/oep/programs/energy/
nhenergyfacts/index.htm. (Last accessed June 6, 2008).

1

2
Ewing, R. et al. (2008). Growing Cooler: The Evidence on Urban
Development and Climate Change. The Urban Land Institute: 150
pp. http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/gcindex.html.

New Hampshire Division of Forested Lands website, http://www.
nhdfl.org/about-forests-and-lands/bureaus/forest-protectionbureau.aspx. (Last accessed December 9, 2008).

3

Stern, Nicholas Herbert (2007). The Economics of Climate
Change: The Stern Review, Great Britain Treasury, Cambridge
University Press. 692 pp. http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/
sternreview_index.htm

4

Chapter 3 Adapting to Change
IPCC (2007). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, [Parry, M.L.,
Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P., van der Linden, P.J. and Hanson, C.E.,
(eds.)] Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 7-22. http://
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-spm.pdf.

1

2

Ibid.

Millar, C. (2007). Climate Change and Forests of the Future:
Managing in the Face of Uncertainty. Ecological Applications.
17(8): pp 2145-2151.
3

Easterling III, E. et al. (2004). Coping with Global climate Change:
The Role of Adaptation in the United States. Prepared for the Pew
Center on Global Climate Change, 40 pp. http://www.pewtrusts.
org/our_work_report_detail.aspx?id=22878.

4

Wake, C. P., Burakowski, E. and Goss, L. (2006). Winter
Recreation and Climate Variability in New Hampshire: 1984 –
2006. Produced for the Carbon Coalition and Clean Air-Cool
Planet, Portsmouth, NH, 37 pp. http://www.carboncoalition.org/
education/documents/NHWinterTourismandClimateVariability_
Feb_2007.pdf.

5

Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) (2006). Climate
Change in the U.S. Northeast. A Report of the Northeast Climate
Impacts Assessment. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of
Concerned Scientists (UCS), 33 pp. http://www.climatechoices.
org/assets/documents/climatechoices/NECIA_climate_report_
final.pdf.

6

Stern, Nicholas Herbert (2007). The Economics of Climate
Change: The Stern Review,

7

19

Ibid.

Great Britain Treasury, Cambridge University Press. 692 pp. http://
www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm.

20

Ibid.

8

21

EPA (2008). Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and

National Assessment Synthesis Team (2000). Climate Change
Impacts on the United States: The Potential Consequences of
New Hampshire Climate Action Plan - 73



Climate Variability and Change. US Global Change Research
Program, Washington, D.C. http://www.usgcrp.gov/usgcrp/
Library/nationalassessment/overviewhealth.htm.

Contributions to 21st-Century Sea-Level Rise. Science, 321
(5894) pp. 1340-1343. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/
abstract/321/5894/1340.

EM-DAT (2009) Emergency Events Database, http://www.emdat.
be/Database/DisasterList/list.php. (Last Accessed January 16,
2009).

23
Hansen, L. (2003). Increasing Resistance and Resilience of
Tropical Marine Ecosystems to Climate Change. In: Buying Time:
A User’s Manual for Building Resistance and Resilience to Climate
Change in Natural Systems [Hansen, L.; L. Biringer; and J. Hoffman
(eds)]. World Wildlife Fund, Washington, D.C. 157 – 176. http://
assets.panda.org/downloads/buyingtime_unfe.pdf.

9

10

Ibid.

Frumhoff, P.C. et al. (2007). Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis report
of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge,
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 145 pp. http://
www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/
confronting-climate-change-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf.
11

Ziska, L.H. et al. (2008). Climate change, aerobiology, and public
health in the Northeast United States. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change. 13(5-6), 607-613.

12

HB 648 Comprehensive Flood Management Final Report,
September 2008, 52 pp. http://gencourt.state.nh.us/
statstudcomm/reports/1853.pdf.

13

New Hampshire Department of Agriculture (2003) Marketing
Research & Recommendations, 15 pp. http://agriculture.nh.gov/
divisions/agricultural_development/documents/strategy.pdf.
14

Frumhoff, P.C. et al. (2007). Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis report
of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge,
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 145 pp. http://
www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/
confronting-climate-change-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf.
15

Governor’s New Hampshire Forest Products Industry Task
Force Report, August 2008, 7 pp. http://www.nhtoa.org/
ForestIndustryTaskForceReportAug.pdf.
16

Iverson, L. et al. (2008) Modeling potential climate change
impacts on the trees of the northeastern United States. Mitigation
and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. 13(5-6), 487-516.

17

18
Paradis, A. et al. (2008) Role of winter temperature and climate
change on the survival and future range expansion of the hemlock
woolly adelgid ( Adelges tsugae ) in eastern North America.
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. 13(5-6),
541-554.

Wolfe D.W. et al. (2008) Projected change in climate thresholds
in the Northeastern U.S.: implications for crops, pests, livestock,
and farmers. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global
Change. 13(5-6), 555-575.

19

Frumhoff, P.C. et al. (2007). Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis report
of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge,
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), 145 pp. http://
www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/
confronting-climate-change-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf.

20

New Hampshire 2007 Hazard Mitigation Plan, New Hampshire
Department of Safety, Homeland Security and Emergency
Management. http://www.nh.gov/safety/divisions/bem/
HazardMitigation/haz_mit_plan.html.

21

22

Pfeffer, J. T. et al. (2008). Kinematic Constraints on Glacier

74 - New Hampshire Climate Action Plan

24
Easterling III, E. et al. (2004). Coping with Global climate Change:
The Role of Adaptation in the United States. Prepared for the Pew
Center on Global Climate Change, 40 pp. http://www.pewtrusts.
org/our_work_report_detail.aspx?id=22878.

Rodenhouse NL, SN Matthews, KP McFarland, JD Lambert, LR
Iverson, A Prasad, TS Sillett and RT Holmes (2008) Potential effects
of climate change on birds of the Northeast. Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. 13(5-6), 517-540.

25

26

These data have been adjusted for inflation.

New Hampshire 2007 Hazard Mitigation Plan, New Hampshire
Department of Safety, Homeland Security and Emergency
Management. http://www.nh.gov/safety/divisions/bem/
HazardMitigation/haz_mit_plan.html.

27

28
HB 648 Comprehensive Flood Management Final Report,
September 2008, 52 pp. http://gencourt.state.nh.us/
statstudcomm/reports/1853.pdf.

Chapter 4 Economic Opportunities
1
Pollin et al. (2008). Green Recovery: A Program to Create Good
Jobs and Start Building a Low-Carbon Economy. Political Economy
Research Institute and Center for American Progress: 38 pp.

http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2008/09/green_
recovery.html.
Gittell, R. et al. (2009). “New Hampshire’s Green Economy and
Industries: Current employment and future opportunities.”
Whittemore School of Business & Economics. University of New
Hampshire, Durham, NH.
2

3

Ibid.

Gittell, R. and Magnuson, M. (2007). Economic Impact of a
New Hampshire Renewable Portfolio Standard. UNH Economic
Analysis, 74 pp. http://des.nh.gov/organization/divisions/air/tsb/
tps/climate/documents/unh_rps_report.pdf.

4

Gittell, R. and Magnuson, M. (2008). Economic Impacts in New
Hampshire of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI): An
Independent Assessment, 69 pp. http://des.nh.gov/organization/
divisions/air/tsb/tps/climate/rggi/documents/unh_rggi_study.doc.

5

Chapter 5 Summary of Actions
1 Rypkema, D. (2005). “Economics, Sustainability, and Historic
Preservation,” keynote address at the National Trust Conference,
Portland, Oregon, 1 October 2005.
2 NHTSA (2009). CAFE Overview - Frequently Asked Questions.
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/CARS/rules/CAFE/overview.htm. (Last
Accessed January 14, 2009).

