New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix A
Executive Order Establishing the
New York Climate Action Council
In August of 2009 Governor David A. Paterson signed Executive Order No. 24 setting a
goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in New York State by 80 percent below the
levels emitted in 1990 by the year 2050. The Executive Order also created the New York
Climate Action Council with a directive to prepare a draft Climate Action Plan by
September 30, 2010. Executive Order No. 24 is copied below.

Executive Order No. 24: ESTABLISHING A GOAL TO REDUCE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS EIGHTY PERCENT BY THE YEAR 2050
AND PREPARING A CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
WHEREAS, an emerging scientific consensus recognizes that the increased concentration
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, along with other heat-trapping greenhouse gasses,
resulting from the combustion of fossil fuels and other human sources, warms the planet
and changes its climate; and
WHEREAS, many scientists warn that unmitigated climate change is expected to result
in significant adverse impacts to our communities, economy and environment; and
WHEREAS, according to the scientific assessments of the United Nations
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and other work, substantial reductions in
greenhouse gas emissions by mid-century have the potential to minimize the most severe
climate change impacts currently predicted; and
WHEREAS, the reduction of global warming and limitation of climate change effects
requires a collaborative, international effort to reduce the emission of greenhouses gases
around the globe; and
WHEREAS, New York and other states should work collaboratively with the federal
government to develop and implement plans and policies that will achieve reductions in
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States; and
WHEREAS, expanding and advancing energy efficiency and renewable energy projects
will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and create new jobs; and
WHEREAS, New York State has demonstrated leadership in this effort by undertaking
actions such as:
•

Executive Order No. 2 (2008): Establishing a State Energy Planning Board and
Authorizing the Creation and Implementation of a State Energy Plan;

A-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Executive Order No. 4 (2008): Establishing a State Green Procurement and Agency
Sustainability Program;

•

Creation of the Governor's Smart Growth Cabinet;

•

Adoption of goals and practices for energy efficiency and green building technology
in State buildings, and for the use of biofuels in State vehicles and buildings;

•

Creation of the New York State Office of Climate Change in the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation;

•

Participation in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a ten-state cooperative effort
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from electric power plants by means of a cap and
trade system;

•

Creation of an Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard, which is intended to reduce the
State’s electricity consumption by 15 percent below projected levels by 2015,
complementing the State’s System Benefit Charge and Renewable Portfolio Standard;

•

The formation of a Renewable Energy Task Force and a Sea Level Rise Task Force;

•

Collaboration with other northeastern and mid-Atlantic states on the development of a
regional low carbon fuel standard;

•

Establishment of a “ 45 x 15” Initiative, which set a goal to meet 45% of New York’s
electricity needs through improved energy efficiency and clean renewable energy by
2015;

•

Adoption of regulations establishing greenhouse gas exhaust emission standards for
motor vehicles;

•

Enactment of legislation requiring new motor vehicles to bear labels disclosing
information to consumers about vehicle greenhouse gas emissions;

•

Enactment of legislation establishing “green” residential and State building programs;

•

Enactment of legislation expanding the State’s “net metering” laws, allowing
increased development of renewable energy by electricity customers;

•

Enactment of Legislation expanding energy efficiency and clean energy initiatives of
the New York Power Authority to public entities; and

•

Investment of billions of dollars by the New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority, the New York Power Authority and the Long Island Power
Authority in existing, expanded and new energy efficiency and renewable energy
programs; and

WHEREAS, it is appropriate to build upon the important environmental benefits obtained
through these actions and to establish a State-wide goal for the reduction of greenhouse
gasses, and to develop a plan that enables New York to participate fully in the national
and international efforts to combat climate change.

A-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

NOW, THEREFORE, I, David A. Paterson, Governor of the State of New York, by
virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the State of New
York, do hereby order as follows:
1.

It shall be a goal of the State of New York to reduce current greenhouse gas
emissions from all sources within the State eighty percent (80%) below levels
emitted in the year nineteen hundred ninety (1990) by the year two-thousand fifty
(2050).

2.

There is hereby created a Climate Action Council (“Council”) consisting of the
Commissioners of Agriculture and Markets, Economic Development,
Environmental Conservation, Housing and Community Renewal, and
Transportation; the Chairs of the Public Service Commission, and Metropolitan
Transportation Authority; the Presidents of the New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority, Long Island Power Authority, New York Power
Authority and Dormitory Authority of the State of New York; the Secretary of
State; the Director of the Budget; the Director of State Operations; and the Counsel
to the Governor. The Director of State Operations shall serve as the Chair of the
Council.

3.

The Council shall prepare a draft Climate Action Plan on or before September 30,
2010. The Council shall hold regional public comment hearings on the draft Plan,
and shall allow at least 60 days for the submission of public comment. Thereafter,
the Council shall prepare a final Climate Action Plan which shall be reviewed and,
if warranted, adjusted annually by the Council.

4.

In aspiring to meet the greenhouse gas emission reduction goal, the Council, in
preparing the Climate Action Plan, shall:
a. inventory greenhouse gas emissions within the State, including the relative
contribution of each type of emission source;
b. identify and assess short-term and long-term actions to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and adapt to climate change across all economic sectors,
including industry, transportation, agriculture, building construction and
energy production;
c. identify and analyze the anticipated reductions, and the economic
implications thereof, as a result of each action;
d. identify the anticipated life-cycle implications, consequences, benefits and
costs of implementing each action, including implications, consequences,
benefits and costs to the State, local governments, business and residents
from implementation of each option and action;
e. identify whether such actions support New York’s goals for clean energy
in the new economy, including specific short-term and long-term
economic development opportunities and disadvantages related to
greenhouse gas emission reductions and the development and deployment
of new and emerging technologies and energy sources;
f. coordinate its activities with the State energy planning process of the State
Energy Planning Board;

A-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

g. identify existing legal, regulatory and policy constraints to reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, assessing the impacts of climate change, and
adapting to climate change, and recommend ways to address any such
constraints;
h. establish estimated timelines for considering and implementing actions;
and
i. undertake such actions, and compile such additional material, as deemed
appropriate by the Council in carrying out its responsibilities under this
Order.
5.

Members of the Council may designate an executive staff member to represent
them and participate on the Council on their behalf, subject to the approval of the
Chair. A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, and all
actions and recommendations of the Council shall require approval of a majority of
the total members or their representatives.

6.

The entities represented on the Council are authorized to provide the primary staff
and other resources that are necessary for the Council to comply with this Order. In
addition, every other agency, department, office, division and public authority of
this State shall cooperate with the Council and furnish such information and
assistance as the Council determines is reasonably necessary for it to comply with
this Order.

7.

The Council may convene advisory panels to assist or advise it in areas requiring
special expertise or knowledge.

8.

The Climate Action Plan is not intended to be static, but rather a dynamic and
continually evolving strategy to assess and achieve the goal of sustained reductions
of greenhouse gas emissions.

G I V E N under my hand and the Privy Seal of the State in the City of Albany this sixth
day of August in the year two thousand nine.
David A. Paterson
Governor

Lawrence Schwartz
Secretary to the Governor

A-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix B
Description of New York State
Climate Action Council Process
Creation of the New York State Climate Action Council
In August 2009, Governor David A. Paterson signed Executive Order 24 establishing the goal of
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from all New York sources to 80 percent below 1990
levels by 2050 and creating the New York State Climate Action Council (Council). The purpose
of the Council is to assist New York in identifying the best opportunities to mitigate and adapt to
climate change, reduce costs associated with climate change activities, and foster economic
growth in New York.
The Council’s Response to Date: In fulfillment of the requirements of the Executive Order,
the Council has held six meetings between November 2009 and December 2010, and formed
three external panels to assist and advise in areas requiring special expertise or knowledge:
Technical Analysis, which consists of five Technical Working Groups; Multi-Sector Integration;
and 2050 Visioning.
For planning and progress benchmarking purposes, the Council adopted an interim GHG
reduction goal of 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030, or one-half of the 80 by 50 goal at the
mid-point between 2010 and 2050.
The Council and supporting panels crafted sector-specific vision statements that describe the
major characteristics of each mitigation and adaptation sector in 2050 as necessary or desirable
to achieve the 80 by 50 goal.
The Council and supporting panels reviewed over 300 multi-sector GHG mitigation policy
options and approved for inclusion in this Report a package of draft mitigation policy options to
reduce GHG emissions and address related energy and economic issues in New York State.
Many of these draft recommendations have been individually analyzed for their likely GHG
reduction potential and net direct cost or savings to the New York economy. 1
The Council and supporting panels performed a systematic review of vulnerabilities to the
effects of climate change and approved draft adaptation policy recommendations across eight
sectors for inclusion in this Report.
The Climate Action Plan Process
The Council began the formal deliberative process at the first meeting of the Integration
Advisory Panel and Technical Working Groups on January 14, 2010. The Integration Advisory
Panel has met in person five times, and the five Technical Work Groups have met in person and
1

Integrated analysis of the policies which takes into consideration policy interactions and overlaps, as well as
macroeconomic, or indirect economic impacts on income, GSP, employment and prices, will be completed in the
next phase of the Plan process.

B-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

by teleconference bi-weekly since January 2010. The five Technical Work Groups considered
potential policy options in the following sectors:
•

Power Supply and Delivery (PSD)

•

Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI)

•

Transportation and Land Use (TLU)

•

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW)

•

Adaptation (ADP)

The four Mitigation Technical Work Groups (PSD, RCI, TLU, and AFW) focused on
opportunities to mitigate GHG emissions or enhance the sequestration of atmospheric carbon
dioxide within their respective sectors. The fifth, the Adaptation Technical Work Group, focused
on policies that anticipated highly likely climate impacts over the next 100 years in eight
economic and natural resource sectors, seeking to enhance potential benefits and reduce the cost
and security risks associated with unavoidable climate impacts.
New York State agency participation has been extensive throughout the process, with project
leadership and coordination provided by the New York Energy Research and Development
Authority (NYSERDA) and the Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC). The Center
for Climate Strategies provided facilitation and technical assistance to the process, including
facilitation and technical support for each of the Technical Work Groups, based on a detailed
proposal approved by NYSERDA.
The Technical Work Groups served as advisors to the Council and consisted of Council member
agency staff and additional public, private and non-profit sector stakeholders with specific
interest and expertise. Members of the public were invited to observe and provide input at all
meetings of the Integration Advisory Panel and Technical Work Groups. A series of four public
informational meetings were held around the State during the process. Planning process
documents and deliberative and analytical products were posted to the Plan’s public web site,
which also provided an additional venue for public input.
Prior to a joint organizational meeting of the Integration Advisory Panel and Technical Work
Groups the appointed participants attended a “2050 Visioning Conference” hosted by the New
York Academy of Sciences and organized by Brookhaven National Laboratory. The focus of the
conference was to place the challenge of the 80 by 50 goal into real-world context, and by
example illustrate the kinds of transformational change needed to achieve the goal.
After getting organized and reviewing the preliminary inventory and forecast the Technical
Work Groups crafted sector-specific vision statements with supplemental text providing detail
about the sector’s demand for and use of energy, as well as advisory comments on related
matters.
Mitigation Policy Process: Following the development of the vision statements, the four
Mitigation Technical Work Groups then generated an additional set of New York State-specific
policy options to be added to the catalog of existing states actions. Catalog policies were
reviewed by representatives of the environmental justice community and participants in

B-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

NYSERDA’s ClimAID project with written comments added to each policy in the catalog
reflecting their concerns for whether and how the policy might affect disadvantaged
communities, or be affected by anticipated near-term climate effects.
Where available, an estimate of the general potential for each cataloged mitigation policy to
reduce GHG emissions in New York and a rough estimate of the direct cost or savings per ton of
emissions reduced were provided to Technical Work Group members. Most of these estimates
were derived from research sponsored by NYSERDA and conducted by the Center for Climate
Strategies, titled Development of New York State Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curves.
Technical Work Group members also scrutinized and recommended enhancements to the New
York State inventory and forecast of GHG emissions developed by NYSERDA with assistance
from the Center for Climate Strategies (contained in the New York Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Inventory and Forecast report and summarized in Chapter 3). The inventory, which begins in
1990, serves as the benchmark against which progress toward the 80 percent below 1990
emissions levels goal is measured. The forecast serves as the baseline or ‘business-as-usual’
projection of future emissions assuming no measures to reduce them are enacted beyond those
already in place or approved.
The inventory and forecast and the analysis of most mitigation policies cover the six types of
gases included in the United States (U.S.) Greenhouse Gas Inventory: carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and
sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). The inventory and reference case projections include detailed coverage
of all economic sectors and GHGs in New York State, including future emission trends related to
energy, the economy, and population growth.
Once the Technical Work Groups had settled upon their broad sector visions for 2050,
commented on the draft inventory and forecast, and reviewed the technical potentials and
anticipated environmental justice and climate impact implications of the catalog policies,
members engaged in a process of selecting priority policies for development and analysis. This
process allowed the Technical Work Groups to regroup the catalog policies into logical policy
bundles organized around sets of technologies, e.g., renewable electricity generation, or policy
instruments, e.g., a renewable portfolio standard.
Technical Work Group-proposed priorities were reviewed by the Integration Advisory Panel and
Council, ultimately yielding 39 priority policy bundles across the four mitigation sectors. The
Technical Work Groups then set about the task of defining each policy as it could be
implemented in New York State and specifying GHG reduction goals and timing. Each policy
was developed using a template calling for:
•

Policy Description

•

Policy Design

•

Implementation Mechanisms

•

Related Policies and Programs in Place

•

Estimated GHG Reductions and Costs or Cost Savings

B-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Key Uncertainties

•

Additional Benefits and Costs

•

Adaptation to Climate Change Considerations (if any)

•

Environmental Justice Considerations (if any)

•

Feasibility Issues

Once the policy design, goals and timing were settled, the Center for Climate Strategies analysts
began to analyze the priority policy bundles designated for quantification. The analytical
assumptions, data sources and methods were carefully reviewed and revised as needed by
NYSERDA, DEC, other participating State agencies and Technical Work Group members. In
some cases, multiple scenarios or sensitivity analyses were produced for policies or sub policies,
and, depending on the results, policy designs were sometimes adjusted by the Technical Work
Groups in response to the first analysis.
The four Mitigation Technical Work Groups have met in person or by teleconference bi-weekly
through October 2010, not including small group meetings. Chapters 6 through 9 contain
summaries of these mitigation policies including their analytical results. The analytical results
presented here describe the potential effectiveness of the mitigation policies on a stand-alone
basis; that is, it is assumed each policy is being implemented in isolation, and that none of the
other recommended policies are implemented as well. This analysis generally does not consider
interactions among policies or overlapping emissions reductions. It is therefore not appropriate to
sum up the reductions or costs associated with individual policies in this Report to estimate a
cumulative result.
Adaptation Policy Process: Unlike mitigation climate action planning, which has been
undertaken in over 20 states and for which generally accepted methods have been developed,
adaptation policy development is relatively new. A few other states have examined the
adaptation challenge, but prior to the New York Climate Action Plan no state had attempted the
comprehensive effort to investigate likely unavoidable climate impacts across eight sectors,
assess their social, environmental, public health and economic risks, and propose dozens of
measures to address them.
While there are many similarities, the Adaptation Technical Work Group followed a different
process than that described above for the Mitigation Technical Work Groups. The Adaptation
Technical Work Group was divided into eight sector subgroups as follows:
•

Agriculture

•

Ocean Coastal Zones

•

Ecosystems

•

Water Resources

•

Public Health

•

Transportation

B-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Energy

•

Communications

Like the Mitigation Technical Work Groups, each Adaptation Technical Work Group subgroup
crafted their own 2050 vision statement and then followed a formal process to guide the
formation of recommendations. Informing this process were the draft results of the ClimAID
research funded by NYSERDA and conducted by teams from Columbia and Cornell
Universities, and the City University of New York, as well as the State Sea Level Rise Task
Force and elements of New York City’s PlaNYC.
The goals of the adaptation policies are somewhat different from the mitigation goals.
Recommended adaptation polices seek to address one or more of the following:
•

Prepare, protect, or improve climate resiliency

•

Improve climate monitoring, surveillance and data collection

•

Improve decision-making tools to enhance incorporation of climate projections in decisionmaking, permit and design criteria

•

Evaluate and enhance New York’s capacity to respond, e.g., through climate-informed
emergency response plans and protocols

•

Develop new strategies and promote advances in related technology through research and
development

•

Promote the inclusion of climate science in education curricula and other forms of
educational outreach

•

Improve coordination among federal, regional, state and local governments

•

Identify and address equity issues

The Adaptation Technical Work Group created its own policy description template to fully
describe their policy proposals and evaluate them according to criteria developed by the group.
The adaptation policy template included the following:
•

Climate Variables and Probabilities

•

Impacts on Resources (Likelihood, Consequence, Magnitude)

•

Timing of Risk and Overall Risk

•

Adaptation Strategy

•

Policy/Mechanism (Who, What, Where, How)

•

Potential Cost

•

Feasibility

•

Timing of Implementation

•

Efficiency

B-5



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Resiliency

•

Environmental Justice Considerations (Distribution, Degree)

•

Co-benefits and Costs

•

Research/Information Needs

The Adaptation Technical Work Group has developed policy recommendations across the eight
sectors, which are summarized in Chapter 11. The full Adaptation Technical Work Group met by
teleconference 12 times since January 2010, with one in-person meeting, and the eight subgroups
met dozens of times separately to develop their recommendations. As with the mitigation
policies, the Integration Advisory Panel and the Council reviewed and commented on the
adaptation policy sets as they were being developed.
Public Engagement: Key to the Climate Action Plan process design is the active engagement
of the public. As shown in Appendix C, the Technical Work Groups and Integration Advisory
Panel count among their members many representatives of environmental justice communities,
business and industry, academia, non-government organizations, trade associations, regional and
local governments, and state agencies. In addition to appointed membership on process
committees, four public informational meetings were held including two with special focus on
environmental justice concerns. An informational webinar will be provided, and three public
hearings will be held to solicit comment on this Interim Report.
To facilitate ongoing public involvement, all Technical Work Group and Integration Advisory
Panel meeting summaries, documents, drafts and work products were posted to the public web
site www.nyclimatechange.us, which provided an opportunity to submit electronic comments or
questions. In addition, every Technical Work Group and Integration Advisory Panel meeting or
teleconference was open to the public, and each meeting agenda provided an opportunity for
public comment or question.
In addition to the multiple public engagement opportunities described above, those living in
economically disadvantaged communities have been represented and their concerns voiced
through formal integration of environmental justice concerns throughout the process. Through
representation on the Integration Advisory Panel and Technical Work Groups, and by
incorporation of written comments and guidance at key junctures in the deliberations, the authors
of these recommendations have heard and sought to incorporate these concerns into the policy
designs.
In all, dozens of comments were received during Technical Work Group conference calls, about
25 comments and other inquiries were received through the web site portal, and approximately
125 people attended the first four informational meetings.
Next Steps
While the identification of mitigation and adaptation policies for New York and the
quantification of a subset of these for their GHG reduction potential and cost is a major
achievement, to fully satisfy Executive Order 24 more must be done. Public comment on this
Interim Report will be taken for a 90-day period, during which three public hearings will be held.

B-6



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Comments received will be reviewed by the Council and addressed in the draft Climate Action
Plan as appropriate.
This Report identifies cross-sector policies and issues (Chapter 12), but the analysis contained
here assumes each policy is implemented in isolation. The next phase of the planning process
will consider all policy interactions and produce a methodologically correct ‘sum of the parts’
projection for Action Plan emission reduction potentials and costs.
Also to be included in the next phase is a macroeconomic analysis of the impact of the
recommended policies on the broader New York economy. Costs and savings associated with
policies in this Report consider only the direct costs and savings to society, defined as within the
geographic boundaries of New York State. Secondary, indirect, or macroeconomic impacts such
as statewide employment, income, energy price and Gross State Product impacts will be
examined next with the results presented in the Final Climate Action Plan Report.
Many climate-sensitive policies are not new. Indeed, much progress has already been achieved
through enactment of measures unrelated to climate concerns. Energy efficiency has long been
both an economic and national security priority; the GHG benefits are considered ‘co-benefits’
of these policy goals. Likewise, many of the policies recommended here offer co-benefits of their
own. In particular, efforts that result in reduced burning of fossil fuels often result in lowered
emissions of pollutants other than CO2. Criteria pollutants, such as particulates, sulfur dioxide,
nitrogen oxides and air toxics emissions, may also be mitigated by climate-driven actions. Some
of these pollutants adversely affect human health and, therefore, impose economic and societal
costs. To more completely assess the value of these policies, the next phase of this planning
process will include a co-benefits analysis to project the level of non-CO2 pollutant reductions
and estimate the related benefits in improved human health and reduced cost associated with
treating resulting illnesses.
As discussed in Chapter 14, some of the most effective actions New York State could pursue
would either require or greatly benefit from the participation of our regional neighbors or the
federal government. Following the issuance of the Final Climate Action Plan Report in 2011, the
State will move toward implementation of the Plan, which will require engagement with regional
neighbors and the federal government on a variety of policy recommendations.
Critical to the charge of Executive Order 24 is demonstrating that the policies proposed here,
after enhanced analysis and refinement, can achieve the goal of total statewide emissions 80
percent below New York State emissions in 1990. The analysis contained here covers the period
from 2010 through 2030. Some key policies have also had GHG reductions estimated between
2030 and 2050, but cost estimates are limited to the next twenty years due to the increasing
uncertainty associated with longer-range projections. The Final Climate Action Plan Report will
therefore contain an additional analysis showing whether the 2050 goal will be achieved by the
implementation of the Plan’s recommendations.

B-7



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix C
Members of the Integration Advisory Panel
and Technical Work Groups
New York Climate Action Plan Process
Integration Advisory Panel
Adam Freed

Timothy Banach
Bard College

NYC Mayor’s Office

Eddie Bautista

Dominic Frongillo

NYC Environmental Justice Alliance

Town of Caroline

Alan Belensz

Matt Fronk

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Rochester Institute of Technology
General Motors (retired)

Janet Besser
National Grid

Gerry Gallagher
Ecology & Environment

Paul Beyer
NYS Department of State

Ashok Gupta
Natural Resources Defense Council

Glen Bruening
Counsel to Governor Paterson

Peter Iwanowicz
Governor's Office Representative

Robert Catell
Stony Brook University

Patrick Jackson
Corning

Soma Chengalur
Kodak

Janet Joseph
NYS Energy Research & Development Authority

Robert Chinery
NYS Department of Health

Steve Levy
Sprague Energy

Jeffrey Cohen
NYS Department of Public Service

Edward Malloy
NYS Buildings & Construction Trades Council

Cecil Corbin‐Mark
We Act for Environmental Justice

Jennifer McCormick
NYS Department of Economic Development

Steve Corneli
NRG Energy

Tim Mount
Cornell University

Paul DeCotis
Long Island Power Authority

Carol Murphy
Alliance for Clean Energy New York

Debra Devine
NYS Homes & Community Renewal

John Nolon
Pace University Land Use Law Center

Matt Driscoll
NYS Environmental Facilities Corporation

Joseph Oates
Consolidated Edison Company

Curtis Fisher
National Wildlife Federation

Jessica Ottney
The Nature Conservancy

C-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Ron Rausch
NYS Department of Agriculture & Markets

Mike Richter
Environmental Capital Partners

Victoria Simon
New York Power Authority

Jodi Smits Anderson
Dormitory Authority of the State of New York

Jared Snyder
NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Eleanor Stein
NYS Department of Public Service

Sean Sweeney
Cornell Global Labor Institute

William Sweet
Golub Corporation

Ernest Tollerson
NYS Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Larry Walker
Cornell University

Lynn Weiskopf
NYS Department of Transportation

Johanna Wellington
General Electric

Elizabeth Yeampierre
United Puerto Rican Organization of Sunset
Park (UPROSE)

C-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York Climate Action Plan Process
Adaptation Technical Work Group Members
*indicates IAP member

Robin Schlaff, Co‐Chair

Elisabeth Kolb

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

NYS Department of Transportation

Mark Watson , Co‐Chair

Megan Linkin

NYS Energy Research & Development Authority

Jim DeZolt (retired co‐chair)

Swiss Re

Sean Mahar

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Audubon New York

Fred Anders

Gary McVoy (retired)

NYS Department of State

NYS Department of Transportation

Christine Costopoulos

*Ron Rausch

NYS Economic Development

NYS Department of Agriculture & Markets

Art DeGaetano

Pat Riexinger

Cornell University

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Paul Dibbell

Cynthia Rosenzweig

Town of Hunter

Columbia University/NASA, ClimAID

Alon Dominitz

William Solecki

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Hunter College

Projjal Dutta

Rene VanSchaack

NYS Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Greene County Industrial Development
Authority

*Curtis Fisher

Dave Westman

National Wildlife Federation

Consolidated Edison Company of New York

*Adam Freed

Ross Whaley

Mayor's Office, New York City

SUNY College Environmtal Science and
Forestry, Emeritus

Kevin Gleason
NYS Department of Health

Michael Wironen

Dave Haight

Ecology & Environment

American Farmland Trust

*Elizabeth Yeampierre

Mike Hervey

United Puerto Rican Organization of Sunset
Park (UPROSE)

Long Island Power Authority

Center for Climate Strategies

State Agency Liaisons

Arturo Garcia‐Costas NYSDEC 1
Mark Lowery NYSDEC
Kristin Marcell NYSDEC
Carl Mas NYSERDA 2
Amanda Stevens NYSERDA
Marilyn Wurth NYSDEC

Steve Chester Lead ADP Facilitator
Billl Dougherty Co‐Facilitator, Analyst
Katie Pasko CCS Support

1

New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation
2
New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority

C-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York Climate Action Plan Process
Agriculture, Forestry and Waste Management Technical Work Group
Members
*indicates IAP member

NYS Energy Research & Development
Authority

Rob Davies, Co‐Chair
NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

*Jessica Ottney

*Ron Rausch, Co‐Chair

The Nature Conservancy

NYS Department of Agriculture & Markets

Kellie‐Terry Sepulveda

Greg Albrecht

The POINT Community Development Corp

NYS Department of Agriculture and Makets

Erin Sharkey

Ben Ballard

Massachusetts Avenue Project

Morrisville State

Doug Shelmadine

Antonio Bento

Sheland Farm

Cornell University

Matt Smith

Dan Conable

Finite Carbon

Cato Analytics

Peter Stein

Resa Dimino

The Lyme Timber Company

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Joe Visalli

Barbara Eckstrom

Adirondack Research Consortium

Thompkins County

Tim Volk

Michael Gainer

SUNY College of Environmental Science &
Forestry

Buffalo ReUse

Judith LaBelle

*Larry Walker

Glynwood Center

Cornell University

Jerry Leone

Jeff Williams

Casella Waste Systems

New York Farm Bureau

Jeff Peterson
Center for Climate Strategies

State Agency Liaisons

Steve Roe Lead AFW Facilitator
Rachel Anderson AFW Co‐Facilitator
Bradley Strode AFW Co‐Facilitator

Sloane Crawford NYSDEC
Steve Hammond NYSDEC
Scott Menrath NYSDEC
Marilyn Wurth NYSDEC

ClimAID Liaison

David Wolfe Cornell University

C-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York Climate Action Plan Process
Power Supply and Delivery Technical Work Group Members
*indicates IAP member

*Jeff Cohen, Co‐Chair

Jim Misewich

NYS Department of Public Service

Brookhaven National Laboratory

*Jared Snyder, Co‐Chair

* Carol Murphy

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Alliance for Clean Energy New York

Bruce Bailey

*Joseph Oates

AWS TrueWind

Consolidated Edison Company of New York

*Janet Besser

Jim Parmelee

National Grid

Long Island Power Authority

Peter Carney

*Mike Richter

NYISO

Environmental Capital Partners

Keith Corneau

*Victoria Simon/Brian Ross

Empire State Development Corporation

New York Power Authority

*Steve Corneli

Jaime Stein

NRG Energy

Sustainable South Bronx

Jim Gallagher

Robert Teetz

NYC Economic Development Corporation

National Grid

*Ashok Gupta

Jim Torpey

Natural Resources Defense Council

SunPower Corporation

Jeff Guynup

Mark Torpey

International Assn. of Heat and Frost
Insulators & Allied Workers

NYS Energy Research & Development
Authority

Jaime Van Nostrand

Erin Heaney

Pace University Energy and Climate Center

Clean Air Coalition of Western NY

Sundar Venkataraman

Radmila Miletich

General Electric

Independent Power Producers of New York

State Agency Liaisons

Center for Climate Strategies

Jeff Wennberg Lead PSD Facilitator
Billl Dougherty Senior Analyst
Katie Pasko Support

Dave Coup NYSERDA
David Gardner NYSDEC
Steve Hammond NYSDEC
Karl Michael NYSERDA

ClimAID Liaison

Michael Hyams Columbia University

C-5



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York Climate Action Plan Process
Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial (RCI)
Technical Work Group Members
*indicates IAP member

Steve Groseclose

*Jodi Smits Anderson, Co‐Chair
Dormitory Authority of the State of New York

Global Foundries

Karen Villeneuve, Co‐Chair

Jeremy Hoffman

NYS Energy Research & Development
Authority

Laborers’ International Union of N. America

Phil Hopke

Floyd Barwig

Clarkson University

NYS Department of Public Service

Sharon Jack‐Williams

Joseph Berman

Dunbar Association

Golub Corporation

Patrick Jackson

Laura Caruso

Corning

SEIU Local 32BJ

Ron Kamen

Robert Damico

EarthKind Solar

NYS Homes and Community Renewal

Amelia LoDolce

Bill Davies

City of Binghamton

Davies Office Refurbishing

Danielle Merfeld
General Electric Global Research Center

Mike Deering

David Meyer

Long Island Power Authority

Pathfinder Engineers

Susanne DeRoches

Jackson Morris

Port Authority of New York & New Jersey

Pace University Energy and Climate Center

Christopher Diamond

Ron Peister

Steven Winter Associates

NYS Department of State

Shannon Fales

Ron Shiffman

Real Estate Board of New York

Pratt Institute

*Adam Freed

Tim Stout

NYC Mayor’s Office

National Grid

*Dominic Frongillo

Elizabeth Weiner

Town of Caroline

Conservation Services Group

Jim Gebhardt

Roy Wood

NYS Environmental Facilities Corporation

Kodak Corporation

Center for Climate Strategies

State Agency Liaisons to RCI TWG

Hal Nelson Lead RCI Facilitator
Eric Bellieveau Energy Efficiency Expert

David Gardner NYSDEC
Steve Hammond NYSDEC
Carl Mas NYSERDA
Michelle Salisbury NYSERDA

ClimAID Liaison to RCI TWG

Stuart Gaffin Columbia University

C-6



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York Climate Action Plan Process
Transportation and Land Use
Technical Work Group Members
*indicates IAP member

*Paul Beyer, Co‐Chair

Kevin Morrow

NYS Department of State

eTec

*Ernest Tollerson, Co‐Chair

*John Nolon

Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Pace University Land Use Law Center

Gerry Bogacz

Maurice O'Connell

NY Metropolitan Transportation Council

CSX Transportation

Lena DeSantis

Anne Reynolds

Port Authority of NY and NJ

NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation

Richard Drake

Deb Stacey

NYS Energy Research & Development
Authority

Capital District Transportation Committee

*Eleanor Stein

Anthony Fresina

NYS Department of Public Service

Laborer’s Union

*William Sweet

*Matthew Fronk

Golub Corporation

Rochester Institute of Technology
General Motors (retired)

Eric Walker
People United for Sustainable Housing
(PUSH) Buffalo

Ross Gould
Environmental Advocates of New York

John Zamurs

*Steve Levy

NYS Department of Transportation

Sprague Energy

Timothy Mathews
Transport Workers Local 100

Center for Climate Strategies

State Agency Liaisons
Steve Hammond NYSDEC
John Marschilok NYSDEC
Carl Mas NYSERDA
Lois New NYSDEC
Adam Ruder NYSERDA
Michael Sheehan NYSDEC

Lewison Lem Lead TLU Facilitator
Hillel Hammer Senior TLU Consultant
James Winebrake Senior TLU Consultant
ClimAID Liaison

Rae Zimmerman, NYU

C-7



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix D
Overview of Current New York State
Climate and Energy Policies
New York State has initiated or participates in programs on regional, state, and local levels that
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and encourage energy independence, energy efficiency and
renewable energy.

Greenhouse Gas Inventory and Reduction
The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
New York is one of ten Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states participating in the RGGI cap and
invest program. The New York CO2 Budget Trading Program (6NYCRR Part 242) and the CO2
Allowance Auction Program (21NYCRR Part 507) took effect January 1, 2009. Emissions of
carbon dioxide from electric power generating facilities will be reduced ten percent by 2018.
Auction proceeds support statewide investments in energy efficiency, renewable and clean
energy, and innovative carbon abatement technologies, as guided by the RGGI Operating Plan.
The Climate Registry
The Climate Registry is a partnership of businesses, environmental organizations and states with
standards for estimating and reporting greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane, nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6)). Twenty-one New York public and private organizations have enrolled as
Founding Reporters and committed to inventory and report their emissions under the Registry's
protocol.
Adoption of California Vehicle Emissions Standards
California is the only state that is not preempted by federal vehicle emissions standards and, as a
result, is permitted to set stricter standards than those that apply to the nation as a whole. Once a
rule has been adopted in California, other states seeking standards for a higher level of emissions
controls are permitted to adopt such California standards as well. New York has adopted the
most recent California standards, which would reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars by 37
percent and from light trucks 24 percent by 2016.
Regional Low-Carbon Fuel Standard
The Regional Low-Carbon Fuel Standard is a market-based, technologically neutral emissionsperformance standard under development by 11 Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states (Connecticut,
Delaware, Massachusetts, Maryland, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode
Island, Vermont, and Pennsylvania) that will reduce the carbon intensity of transportation fuels
sold in the region.

D-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The Transportation and Climate Initiative
This initiative is a coordinated regional effort by 12 Northeast and Mid-Atlantic jurisdictions
(Connecticut, Delaware, Massachussetts, Maryland, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York, Rhode Island, Vermont, Pennsylvania, and the District of Columbia) to reduce
transportation sector greenhouse gas emissions and further the development of a clean energy
economy. The participating jurisdictions are working to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
minimize our transportation system’s reliance on high-carbon fuels, promote sustainable growth,
address the challenges of vehicle miles traveled, and help build the clean energy economy.
Climate Smart Communities
This program includes ten-point pledge for municipalities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
prepare for climate change, and invest in green economies. Launched February 2009, the Climate
Smart Communities Pledge has already been adopted by at least 85 New York communities.
Office of Climate Change
The charge of the Office of Climate Change is to lead development of programs and policies that
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and help municipalities and individuals adapt to the effects of
climate change. In addition to implementing RGGI, the Office is developing the full suite of
responses needed for significant emissions reductions and for successful adaptation to changing
temperatures, sea levels, precipitation and other climate factors.

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
45 by 15
Adopted in the 2009 State Energy Plan, this energy policy is designed to meet 45 percent of New
York’s electric energy needs from energy efficiency and renewable energy by the year 2015.
Along with program requirements from the State’s energy authorities, this policy is implemented
by two key programs:
Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)
This program requires 30 percent of electricity in New York to be supplied from
renewable energy sources by 2015 and provides financial incentives to support
development of renewable energy sources. To date, the RPS has lead to the development
of over 1300 MW of renewable power including large-scale facilities and thousands of
customer-sited renewable resources. New York is one of 27 states to use a RPS to drive a
transition to renewable sources of electricity.
Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard (EEPS)
This program is designed to contribute to reducing energy demand 15 percent from
forecasted levels by 2015, through energy efficiency. This program is expected to provide
more than $4 billion in benefits to customers, along with thousands of jobs to support
energy efficiency programs, such as retrofitting outdated and inefficient residential,
commercial and industrial properties and installing new energy efficient equipment.
Additional energy efficiency gains are anticipated to contribute to the 15 percent

D-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

reduction also include strengthening efficiency standards for appliances and buildings,
and address energy efficiency opportunities for New York’s largest energy consumer –
State government.
System Benefits Charge (SBC)
The System Benefits Charge supports the implementation of a portfolio of energy efficiency and
clean energy activities. The SBC program provides New York-based investment in research,
development and demonstration of emerging energy technologies, supports business
development of new companies that are providing innovative products and services, and
provides support for accelerating the introduction into the market and use of energy efficiency
and clean energy technologies. This program also provides targeted energy efficiency services
for low-income customers.
Green Buildings
The Green Buildings Tax Credit Program provides state tax credits to owners and tenants of
eligible buildings that meet certain energy and environmental performance standards. Large
commercial and residential buildings that meet these standards will have lower environmental
impacts than buildings that would otherwise meet a lower level of performance, based on
existing building codes. The program is also designed to provide general information and foster
contacts among building design teams and building owners to help new and rehabilitated
commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings achieve higher levels of energy and
environmental performance. In addition to the tax credit program, a new incentive program to
foster interest in high-performance single-family residential buildings has also been initiated.
Renewable Energy Task Force
Comprised of 20 private-sector and government representatives, the Renewable Energy Task
Force issued a Report in February 2008, listing 16 specific policy and program recommendations
which constitute a roadmap to significantly increase the use of renewable energy in New York.
Recommendations include greater solar energy production, expanding the State's RPS, and
business incentives to attract renewable energy producers and expand the State's "green collar"
workforce. This Report has launched several successful initiatives, including the Vehicle Miles
Traveled Task Force, a Renewable Fuels Roadmap and Sustainable Biomass Feedstock Supply
For New York 1 , and other projects which will provide the foundation to advance the
recommendations into sound energy and environment programs.
Net Metering
Net Metering allows electricity customers with qualified renewable energy systems – including
home-based solar and wind systems and farm-based waste digester systems – to sell excess
electricity generated by such facilities to the local utility. Several 2008 laws authorized
expansion of the existing programs, increasing the maximum amount of energy that utilities are
required to buy from host energy sites through net metering.

1

NYSERDA Report 10-05. April, 2010.
D-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

State Operations Policies
Designed to affect State government operations and improve the energy and environmental
performance of State assets and resources, several programs have been initiated and
implemented through Executive Order (EO). These EO actions include:
Green and Clean State Buildings and Vehicles Guidelines (EO 111)
EO 111 requires State buildings to reduce energy consumption by 35 percent of 1990
levels by 2010, and mandates that State agencies select ENERGY STAR qualified
products. Construction and renovations must follow Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) green building standards.
State Green Procurement and Agency Sustainability Program (EO 4)
EO 4 promotes the State purchase of environmentally-friendly commodities, services and
technologies, as well as agency sustainability and stewardship programs.
Use of Biofuels and Alternative Fueled Vehicles (EO 142)
EO 142 requires State agencies to phase in renewable heating and transportation fuels.
The State is working to assess the environmental, social, and health effects of biofuels
and has developed a Renewable Fuels Roadmap that lays out a sound future for New
York in this area.

Climate Change Adaptation
New York State Sea Level Rise Task Force
The Sea Level Rise Task Force was created by the State Legislature in 2007 to assess sea level
rise effects to the State's coastlines and to recommend protective and adaptive measures for
coastal communities and natural habitats. The Task Force will produce a report of
recommendations by January 1, 2011.
NYS Interagency Local Government Adaptation Workgroup
This ad hoc workgroup facilitates development of recommendations for local adaptation
planning, decision-support tool development and cooperative management of pilot projects.
State Wildlife Action Plan (SWAP) Vulnerability Assessments
These habitat type vulnerability assessments and assessments of threats to species of special
concern identify potential actions for SWAP.

D-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix E
Methods of Quantification
The Climate Action Plan used an overall analytical approach applied across the four greenhouse
gas mitigation sectors. Key elements of the overall approach are described in the Quantification
Methods Memorandum. The key elements are divided into the following three sections: Overall
Approach, GHG Emissions and Emission Reductions, and Cost Analysis Methods. Separate
memoranda, the “Common Assumptions Memos,” focus on key analytical methods that are
specific to each of the four Technical Work Group areas, and follow the Quantification Methods
Memorandum.

E-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Draft Quantification Methods Memorandum
New York State Climate Action Plan
Prepared for:
The New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority
and
The New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation
Albany, NY

Prepared by:
The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS)

July 23, 2010

E-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS.............................................................................................................E-3
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................E-4
Overall Approach .........................................................................................................................E-4
Emission Sources .....................................................................................................................E-4
Fuel Cycle Coverage ................................................................................................................E-5
Life Cycle Coverage ................................................................................................................E-5
Pollutant Coverage and Global Warming Potentials ...............................................................E-5
Time Period of Analysis ..........................................................................................................E-6
Start and End Years for Analysis .............................................................................................E-7
Transparency ............................................................................................................................E-7
Key Analytical Outputs and Metrics............................................................................................E-7
GHG emission reductions ........................................................................................................E-7
Costs.........................................................................................................................................E-7
Cost-effectiveness ....................................................................................................................E-8
Direct vs. indirect effects .........................................................................................................E-8
End effects ...............................................................................................................................E-8
Non-GHG (external) impacts and costs ...................................................................................E-9
Biomass supply & demand ......................................................................................................E-9
Uncertainty / Sensitivity Analysis ...........................................................................................E-9
GHG Emissions and Emission Reductions ..................................................................................E-9
New York State GHG Emissions Inventory and Forecast .......................................................E-9
Calculation of Emission Reductions for Policy Options .........................................................E-9
Energy Conversion Factors ....................................................................................................E-10
Cost Analysis Methods ..............................................................................................................E-10
Cost Effectiveness ..................................................................................................................E-10
Annual O&M Costs ...............................................................................................................E-13
Forecast of Fuel Demand, Prices, and Costs..........................................................................E-13
Avoided Electricity Generation Costs ...................................................................................E-13
Interactions with the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) .......................................E-13
Documentation ...........................................................................................................................E-13
Annex 1: Examples of Direct/Indirect Net Cost and Benefit Metrics .......................................E-15
AFW Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft .............................................................E-17
PSD Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft ...............................................................E-24
RCI Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft................................................................E-27
TLU Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft...............................................................E-33

E-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Quantification Memorandum is to explain the methodologies and identify key
assumptions for developing sector-specific estimates of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
reduction potential, incremental costs, and cost effectiveness for Climate Action Plan
recommended policies for New York. This memorandum also addresses the data sources/types
and methods that will be needed to support the analysis of sector-specific GHG mitigation policy
options associated with statewide implementation of aggregated technologies and best practices.
The first part of this memorandum discusses key elements of the overall analytical approach that
apply across all four Technical Work Group sectors. The key elements are divided into the
following three sections: Overall Approach, GHG Emissions and Emission Reductions, and Cost
Analysis Methods. Separate memoranda, the “Common Assumptions Memos,” focus on key
analytical methods that are specific to each of the four Technical Work Group areas.

Overall Approach
Emission Sources
The project was divided into four Technical Work Group sectors to analyze the emission
reduction potential and associated costs of individual GHG mitigation policy options and reflect
the relationship between reduction potentials and cost per metric ton of carbon dioxide
equivalent (CO2e) emissions avoided. The four sectors include:
(1)

Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI);

(2)

Power Supply and Delivery (PSD);

(3)

Transportation and Land Use (TLU); and,

(4)

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW).

The analysis of policy options will focus on those that are or may be applicable in New York
State. When relevant, and as allowed by the availability of data, budget and project time, the
analysis will include geographic differences in the application and costs of mitigation policies
(e.g., New York City versus the rest of the state). At a minimum, in-state emission reductions
and costs will be estimated for technologies and best practices as applied in New York State.
Subject to review by the Integration Advisory Panel, emission reductions will also be estimated
for technologies and best practices applied within the state that result in emission reductions
outside of the state. For instance, a major benefit of recycling is the reduction in material
extraction and processing (e.g., aluminum production). While a policy may increase recycling in
New York, the reduction in emissions may occur where this material is produced. Where
significant emissions impacts are likely to occur outside the state, this will be clearly indicated.
However, for the purpose of counting emissions reductions against New York’s goal, only instate reductions will be included.

E-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Fuel Cycle Coverage
For the purposes of this study, the full fuel cycle represents the range of activities associated with
fuel extraction, processing, distribution, and consumption. For the PSD, RCI, AFW and TLU
sectors, GHG reductions for each mitigation policy option will be based upon the full fuel cycle
because information is available to support this type of analysis for these sectors. Tracking the
full range of fuel use inputs is essential for accurately tracking fuel cycle carbon emissions for
technology options displaying very different performance characteristics. The approach involves
identifying all the possible stages of the fuel cycle and quantifying the fuel input per unit of
energy produced (electricity or fossil fuel).
Fuel cycle impacts will be reported for each source for which information is available to support
a fuel cycle analysis. Where fuel cycle emission reductions are captured, there will often be two
sets of emission reductions estimated: the total fuel cycle reductions; and those estimated to
occur within the state. For the purpose of counting emissions reductions against New York’s
goal, only in-state reductions will be included. In most cases, these will be difficult to separate
based on available information. Therefore, by default, the in-state reductions will often be those
associated with fuel combustion and known in-state processes. Emission reductions from in-state
processes associated with non-combustion reduction sources include only those processes that
are known to occur within New York State (e.g., landfill emission reductions, but not the
upstream GHG emissions embedded in the waste component) and exclude processes where the
geographic origin of the mitigated emissions is uncertain (e.g., emissions from
extraction/processing/packaging of virgin materials into usable products).
Life Cycle Coverage
For the purposes of this quantification, life cycle represents the energy and materials used for
manufacture, its energy use during useful life, and disposal and/or capacity to be recycled. As the
Climate Action Plan Council has conveyed interest in reporting in-state GHG reductions – with
fuel-cycle reductions considered as co-benefits – full life cycle analyses may not be performed.
Should sufficient data and parameters become available to execute a full life cycle analysis, CCS
will include life cycle analysis, listing life cycle GHG reductions as co-benefits.
Pollutant Coverage and Global Warming Potentials
The analysis will cover the following six GHGs: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous
oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride
(SF6). Emissions of these gases will be presented using a common metric, CO2e, which accounts
for the relative contribution of each gas to global average radiative forcing by multiplying the
emissions of each pollutant by its Global Warming Potential (GWP)—a unitless factor
representing the ratio of the radiative forcing of each GHG to the radiative forcing of CO2 (the
GWP for CO2 is 1). Table E-1 shows the 100-year GWPs published by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its Second, Third, and Fourth Assessment Reports. To be
consistent with the GHG emissions inventory and forecast for the state of New York, the 100year GWP’s published in the Second Assessment Report of the IIPCC will be used to convert
mass emissions to a 100-year GWP basis. Use of the 100-year GWP’s published in the IPCC’s
Second Assessment Report is also consistent with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
and IPCC guidance for consistency with how U.S. national, state, and country-specific GHG
emissions inventories have been developed in the past.
E-5



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Qualitative information on the criteria air pollutants and toxic air pollutants will also be included
when this information is identified for individual technologies and practices in order to support
co-benefits analysis.
Table E-1. 100-Year Global Warming Potentials from the Second, Third and Fourth
Assessment Reports of the IPCC
100-year GWP (2nd
1
Assessment)

100-year GWP
(3rd Assessment) 2

100-year GWP
(4th Assessment) 3

CO2

1

1

1

CH4

21

23

25

Gas

N2O

310

296

298

HFC-23

11,700

12,000

14,800

HFC-125

2,800

3,400

3,500

HFC-134a

1,300

1,300

1,430

HFC-143a

3,800

4,300

4,470

HFC-152a

140

120

124

HFC-227ea

2,900

3,500

3,220

HFC-236fa

6,300

9,400

794

HFC-4310mee

1,300

1,500

1,640

CF4

6,500

5,700

7,390

C2F6

9,200

11,900

12,200

C4F10

7,000

8,600

8,860

C6F14

7,400

9,000

9,300

SF6

23,900

22,200

22,800

* The methane GWP includes the direct effects and those indirect effects due to the production of tropospheric ozone
and stratospheric water vapor.

An inventory for elemental (black) carbon (EC) and organic carbon (OC) will also be developed,
so that potential co-benefits related to climate forcing and regional haze can be assessed, at least
in a semi-quantitative fashion. CCS will use methods that it has used in several other states to
develop a base year and projection year EC/OC inventory.
Time Period of Analysis
Fuel cycle emission reductions and incremental costs will be calculated relative to the
characteristics of the baseline that would otherwise prevail in New York up through the end of
the planning period, 2030.

1

Second Assessment: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/downloads/ghg_gwp.pdf 1995. Because only
a summary of the Second Assessment Report if available online, an EPA document is cited which has the table from
the IPCC report.
2

Third Assessment: http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/wg1/248.htm, 2001.

3

Fourth Assessment: http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-chapter2.pdf, 2007.

E-6



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The analysis will report annual emission reductions for 2020 and 2030. The present value of the
cumulative incremental costs, and undiscounted cumulative CO2e emission reductions, will be
reported for the period starting with the initial year of the phase-in of the policy, up through
2030. For example, if an RCI policy includes a complete phase-in over time of more efficient
plug load technologies (i.e., computers, televisions, video machines, etc) the annual GHG
reductions will be reported for the years 2020 and 2030. The present value of the cumulative
incremental costs and the undiscounted cumulative emission reductions will be reported for the
entire period from the beginning of the phase-in up through 2030.
Start and End Years for Analysis
The beginning of the analysis period for which GHG reduction benefits and incremental costs
will be calculated is the year 2011, considered to be the earliest year for which GHG mitigation
options could be introduced in NY. The end of the analysis period is 2030.
Transparency
Data sources, methods, implementation mechanisms, key assumptions, and key uncertainties will
be documented and supported by references to provide transparency on how the key analytical
outputs for each policy option were developed and applied. Information provided by the state
agencies and project participants will be used to ensure best available data sources, methods, and
key assumptions using their expertise and knowledge to address specific issues in New York
State. Modifications will be made through facilitated discussions.

Key Analytical Outputs and Metrics
GHG emission reductions
Net GHG reduction potential in physical units of million metric tons (MMt) of carbon dioxide
equivalent (CO2e) will be estimated for each quantifiable policy for each target year, 2020 and
2030, and cumulative reductions through 2030. As noted earlier, full fuel cycle or life cycle
analysis will be used to evaluate net energy (and emissions) performance of policy options, as
appropriate. Net analysis of the effects of carbon sequestration will be conducted where
applicable. (See the section on “GHG Emissions and Emission Reductions” for additional
details.)
Costs
Net capital, operating and maintenance (O&M), and fuel costs will be estimated for each of the
policy options that are determined quantifiable. Costs will be discounted as a multi-year stream
of net costs to arrive at the “net present value cost” associated with implementing new
technologies and best practices. It is proposed that costs be discounted for all options in constant
2005 dollars using a 5 percent annual real discount rate. The nominal discount rate will be
calculated by adding the projected inflation rate over the analysis period. 4 Capital investments
4

The inflation rate for the analysis period is assumed to be 2.2%, subject to approval by the Integration Advisory
Panel and Climate Action Council. Capital and other costs reported in nominal dollars will be converted to 2005$
using the inflation rate for the NY state region as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(http://www.bls.gov/ro2/news.htm)

E-7



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

will be represented in terms of annualized or amortized costs over the project period.
Discounting will begin in this initial year of the analysis period (i.e., assumes investment occurs
in the beginning of the year). Policies that result in energy savings relative to the baseline
technology or practice may result in a cost savings (recorded as a negative value). As noted
above, the discount rate will be kept constant for the evaluation of all GHG mitigation options risk and uncertainly will be accounted for by calculating option-specific cash flows that account
for policy, practice, or technology differences.
Cost-effectiveness
The cost effectiveness for each quantified policy will be calculated by dividing the present value
cost by the cumulative (undiscounted) reduction in metric tons of GHG emissions. Because
monetized dollar value of GHG reduction benefits are not available, physical benefits will be
used instead, measured as dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) or “cost
effectiveness” evaluation. Both positive costs and cost savings (negative value) will be estimated
as a part of compliance cost. When combined with GHG impact assessments, the results of these
cost estimates will be aggregated into a sectoral summary table and sector and economy-wide
stepwise marginal cost curves.
Direct vs. indirect effects
Socio economic impact of policy options and scenarios will include direct effects, but will not
include indirect and distributional effects. Direct effects are those borne or created by the
entities, households or populations subject to the policy or implementing the new policies; for
example, a policy encouraging the purchase of advanced technology vehicles would include an
evaluation of the incremental cost of the vehicles, and the savings on fuel cost and associated
GHG emissions. Indirect effects are defined as those borne or created by the entities, households
or populations other than those implementing the policy recommendation; in the above example,
this could be the number of jobs created/lost by the alternative GHG mitigation investments, or
the reduction in ambient air pollution concentrations. Distributional effects refer to the extent to
which a GHG mitigation policy design may result in disproportionate impacts on different
regions, sectors, communities, or households. Some examples of direct and indirect net costs and
benefits metrics are included in Annex 1 at the end of this memo for purposes of illustration.
End effects
For GHG mitigation options whose lifetimes extend beyond the end of the analysis period (i.e.,
beyond 2030), only costs and benefits that fall within the analysis period will be fully included in
the analytical results. For long-lived investments (e.g., public transport infrastructure, nuclear
power plants) whose costs and benefits extend beyond 2030, GHG reductions up through 2050
will be quantified in order to be able to offer a direct comparison with the 80 by 50 goal. In order
to make this comparison, sectoral business-as-usual GHG projections will be estimated for the
2031-2050 period using simple extrapolation techniques, except for technologies that mature at
the end of the study period or decline in effectiveness discontinuously after 2030. Incremental
costs in the 2031-2050 period will be accounted for qualitatively in the write-up of results.

E-8



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Non-GHG (external) impacts and costs
Environmental co-benefits such as reductions in criteria air pollutants which in turn would lead
to reduced public health impacts from productive activities in New York are to be analyzed
separately. Qualitatively, CCS will document measures that are expected to have other non-GHG
impacts, including water quality, water use, solid waste reduction, and environmental justice
issues and will provide information as available and needed to support quantification of these
impacts.
Biomass supply & demand
Within the AFW Common Assumptions memorandum, estimates of biomass supply will be
prepared. Estimates are provided for all known feedstocks, including municipal solid waste fiber,
in units of dry tons and million British Thermal Units (MMBtu). During the course of GHG
quantification, CCS will maintain a spreadsheet to be used by the team to track demand by each
mitigation approach (e.g., biomass to energy, liquid biofuels production).
Uncertainty / Sensitivity Analysis
Key uncertainties and feasibility issues will be identified and discussed qualitatively. For
instance, the certainty of energy price forecasts and technology change rates may vary
significantly across certain sectors and actions. Characterization of the source and potential
magnitude of uncertainty will be useful to policymakers as they make future policy decisions. To
the extent that data are available and time and resources allow, a quantitative assessment of
uncertainty or certain parameter sensitivities will be included in the analysis of policy options by
conducting sensitivity analysis.

GHG Emissions and Emission Reductions
New York State GHG Emissions Inventory and Forecast
To estimate statewide impacts associated with potential policies, information on current and
future energy use and the extent of application (penetration) of both baseline and policy options
will be needed. Working with CCS, NYSERDA has prepared a comprehensive GHG emissions
inventory for 1990 through 2008 and a forecast to 2030 for all emission source sectors. The
emissions inventory and forecast has been prepared at the state-level representing a planning
inventory rather than a compliance inventory. Forecast data used to support the development of
New York’s 2009 State Energy Plan were used to revise the forecast of energy demand and
emissions. Historical fuel use data used in preparing the inventory are provided in a separate
publication; these data rely on data published by the U.S. Energy Information Administration. 5
Calculation of Emission Reductions for Policy Options
Emission reductions for individual policies will be estimated incremental to baseline emissions
based on the change (reduction) in emissions activity (e.g., physical energy units) or as a
percentage reduction in emissions activity (e.g., physical energy units or emissions) depending

5

Patterns and Trends, New York State Energy Profiles: 1993-2008, prepared by New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority Energy Analysis Program.

E-9



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

on the availability of data. This information will be needed to support the cost-effectiveness
calculation for each policy option.
Fuel- and pollutant-specific emission factors will be used to convert physical units of emissions
activity to emissions. The emission factors will be based on those that NYSERDA uses to
prepare the GHG emissions inventory and forecast for New York State, and are provided in the
Sector-specific “Common Assumptions” memoranda. For fuel combustion sources, fuel-specific
oxidation factors will be used with emission factors to estimate emissions. Fuel combustion
oxidation factors refer to the percentage of fuel that is fully oxidized during the combustion
process. Table E-2 provides the oxidation factors to be used for this analysis; these factors are
based on those used in the EPA’s most recent GHG inventory for the U.S. 6
Table E-2. Fuel Combustion Oxidation Factors
Fuel

Oxidation Factor

Coal

0.990

Natural Gas and LPG

0.995

Distillate and Residual Oil

0.990

Municipal Solid Waste

0.980

Energy Conversion Factors
Energy conversion factors refer to the energy density of fuels used in New York. These factors
are provided in the Sector-specific “Common Assumptions” memoranda. Energy conversion
factors obtained from NYSERDA will be used for this project. Otherwise, default energy
conversion factors will be taken from Table Y-2 (Conversion Factors to Energy Units (Heat
Equivalents)) of Appendix Y in the EPA’s most recent GHG Inventory for the U.S. 7

Cost Analysis Methods
Cost Effectiveness
Because the monetized dollar value of GHG reduction benefits are not available, physical
benefits are used instead, measured as dollars per tCO2e (cost or savings per metric ton) or “cost
effectiveness.” Both positive costs and cost savings (negative values) are estimated as a part of
mitigation cost. When combined with GHG impact assessments, the results of these cost
estimates will be aggregated into a stepwise marginal cost curve that can be broken down by
sector or subsector as needed, as well as sub state region for key measures.
The net cost of saved carbon of a proposed policy option is calculated by dividing the cumulative
future streams of incremental costs, discounted back to the present time, by the cumulative
6

U.S. EPA, April 2010. Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2008. Available at:
http://epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html.

7

Available at: http:/yosemite.epa.gov/oar/globalwarming.nsf/UniqueKeyLookup/LHOD5MJTCL/$File/2003-finalinventory_annex_y.pdf.

E-10



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

undiscounted net CO2e reductions achieved by the technology or best practice. Mathematically,
the equation to be used is as follows:
n

{

CSC = ∑
t =0

}

(( LCm − LCr ) * At )
(1 + Dr ) t

n

∑ (CO e − CO e )
2 r

2 m

t =0

where:
CSC =
LCm
LCr

=
=

A
=
Dr
=
CO2er =
CO2em =
t

=

Cost of saved carbon (or cost-effectiveness) of a technology or best practice,
$/tCO2e avoided
Levelized cost of a technology or best practice, $/activity unit
Levelized cost of the baseline or reference technology or best practice, $/activity
unit
Amount of activity affected by the technology or best practice in year t, activity unit
Real discount rate, dimensionless
CO2e emissions associated with the baseline or reference technology or best
practice in year t, metric tons CO2e
CO2e emissions associated with a technology or best practice in year t, metric tons
CO2e
year in the evaluation period (0 ≤ t ≤ 40)

Activity units refer to a unit indicator of GHG emissions activity for a policy option. The activity
units will vary depending on the Sector and within each sector the individual option. The activity
units are used to normalize data for comparison of the policy option to the baseline. For example,
for the Power Supply and Delivery sector, MWh of gross electricity generation could be used as
the activity unit such that dollars per megawatt-hour ($/MWh) would be used as the activity unit
for the “LCm” and “LCr” terms and MWh would be used as the activity unit for the cost terms in
the equation.
The results of the analyses will be used to develop a GHG abatement cost curve which will rank
each technology or best practice in the order of its cost effectiveness for reducing a metric ton of
CO2e emissions. This ranking will be represented in the form of a curve that is similar
conceptually to Figure E-1. Each point on this curve represents the cost-effectiveness of a given
policy option relative to its contribution to reductions from the baseline, expressed as a
percentage. The points on the curve appear sequentially, from most cost-effective in the lower
left area of the curve, to the least cost-effective options located higher in the cost curve in the
upper right area.

E-11



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure E-1. Example Cost Curve
Cost ($/tCO2e reduced)

50
40
30
20
10
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

GHG reductions (tonnes CO2e)

The costs of each policy option that will be evaluated will be levelized and converted into dollars
per activity unit. The cost components to be considered include capital, fixed O&M, variable
O&M, and fuel costs. Other sector-specific costs (e.g., transmission of electricity) will be
included as applicable to each sector.
The levelization calculation is similar to amortization and its purpose is to develop a level stream
of equal dollar payments that lasts for a fixed period of time. The levelization formula to be used
in the analysis is as follows:

LC =
where:
LC
=
PV
=
Dr
=
t
=

[ PV * Dr * (1 + Dr ) t ]
((1 + Dr ) t ) − 1

Levelized cost of the a technology or best practice, $/activity unit
Present value of discounted cost stream
Real discount rate, dimensionless
Levelization period, or number of years over which payments are to be made

There are several parameters that will be used in the levelization process. Some are technologyspecific (e.g., plant lifetime, capacity factor), others are state-specific (e.g., state income tax
rate), others are market-driven (cost of capital), while others are a matter of policy (e.g., real
discount rate).
Capital Costs
Capital costs represent the material, equipment, labor, and other costs associated with the
implementation of a policy option relative to the baseline or reference technology or practice.
For policy options that require a capital investment, these costs will be annualized using a fixed
charge rate (FCR), a factor that is the sum of the cost of capital (equals the cost of debt plus the
cost of equity), taxes, and depreciation. Differences between public/private financing costs will
be captured through sector-specific assumptions regarding equity/debt fractions and depreciation
schedules. For long-term capital investments that extend beyond 2030, the investment will be

E-12



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

annualized over its operational lifetime; only costs incurred within the 2011-2030 analysis period
will be fully included in the presentation of quantitative results.
Annual O&M Costs

O&M costs refer to labor, equipment, and fuel costs related to annual operation and maintenance
of policy measures and are differentiated into annual expenditures (i.e., variable O&M) and fixed
expenditures (i.e., fixed O&M). Variable O&M estimates are provided in activity units over the
full period of operation of the technology. O&M costs are described and included in the LCC
when there is a differential between the baseline technology and the GHG-reducing alternative.
Forecast of Fuel Demand, Prices, and Costs

Fuel demand and price forecasts will be based on the information developed for New York’s
State Energy Plan. This information will include fuel demand and price forecasts for 2011
through 2030 by sector and fuel type in both physical (e.g., gallons, cubic feet, barrels) and
energy (e.g., British thermal units [Btu]) units. The sectors covered include electricity
generation; residential, commercial/institutional, and industrial; and transportation. The fuels
covered include natural gas, petroleum (motor gasoline, kerosene, liquefied petroleum gas,
distillate and residual oil), and coal, nuclear fuel, and renewable fuels (biomass and landfill gas).
For the purpose of developing abatement cost curves, the fuel demand and price forecasts
developed by NYSERDA, NYISO, and other sources will be used for all sectors. Fuel costs
(including avoided fuel costs) will be calculated using this information along with fuel
consumption estimates developed for each technology or best practice.
Avoided Electricity Generation Costs

For policy options in the RCI, agriculture, and waste sectors that reduce electricity demand, the
amount and cost of electricity avoided will be estimated. Information on avoided electricity costs
will reflect the consensus of the project research team, NYSERDA, and the Climate Action
Council.
Interactions with the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)

RGGI is a ten-state agreement to reduce GHG emissions through a cap and trade system focused
only on the supply of electric power. States within RGGI have negotiated a regional CO2
emission cap for the power sector of 188 million short tons per year through 2014 (cap of 64
million short tons for NY), with the cap being strengthened by 2.5 percent per year over the
period 2015 through 2018. The energy modeling undertaken to develop New York’s State
Energy Plan fully incorporates the RGGI program in the reference case forecast. Hence, all
power sector GHG mitigation policies to be analyzed are considered incremental to the RGGI
program since they will achieve greater GHG emissions than the RGGI program. In addition, a
more stringent RGGI program itself will be analyzed as part of the PSD-6 option.

Documentation
Documentation of the work completed for each policy option for each sector will be completed
in a template format that addresses the items listed below (among others) to ensure consistency
for comparison of information and also assist with identifying data gaps that will be addressed.

E-13



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Work Group Sector
Name of policy option
Policy Description
Policy Design (Goals and Timing for implementation and parties involved or affected by
implementation of the policy.)
Implementation Mechanisms
Quantification: Estimated GHG Savings and Costs per MtCO2e (GHG reduction potential in
2020 and 2030, Cumulative GHG reduction potential, net cost, data sources, and quantification
methods)
Key Assumptions and Uncertainties
Co-Benefits and External Costs (qualitative discussion)

E-14



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Annex 1: Examples of Direct/Indirect Net Cost and Benefit Metrics
Note: These examples are meant to be illustrative and are not necessarily comprehensive.

A. Direct Costs and/or Savings
Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector
•

Incremental cost of more efficient vehicles net of fuel savings, net of fuel savings.

•

Incremental cost of implementing Smart Growth programs, net of saved infrastructure and
service costs plus fuel savings and reduced consumption.

•

Incremental cost of mass transit investment and operating expenses, net of any saved
infrastructure and service costs (e.g., roads)

•

Incremental cost of alternative fuel, net of any change in maintenance costs

•

Net effects of carbon sequestration from land use measures

Residential, Commercial, and Industrial (RCI) Sectors
•

Net capital costs or savings (or incremental costs or savings relative to standard practice) of
improved buildings, appliances, equipment (cost of higher-efficiency refrigerator versus
refrigerator of similar features that meets standards)

•

Net operation and maintenance (O&M) costs or savings (relative to standard practice) of
improved buildings, appliances, equipment, including avoided/extra labor costs for
maintenance (less changing of compact fluorescent light (CFL) or light-emitting diode (LED)
bulbs in lamps relative to incandescent)

•

Net fuel (gas, electricity, biomass, etc.) costs (typically as avoided costs from a societal
perspective)

•

Cost/value of net water use/savings

•

Cost/value of net materials use/savings (for example, raw materials savings via recycling, or
lower/higher cost of low-global warming potential (GWP) refrigerants)

•

Direct improved productivity as a result of industrial measures (measured as change in cost
per unit output, for example, for an energy/GHG-saving improvement that also speeds up a
production line or results in higher product yield)

Energy Supply (ES) Sector
•

Net capital costs or savings (or incremental costs or savings relative to reference case
technologies) of renewables or other advanced technologies resulting from policies

•

Net O&M costs or savings (relative to reference case technologies) renewables or other
advanced technologies resulting from policies

•

Avoided or net fuel savings (gas, coal, biomass, etc.) of renewables or other advanced
technologies relative to reference case technologies resulting from policies

•

Total system costs (net capital + net O&M + avoided/net fuel savings + net imports/exports +
net transmission and distribution (T&D) costs) relative to reference case total system costs

E-15



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW) Sectors
•

Net capital costs or savings (or incremental costs relative to standard practice) of facilities or
equipment (e.g., manure digesters and associated infrastructure, generator; ethanol
production facility)

•

Net O&M costs or savings (relative to standard practice) of equipment or facilities

•

Net fuel (gas, electricity, biomass, etc.) costs or avoided costs

•

Cost/value of net water use/savings

•

Cost/value of carbon sequestration from land use measures

•

Reduced VMT and fuel consumption associated with land use conversions (e.g., as a result of
forest/rangeland/cropland protection policies)

B. Indirect Costs and/or Savings across All Sectors
•

Net value of employment and income impacts, including differential impacts by socio
economic category

•

Re-spending effects on the economy from financial savings

•

Net changes in the prices of goods and services in the region

•

Health benefits of reduced air and water pollution

•

Ecosystem benefits of reduced air and water pollution

•

Value of quality-of-life improvements

•

Value of improved road and community safety

•

Energy security

•

Net embodied energy of materials used in buildings, appliances, equipment, relative to
standard practice

•

Improved productivity as a result of an improved working environment, such as improved
office productivity through improved lighting (though the inclusion of this as indirect might
be argued in some cases)

•

Higher cost of electricity in the region

E-16



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

AFW Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft
To:

NYS Climate Action Plan Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management
Technical Workgroup

From:

Steve Roe and Brad Strode

CC:

Tom Peterson, Jeff Wennberg, Randy Strait, Sandra Meier

Subject:

Assumptions used in the quantification of options for the AFW Technical Work
Group

Date:

July 12, 2010

This memorandum summarizes methods, data sources, and key assumptions to be used to
estimate the GHG reductions and costs for AFW sector mitigation options. The information
presented here builds on the general approaches and data sources laid out in the overview
quantification memorandum covering all sectors (including common emission factors, cost
assumptions, etc.).
Quantifying reductions of GHG (particularly future reductions) is an inherently complex process
and assumptions are important inputs into the quantification methodologies and models used to
estimate mitigation costs and benefits. Models are representations of reality, and require the best
available data on likely futures. An emphasis should be placed on using assumptions that are
based on the best available data using local or regional data (when available) rather than national
level data.
CCS has developed estimates of GHG emissions and forecasts for the AFW sector to supplement
the inventory prepared by DEC (which primarily covered combustion sources). These inventory
and forecast data are needed to support the development of mitigation cost curves and to provide
context to the selection of mitigation priorities. For emission inventories previously developed
by CCS, the only sector for which consumption-based emissions data are provided is the
electricity consumption sector. Other sectors of the inventory tend to only include GHG
emissions that occur within the state as a result of energy consumption or other GHG emission
process (e.g., methane from landfilled waste). For example, for fuel combustion in the RCI and
Transportation sectors, only the emissions associated with fuel combustion are provided, not
those associated with the extraction, transport, processing, and distribution of each fuel.
Similarly, for waste management, only emissions associated with waste management processes
in New York would be included in the inventory (e.g., landfilling, waste combustion), not those
associated with production and transportation of the initial packaging or product that became a
component of the solid waste stream. In addition, emissions from the management of New York
waste that is exported out of state are not included.
For some mitigation options, fuel cycle emission reductions can be estimated, and it should be
recognized that there are likely to be at least a portion of emission reductions that occur out-ofstate as a result of in-state mitigation actions:

E-17



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Fossil fuel consumption: inventory estimates are based only on the GHG emissions
associated with the combustion of each fuel; fuel cycle emission reductions are estimated
using GHGs from combustion plus the embedded GHGs from extraction, transportation,
processing, and distribution;

•

Solid waste management: landfill methane emissions or total GHG emissions are associated
only with waste combustion and decomposition for in-state managed waste; fuel cycle
emission reductions include the landfill/waste combustion emissions plus those associated
with production and distribution of the initial packaging or product (e.g., net difference of
use of virgin materials versus recycled materials). Also, emission reductions that occur out of
state from reductions in exported waste should be captured in the analysis; and,

•

Biofuels consumption: for fossil fuel displacement benefits, the inventory includes only
GHGs from fossil fuel combustion; fuel cycle emission reductions are estimated using the
fuel cycle gasoline/diesel emission factors compared to fuel cycle biofuel emission factors
(captures total GHGs from fuel production, processing, and distribution).

For the AFW Technical Work Group, CCS will estimate the in-state GHG reductions for each
mitigation option selected for analysis. Where data and methods are available to do so, CCS will
also specify the fuel cycle emission reductions, reporting these reductions as co-benefits. This
method is based on the most recent guidance from Climate Action Plan project leaders. CCS also
strives to estimate fuel cycle reductions for GHG mitigation in the other work group areas
(Areas); so, it is important for the Climate Action Council to understand the ramifications of this
(e.g., measurement of fuel cycle GHG reductions against a GHG forecast that is not based on
fuel cycle emission estimates).
Common assumptions used in the development of mitigation options in other sectors (especially
energy supply and transportation) are also used for the quantification of many AFW mitigation
policy options. These could include future costs of fossil fuels, electricity consumption-based
emission factors, costs for new electricity generation, and future gasoline and diesel
consumption. In the discussion of common assumptions for the AFW sector in the sections
below, CCS also notes instances where the AFW analysis will borrow common assumptions
from other sectors. These common assumptions have been documented in the overview
quantification memorandum, as well as the Area-specific memos (e.g., Power Supply and
Delivery (PSD), Transportation and Land Use (TLU)).

Quantification Process
The analysis includes spreadsheet modeling techniques in which assumptions are transparent and
readily accessible for review. The assumptions delineated in the following document are for the
quantification of the policy options developed by the AFW Technical Work Group. This
quantification of costs and CO2 reductions entails the following steps:
•

Develop stand-alone GHG reduction and cost estimates for each quantifiable option;

•

Once completed, the stand alone options will be adjusted to reflect existing actions;

•

To assess the AFW emission reductions without double-counting, it is necessary to consider
overlaps and interactions within the AFW policies and measures;

E-18



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Options will be also be modified to reflect overlaps between AFW options and other
Technical Work Group options. Potential interactions occur between AFW policies and
measures that deploy renewable energy with PSD; Residential, Commercial, and Industrial
(RCI); and TLU mitigation measures.

Common Methods, Assumptions, and Data Sources for GHG Mitigation

Forestry - Afforestation/Reforestation: Assumed Sequestration Rates and Costs
Carbon sequestered by afforestation activities is assumed to occur at the same rate as carbon
sequestration in average New York state forests. Average carbon storage rates were determined
based on USFS GTR-NE-343, 8 assuming afforestation activity with a forest type distribution of
70% maple-beech-birch, 15% oak-hickory, and 15% white-red-jack pine. This distribution is
reflective of the average forest composition in New York and is based on the major forest types
identified by USFS. 9 A 45-year project period is assumed, such that the rate of forest carbon
sequestration under afforestation projects for an average acre in New York was estimated at 1.1
metric tons of carbon (tC)/acre/year (see Table E-3).
Table E-3. Average carbon sequestration rate for afforestation projects
Assumed
Distribution

tC/acre
(0 year)

tC/acre
(45 year)

tC/acre/year

Maple-beech-birch

70%

0.8

50.6

1.1

Oak-hickory

15%

0.8

56.2

1.2

White-red-jack pine

15%

0.8

37.1

0.8

Forest type

Weighted Average

1.1

tC/acre = metric tons of carbon per acre. Excludes soil organic carbon pool due to
the uncertainty in those estimates.

For reforestation projects, CCS would also use data from the same publication to derive an
average sequestration rate. Reforestation refers to projects occurring on lands that had recently
been under forest cover (such as planting projects following clear-cut harvesting).
Estimated per acre costs for afforestation in New York were obtained from Walker et al. 2007, 10
who surveyed state foresters, regional foresters, or other foresters and related specialists in the
USFS, universities, and forest companies, and reported the results on a state-by-state basis. Costs
include site preparation, labor, seedlings, and herbivore protection (Walker et al. 2007). Average
per-acre afforestation costs in New York were estimated to be $550 for both hardwoods and
softwoods. This is a one-time cost incurred in the year of planting.
8

J.E. Smith, L.S. Heath, K.E. Skog, and R.A. Birdsey. 2006. Methods for calculating forest ecosystem and
harvested carbon with standard estimates for forest types of the United States. USDA USFS Northeastern Research
Station. General Technical Report GTR-NE-343. (This document is also published as part of the US DOE 1605(b)
Voluntary GHG Reporting Program). See http://nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/gtr/ne_gtr343.pdf.
9

Carbon in United States Forests and Wood Products, 1987-1997: State-by-State Estimatesby Richard A. Birdsey &
George M. Lewis. (available at http://www.fs.fed.us/ne/global/pubs/books/epa/states/NY.htm)

10

S. Walker, S. Grimland, J. Winsten, and S. Brown. 2007. Terrestrial carbon sequestration in the Northeast:
opportunities and costs part 3A: opportunities for improving carbon storage through afforestation of agricultural
lands. Report to The Nature Conservancy Conservation Partnership Agreement by Winrock International, prepared
with the support of the US DOE under Award No. DE-FC26-01NT41151.

E-19



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Agriculture - Land Value and Conservation Easement Costs
If better information on conservation easement costs is not available for agricultural lands (e.g.,
historical in-state costs paid for conservation easements), the mitigation cost quantification will
assume Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) annual payments as a proxy for easement costs.
CRP land annual payments for New York were projected across the mitigation period based on
historical payments (see Table E-4), and is escalated to account for increased land value across
the period. 11
Table E-4. 2007 and projected CRP payments 12
CRP Enrollment
(Acres)

Annual Payment
(Thousand$)

Annual
Payment
($/acre)

Annual Payment
(revised to
2005$/acre)

2007

66,544

$4,863

$73.08

$66.29

2008

67,832

$5,040

$74.30

$67.39

2009

69,144

$5,223

$75.54

$68.52

2010

70,482

$5,414

$76.81

$69.67

2011

71,846

$5,611

$78.09

$70.83

2012

73,236

$5,815

$79.40

$72.02

2013

74,654

$6,027

$80.73

$73.22

2014

76,098

$6,246

$82.08

$74.45

2015

77,571

$6,473

$83.45

$75.69

2016

79,072

$6,709

$84.85

$76.96

2017

80,602

$6,953

$86.27

$78.25

2018

82,162

$7,206

$87.71

$79.56

2019

83,752

$7,469

$89.18

$80.89

2020

85,372

$7,741

$90.67

$82.24

2021

87,024

$8,022

$92.19

$83.61

2022

88,708

$8,314

$93.73

$85.01

2023

90,425

$8,617

$95.30

$86.44

2024

92,175

$8,931

$96.89

$87.88

2025

93,959

$9,256

$98.51

$89.35

2026

95,777

$9,593

$100.16

$90.85

2027

97,630

$9,942

$101.83

$92.37

2028

99,519

$10,304

$103.54

$93.91

2029

101,445

$10,679

$105.27

$95.48

2030

103,408

$11,068

$107.03

$97.08

Year

11

Under the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), the USDA establishes contracts with agricultural producers to
retire environmentally sensitive land. During the 10- to 15-year CRP contract period, farmland is converted to grass,
trees, wildlife cover, or other conservation uses providing environmental benefits, including improvement of surface
water quality, creation of wildlife habitat, preservation of soil productivity, protection of groundwater quality, and
reduction of offsite wind erosion damages. The program also assists farmers by providing a dependable source of
income. See http://www.fsa.usda.gov/Internet/FSA_File/annual_consv_2007.pdf.
12

See http://www.fsa.usda.gov/Internet/FSA_File/annual_consv_2007.pdf

E-20



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Agriculture - Tilling Practices
The reduction in fossil diesel fuel use associated with changing land use from intensive
agriculture to alternative land use or practices is estimated at 3.5 gallons/acre. 13 The fuel cycle
fossil diesel GHG emission factor is 12.3 tCO2e/1,000 gallons. 14 This will be revised as needed
to reflect the value assumed in the TLU section of this memorandum (i.e., based on the
NYGREET model).

Agriculture – Fertilizer Application GHG Emissions and Costs
The fertilizer cost information provided in Table E-5 is taken from U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service’s U.S. fertilizer use and price information (see
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/fertilizeruse/). A weighted price of applied nitrogen was derived
from this information using the most recent data available from United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA).
Table E-5. Average US price of common nitrogen fertilizers
Month/Year

Average U.S. farm prices of selected fertilizers
Nitrogen
Urea 45-46% Ammonium
solutions 30%
nitrogen
nitrate

Anhydrous
ammonia

Apr 2007

Ammonium
Sulfate

$/short ton
523

277

82

30

453

382

288

34

21

1,124

1,371

963,710

1,218,964

N content (%)
46
$/short ton nitrogen
638

923

2006
3,821,891
2006-2007

985
US Consumption

10,104,319

5,369,913

Weighted $/short ton nitrogen
862

To predict fertilizer prices in the future, the historical growth rate for fertilizer prices was used.
Nominal (unadjusted for inflation) growth in fertilizer prices between 1990 and 2007 averaged
7.96% growth. 15 However, when this figure is adjusted for inflation, this growth rate is
significantly less dramatic. A growth rate for fertilizer price was used because fertilizer prices
can fluctuate dramatically, and therefore holding these prices constant (in real dollars) did not
13

Reduction associated with less intensive land use (e.g., fewer passes). The estimate is based on conservation
tillage compared with conventional tillage, at
http://www.conservationinformation.org/Core4Brochures/CTBrochure.pdf, accessed May 2008.

14

Fuel-cycle emissions factor for fossil diesel from J. Hill et al., "Environmental, Economic, and Energetic Costs
and Benefits of Biodiesel and Ethanol Biofuels," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(30):11206–
11210. From the assessment used to evaluate U.S. soybean-based biodiesel life-cycle impacts. See
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/103/30/11099.

15

USDA ERS. Table 7. “Average U.S. farm prices of selected fertilizers.”
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FertilizerUse/ Accessed 10/7/08.

E-21



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

seem an accurate estimate. Another option would be to tie fertilizer prices to natural gas prices,
because natural gas costs make up 70 percent of all fertilizer production costs. 16 However, given
the uncertainty involved in estimating natural gas prices, as well as the potential impact of price
fluctuations (which will cause fertilizer prices to rise in the face of uncertainty), this method was
not used.
The avoided fuel cycle GHG emissions (i.e., emissions associated with the production, transport,
and energy consumption during application) were taken from Wood and Cowie. 17 The estimate
provided for the U.S. (taken from West and Marland, 2001 18 ) was 858 grams (g) CO2e per
kilogram of nitrogen (kgN). 19 In addition to the avoided fuel cycle emissions, land application
nitrous oxide emissions also need to be accounted for. Traditionally, CCS has used information
generated by the U.S. EPA’s State Inventory Tool. In the absence of alternative data, CCS will
use this tool to determine nitrous oxide emission estimates and the assumed emissions factor for
nitrogen applied (i.e., X kg CO2e / kgN applied). Combining these two emission factors provides
a total emissions factor per kilogram of nitrogen applied.

Waste Management - Recycling Capital Costs
For other states, CCS has used a value of $129/household for recycling program capital costs,
based on an analysis in Vermont. 20 CCS will research the availability of capital cost data specific
to New York City and the rest of the state to determine whether more state-specific data are
available.

Waste Management – Landfill and Compost Tipping Fees and Transportation Cost
Diverting waste from landfills can reduce costs by avoiding tipping fees. The average landfill
tipping fee assumed to represent New York State is $45/ton.21 Additional transportation and
transfer costs are assumed to add $55 per ton to the total disposal cost. CCS will consult the
AFW Technical Work Group regarding the potential growth rate of tipping fees. Tipping fees for
composting facilities and recycling haulers must also be considered. Tipping fees for composting
facilities can range from $15/ton to $50/ton depending on location and type of material being
received. For other states, CCS has assumed a tip fee to recycling haulers of $10/ton. 22 It is to be

16

Huang, Wen-yuan. “Impact of Rising Natural Gas Prices on U.S. Ammonia Supply.” USDA. August 2007.
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/WRS0702/ Accessed 10/7/08.
17

Sam Wood and Annette Cowie (2004) A Review of Greenhouse Gas Emission Factors for Fertilizer Production
Research and Development Division, State Forests of New South Wales, Cooperative Research Centre for
Greenhouse Accounting.
18

West, T. O. and Marland, G. 2001. A Synthesis of Carbon Sequestration, Carbon Emissions and Net Carbon Flux
in Agriculture: Comparing Tillage Practices in the United States. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 1812, 116.
19

These emission factors provide an estimate of the typical fuel cycle GHG emissions (including resource
extraction, the transport of raw materials and products, and the fertilizer production processes) per unit weight of
fertilizer produced (i.e., gCO2e/kg fertilizer).
20

P. Calabrese, Cassella Waste Management, personal communication, S. Roe, CCS, 2007.

21

Personal communication from Resa Dimino of NYS DEC. Provided to B. Strode (CCS) via e-mail.

22

J. Ketchum, Waste Management, personal communication with S. Roe, CCS, November 20, 2007.

E-22



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

assumed that recycling and composting facilities are closer to the point of generation and an
incremental increase in these activities will not lead to a change in transportation costs.

Waste Management - Value of Recycled Materials
Current US market prices for recycled materials are available from the RecycleNet.23 This
service reports current prices for materials such as scrap metal and scrap plastic, as well as,
curbside recyclables, including newspapers, office paper, loose waste paper, polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), aluminum, steel cans, and glass.
However, due to the large scale of variability in market prices for recycled material seen in
recent years, the value of recycled materials is uncertain. DEC has indicated that NYC estimates
total recycling revenues at $7 to $12 million per year.

Waste Management - EPA Waste Management Software Tools
EPA has several models that may be used to estimate GHG impacts or costs of waste
management mitigation options. 24 The Landfill Gas Energy Cost Model (LFGcost-Web)
estimates costs for landfill gas energy projects. The Waste Reduction Model (WARM) estimates
GHG emission reductions from different waste management practices. The Landfill Gas
Emissions Model (LandGEM) is a tool for estimating emissions from MSW landfills.

All AFW Sectors - Energy Consumption Emission Factors
Both fuel cycle and standard (fuel combustion) emission factors for energy consumption will be
taken from the PSD and TLU quantification methods memoranda, as applicable (e.g.,
transportation fuels will be taken from the TLU section).
All AFW Sectors - Fuel Prices

As with emission factors above, assumptions for fuel prices will be taken from the applicable ES
or TLU quantification methods memoranda.

All AFW Sectors - Electricity Capital Costs and Capacity Factors
Where these estimates are needed, they will also be taken from the PSD quantification methods
memorandum.

All AFW Sectors - Renewable Incentives
Inclusion of the federal production tax credit (PTC) in the levelized cost estimates for renewables
in the mitigation options analyzed needs to be considered. The federal Renewable Electricity
Production Tax Credit has been around in some form since 1992 but seems to always be about to
expire (currently December, 2012 for wind and December, 2013 for other renewable sources).
The existing incentive for closed-loop biomass is 2.0¢/kWh. Electricity from open-loop biomass,
landfill gas, and municipal solid waste resources receives a 1.0¢/kWh credit.

23

RecycleNet Spot Market Pricing, http://www.scrapindex.com/index.html.

24

EPA Waste Management Tools, http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-programs/state-and-local/bytopic/waste.html.

E-23



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

PSD Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft
To:

NYS Power Supply and Delivery Technical Workgroup

From:

Bill Dougherty and Jeff Wennberg

CC:

Tom Peterson, Randy Strait, Jared Snyder, Carl Mas

Subject:

Assumptions used in the quantification of options for the PSD Technical Work
Group

Date:

August 4, 2010

This memo outlines proposed data sources used to quantify the greenhouse gas (GHG) impacts
and costs for those PSD Technical Work Group policy options that are considered amenable to
quantification. The memo will be reviewed in an upcoming Technical Work Group call so that
comments on the assumptions may be made and alternative data sources recommended for
Technical Work Group approval. Any changes to this memo will be incorporated and the revised
memo will be used as documentation for the modeling results.
The scope of this memo only covers the major assumptions directly related to the quantification
of the PSD policy options. Recall that the emissions reductions and costs in the quantification of
the policy options occur against the backdrop of the GHG forecast that includes recent state
actions. The effects of the policy options are therefore incremental to the activity projected under
the forecast. The assumptions embedded in the New York Inventory and Forecast were reviewed
during a PSD Technical Work Group call held early in the process.

Quantification Process
The analysis includes spreadsheet modeling techniques in which assumptions are transparent and
readily accessible for review. The assumptions delineated in the following document are for the
quantification of the priority policy options developed by the PSD Technical Work Group.
This quantification of incremental costs from the introduction of GHG mitigation options and
their corresponding CO2e reductions entails the following steps:
•

Establish the levelized cost and GHG emission characteristics of the appropriate power
supply resource(s) in the Baseline GHG forecast that would be displaced by the technologies
in each priority GHG mitigation policy.

•

Develop stand-alone levelized cost estimates for each technology included as part of a
quantifiable policy option. Some policies might require that CCS evaluate different scenarios
(e.g., renewable resource mix). This will be approached on a case-by-case basis through
Technical Work Group-generated design of sensitivity analyses.

•

Estimate the incremental costs and GHG reductions for each stand-alone policy.
E-24



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

After the stand-alone analysis is complete, perform an integrated supply/demand analysis for
the PSD sector that accounts for overlaps and any potential double counting among PSD,
RCI, TLU, and AFW policies. To account for the issue of credit associated with emission
reductions, we propose to start with the Mitigation Case demand forecast, then develop a
GHG Mitigation Case capacity expansion plan to meet that demand. This implies a RCI-PSD
option analysis sequence and seems most consistent with the way expansion plans would be
developed, given demand foresight.

PSD Baseline
An understanding of the Baseline capacity expansion plan, annual electricity generation and
associated GHG emissions will be based on the New York State GHG Emissions Forecast
developed by NYSERDA (2009). Electricity transmission and distribution losses are estimated at
9 percent on average, based on modeling work done by NYSERDA and the New York
Independent System Operator 25 , and are assumed to be constant across all regions. As the
Baseline forecast is only available through 2018, a linear extrapolation will be made out to the
end of the analysis period (i.e., 2030) consistent with an assumption that the system emissions
intensity rate (i.e., tCO2e/MWh) for the 2019-2030 period is the same as the 2018 level.
Technical supporting documents for the Baseline forecast (i.e., technology performance
assumptions, fuel prices, capacity additions, etc) have been provided by NYSERDA and will be
used to better understand the Baseline modeling outputs.

PSD Mitigation
Electricity generation from GHG mitigation technologies are calculated at the technology level
and aggregated up based on the policy design. For instance, the electricity produced by
renewable sources in the Renewable Portfolio Standard are estimated based on the stipulated
resource mix relative to the mix of fossil resources that would be displaced in the Baseline. An
assessment of the mix of fossil resources displaced in the Baseline will be made on a policy-bypolicy basis in consultation with NYSERDA and the Technical Work Group.

Cost Assumptions
The incremental costs to implement the PSD options are the difference between the levelized
costs of GHG mitigation options and the levelized costs of the resources displaced in the
Baseline. The assumptions associated with costs calculations are:
•

Forecasted fossil fuel prices for the PSD sector and well as technology cost and performance
assumptions will be consistent with those used to develop the Baseline power supply
forecast.

•

Forecasted technology cost and performance assumptions for GHG mitigation options will be
consistent with those used to develop the NYSERDA Cost Curve study. These will be
augmented/adjusted as needed in consultation with NYSERDA and the Technical Work
Group.

25

Personal communication with Ted Lawrence at NYSERDA on November, 12, 2008.

E-25



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Electricity Imports
The GHG emissions associated with electricity imports assumes that the emissions intensity over
the analysis period is a constant 0.36 metric tons CO2/MWh on a consumption basis. This is
based the State Energy Plan “starting point” generation, demand, and GHG forecasts. It is
assumed that cost impacts associated with changes in electricity imports are based on the annual
wholesale electricity prices.

Effects of Recent Actions
Relevant recent actions that are not included in the NYSERDA forecast will be accounted for to
the extent possible. We assume that the effects of the Renewable Portfolio Standard are included
in the NYSERDA electricity and fuel forecasts. It is important to note that the ‘Starting Point’
only includes the 25 percent RPS. The 45 by15 policy is a bit complicated in that the new 30%
RPS is linked to a reduction in load leading to an output where new renewable generation is not
much larger. The existing Integrated Planning Model (IPM) runs for the different cases will be
reviewed to assess the prospects for a parameterized analysis (i.e., no new IPM runs). In any
event, this issue will be further discussed with NYSERDA as the quantification gets underway.

Other Assumptions
The following assumptions are generic to all options:
•

Real discount rate: costs and benefits from each option are discounted at a 5 percent real
discount over the 2011-2030 period as specified by the Climate Action Plan Quantification
Methods Memorandum.

•

GHG emission factors: Fuel-based emissions factors are as specified by the Climate Action
Plan Quantification Methods Memorandum.

•

Technological Change: The impacts of technology learning on capital costs of PSD
technologies will be folded into the levelized cost calculations consistent with assumptions
developed in the NYSERDA Cost Curve study. The ongoing NYSERDA review of solar-PV
price forecasts should be completed by the time the quantification gets underway. In
addition, we will aim to incorporate any recommended assumptions from the EPRI review of
the Cost Curve study.

Moreover, the quantification of each of the PSD policy options requires additional assumptions
that are germane to each option. These are identified in the design for each option and will be
incorporated into the analysis in consultation with NYSERDA and the Technical Work Group.

E-26



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

RCI Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft
To:

NYS Climate Action Plan Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial
Technical Workgroup

From:

Hal Nelson and Steve Bower

CC:

Tom Peterson, Jeff Wennberg, Randy Strait, Karen Villeneuve, Jodi SmitsAnderson

Subject:

Assumptions used in the quantification of options for the RCI Technical Work
Group

Date:

July 26, 2010

This memo outlines proposed data sources used to quantify the greenhouse gas (GHG) impacts
and costs for those RCI Technical Work Group policy options that are considered amenable to
quantification. The memo will be reviewed in an upcoming Technical Work Group call so that
comments on the assumptions may be made and alternative data sources recommended for
Technical Work Group approval. Any changes to this memo will be incorporated and the revised
memo will be used as documentation for the modeling results.
The scope of this memo only covers the major assumptions directly related to the quantification
of the RCI policy options. Recall that the emissions reductions and costs in the quantification of
the policy options occur against the backdrop of the inventory and forecast. The effects of the
policy options are therefore incremental to the activity projected under the inventory and
forecast. The assumptions embedded in the New York Inventory and Forecast were reviewed at
during the February 5th, 2010 RCI Technical Work Group call.

Quantification Process
The analysis includes spreadsheet modeling techniques in which assumptions are transparent and
readily accessible for review. The assumptions delineated in the following document are for the
quantification of the policy options developed by the RCI Technical Work Group. This
quantification of costs and CO2 reductions entails the following steps:
•

Develop stand-alone cost estimates for each quantifiable option

•

Once completed, the stand alone options will be adjusted to reflect existing actions such as
the NYS energy efficiency portfolio standard and the April, 2010 customer sited renewable
portfolio standard. These are actions that are not in the reference case forecast, but are likely
to occur. Adjusting for existing actions eliminates potential “double counting” of greenhouse
gas reductions.

E-27



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

To assess the RCI emission reductions without double-counting, it is necessary to consider
overlaps and interactions within the RCI policies and measures as they affect similar types of
energy use.

•

Options will be also be modified to reflect overlaps between RCI options and other Technical
Work Group options. Potential interactions occur between RCI policies and measures that
deploy renewable energy with Power Supply and Delivery (PSD) and Agriculture, Forestry
and Waste (AFW) mitigation measures. One interaction that could be modeled is the effect of
New York’s renewable portfolio standard (RPS) and the Power Supply and Delivery policy
options on the assumed carbon intensity of electricity delivered to the RCI sectors.

RCI Energy Reductions
Energy savings from efficient technologies and best practices are calculated at the technology
level and aggregated up based on energy consumption at the relevant end use. For instance, the
electricity savings from light emitting diode (LED) technologies are estimated based on the
incremental energy efficiency of LED lighting over the assumed reference technology. These
energy savings are then adjusted for lighting energy use as a percent of the RCI sectoral sales,
less business as usual LED penetration. Electricity savings are also adjusted for transmission and
distribution (T&D) losses according to the formula:
Eq 1). Annual energy efficiency deployment: [(technology or practice electricity savings)
/ (1-T&D losses)]
Annual baseline energy consumption and GHG emissions will be derived from the most recent
NYSERDA NYS GHG Emissions Inventory.
•

The baseline electricity demand comes from the “starting point” forecast for RCI sectors
through 2030.

•

The fuel consumption forecast comes from most recent NYSERDA forecast.

Electricity T&D losses are estimated at 9 percent based on modeling work done by NYSERDA
and the NY Independent System Operator 26 . Electricity T&D losses are assumed to be constant
across all regions and load periods even though peak electricity T&D losses are higher than
baseload T&D losses. Natural gas T&D losses are not initially accounted for as energy savings
from avoided natural gas transmission and distribution usage are assumed to be modest. The
GHG benefits from reduced gas demand will be discussed qualitatively, but if quantification of
policies to conserve natural gas show significant reductions, then avoided fugitive methane
emissions might be estimated.

Methodology for Avoided Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Calculations

Energy reductions for fuel in physical units (Btu) will be converted into GHG emissions
reductions according to their relevant emissions factors presented in the quantification methods
memorandum. For electricity reductions, the GHG impacts for grid connected RCI policy
options are quantified according to the following formula:
26

Personal communication with Ted Lawrence at NYSERDA on November, 12, 2008.

E-28



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Eq 2). CO2 Reductions in yeart: Electric efficiency deployment (GWh) in yeart * CO2
intensity in tons per GWh in yeart
To estimate emissions reductions from policy options that are expected to displace conventional
grid-supplied electricity (i.e., energy efficiency) a straightforward approach is employed based
on input from NYSERDA and other stakeholders. Consumption-based emission intensity has
been developed that accounts for emissions from imported power, instate generation as well as
CO2 emissions from transmission and distribution losses. A weighted average approach to instate
generation and imports was employed based on the State Energy Plan “starting point”
generation, demand, and GHG forecasts. Imports over the period were credited at 0.36 metric
tons CO2 / MWh for all periods. The consumption based intensity divides CO2 emissions from
the power sector by electricity demand (instead of generation). 27 Due to reductions in forecasted
T&D losses as well as increased penetration of renewables and other lower carbon fuels, the
forecasted emissions intensity in metric tons CO2/MWh is forecasted to decline dramatically in
NY in the near term. The following table shows the electricity emissions intensity assumptions
employed:
Table E-6: Consumption-Based Electricity Emissions Intensity [2009 PLACEHOLDER]
Year

Tonnes CO2 / MWh

2006

0.42

2007

0.38

2008

0.35

2009

0.33

2010

0.31

2011

0.31

2012

0.30

2013

0.30

2014

0.30

2015

0.29

2016

0.29

2017

0.29

2018

0.29

2019

0.29

2020

0.29

2021

0.29

2022

0.29

2023

0.29

2024

0.29

2025

0.29

27

The consumption based approach is slightly higher than the production based intensity. The consumption based
approach makes more sense from a theoretical standpoint as emissions from T&D losses are mitigated from RCI end
user activities.

E-29



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Year

Tonnes CO2 / MWh

2026

0.29

2027

0.29

2028

0.29

2029

0.29

2030

0.29

Current electricity load forecasts are available through 2030.
This approach provides a transparent way to estimate emissions reductions and to avoid double
counting (by ensuring that the same megawatt hours (MWh) from a fossil fuel source is not
“avoided” more than once). It can be considered a “first-order” approach; it does not attempt to
capture a number of factors such as the distinction between peak, intermediate, and baseload
generation; issues in system dispatch and control; impacts of nondispatchable and intermittent
sources such as wind and solar; or the dynamics of regional electricity markets. These
relationships are complex and could mean that policy options affect generation and emissions (as
well as costs) in a manner somewhat different than estimated here. Nonetheless, this approach
provides reasonable first-order approximations of emissions impacts and offers the advantages of
simplicity and transparency that are important for stakeholder processes.
Figure E-2. 2005 CO2 Emissions in New York State

E-30



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Cost Assumptions
The cost to implement the RCI options are the net difference between the avoided costs of
energy and the cost of the energy efficiency measures where:
Net costs (benefits): Energy efficiency deployment * (avoided cost of energy – levelized cost of
measures including administrative costs)
The assumptions associated with costs calculations are:
•

Forecasted fuel prices for the RCI sectors come from the most recent NYSERDA price
forecast.

•

Avoided electricity prices from Optimal (2010) for the RCI sectors are used for avoided costs
and are estimated in the following manner:
○

For each year following the end of the available forecast period, the prices are changed
by the annual forecasted change in price of electricity from table 67 of the detailed
outputs to the AEO 2010 for the NERC region. 28

Effects of Recent Actions
Relevant recent actions that are not included in the NYSERDA forecast will be accounted for to
the extent possible. The federal Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007 was
signed into law in December 2007. This law contains several requirements that will reduce GHG
emissions as they are implemented over the next few years. We assume that the effects of the
EISA are included in the NYSERDA electricity and fuel forecasts.
Relevant updates to New York’s mandatory building energy codes are also identified in the
analysis. NYS’ residential code is based on the 2004 International Code Council’s International
Energy Conservation Code (IECC). For commercial buildings New York references the 2003
IECC code and American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE) 90.1 standards.
Planned activities such as the NYS Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard (EEPS) 15% efficiency
target by 2015 (45 by 15), as part of the Governor’s proposal to have 45% of electricity come
from renewables and energy efficiency, will be explicitly modeled as appropriate. 29 The April
2nd, 2010 RPS order will be included as a recent action “wedge” between what would have
happened in the baseline through 2015 and the Climate Action Plan policies.
Evolving policies with market-driving effects such as the governor’s Executive Order 111 for
state buildings, which ends in 2010, New York City legislation in response to the Mayor’s
PlaNYC2030, and other currently planned energy efficiency interventions by NYSERDA, Long
Island Power Authority (LIPA), and New York Power Authority (NYPA) will be analyzed, as

28

http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/archive/aeo08/index.html

29

A scenario with the effects of the 15% energy efficiency savings by 2015 is estimated as the difference between
the “starting point” load forecast and the 15x15 in the most recent forecast file.

E-31



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

budget and project time allow, to assess baseline penetration rates of selected efficiency
measures.

Other Assumptions
The quantification of each of the policy options requires additional assumptions that are germane
to each option and are described in detail in the policy option document. For instance, there are
many building code assumptions in that policy option. However, the following assumptions are
generic to nearly all options:
•

Real discount rate: costs and benefits from each option is discounted at a 5 percent real
discount over the 2010-2030 period as specified by the NY Climate Action Plan
Quantification Methods Memorandum.

•

Technological Change
○

An examination of historical energy efficiency equipment, including compact florescent
lights, solar PV, heat pump water heaters, and other measures shows learning curves that
result in capital cost reductions over time. The installed costs and value of energy savings
are sensitive to future conditions. Learning curves will be used for selected measures to
account for economies of scale in production which result in cost reductions over time.
Learning curves will come from the most recent, reliable data sources.

E-32



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

TLU Common Assumptions Memorandum - Draft
To:

New York Climate Action Council

From:

Hillel Hammer

cc:

Tom Peterson, Jeff Wennberg, Randy Strait, Sandi Meier, Ernest Tollerson and
Paul Beyer

Subject:

Analysis and Assumptions for Transportation and Land Use Policy Options

Date:

July 12, 2010

This memo summarizes key elements of methods of analysis aimed at estimating potential
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions and cost effectiveness of Transportation and Land
Use (TLU) policy options in the New York State Climate Action Plan process. The process of
policy analysis is intended to support state-specific design and analysis of draft policy options,
while providing for both consistency and flexibility.
Key general guidelines for policy analysis as conducted by Center for Climate Strategies’
consultants are presented first, followed by specific elements of policy analysis methods and
assumptions for Transportation and Land Use issues.
1. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR POLICY ANALYSES
The following outlines the central guidelines for policy analysis. For a complete description of
all general guidelines for policy analysis, see Draft Quantification Methods Memorandum—New
York State Climate Action Plan, July 2010 (‘Quantification Memo’).

Fuel Cycle Coverage
GHG reductions for each mitigation option in TLU will be based upon the full fuel cycle because
information is available to support this type of analysis for this sector (see more in Section 2
below).

Life Cycle Coverage
As mentioned above, there are other mitigation policy options that will also have important life
cycle impacts. These include those associated with reducing non-fuel consumables, such as
concrete and steel. Life cycle impacts will be reported for each source for which information is
available to support a life cycle analysis. For TLU, this will focus mostly on construction
materials, where possible. It will not be possible to identify in-State versus out-of-state sources
for these construction materials.

Pollutant Coverage and Global Warming Potentials
The analysis will cover the six Kyoto GHGs, presented as carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e),
which indicates the relative contribution of each gas to global average radiative forcing. This will
be based on the approach outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in
its Second Assessment Report, consistent with the draft GHG emissions inventory and forecast

E-33



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

for the state of New York and with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and IPCC
guidance.

Time Period of Analysis
For each sector, life cycle emission reductions and incremental life cycle costs will be calculated
relative to the characteristics of the Baseline that would otherwise prevail in New York up
through the end of the planning period, 2030.
The analysis will report annual emission reductions for 2020 and 2030. The net present value of
the cumulative costs, and cumulative emission reductions, will be reported for the period starting
with the initial year of the phase-in of the policy, up through 2030. For long-term capital
investments, the investment will be annualized over the lifetime of the project operation, and the
portion included in the analysis period will be included.

Transparency
Analyses will be performed in spreadsheet format to the extent practicable, to enable maximum
transparency and facilitate review. Exceptions to this will be only in cases where external models
such as GREET are required (see details on the model in Section 2).
Data sources, methods, implementation mechanisms, key assumptions, and key uncertainties will
be documented and supported by references to provide transparency on how the key analytical
outputs for each policy option were developed and applied. Information provided by the state
agencies and project participants will be used to ensure best available data sources, methods, and
key assumptions using their expertise and knowledge to address specific issues in New York
State. Modifications will be made through facilitated discussions.

Key Analytical Outputs and Metrics
GHG Emission Reductions
Net GHG reduction potential in physical units of million metric tons (million metric tons or
MMt) of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) will be estimated for each quantifiable policy for
target years 2020 and 2030, as well as the total for the entire analysis period.
Costs
Net capital, operating and maintenance (O&M), and fuel costs will be estimated for each of the
policies that are determined quantifiable. Costs will be discounted as a multi-year stream of net
costs to arrive at the “net present value cost” associated with implementing new technologies and
best practices. It is proposed that costs be discounted in constant 2005 dollars using a 5 percent
annual real discount rate. The nominal discount rate will be calculated by adding the projected
inflation rate over the analysis period. Capital investments will be represented in terms of
annualized or amortized costs over the project period. (See the section on “Cost Analysis
Methods” for additional details.)
Cost savings (e.g., fuel savings) will be included, represented as a negative cost. If significant
financing costs or split incentives (cases where the benefits are not reaped by the investor) are
expected, these will be identified.

E-34



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Cost-effectiveness
The cost effectiveness—cost or savings per tone—for each quantified policy, represented as
dollars per MMt CO2e ($/MMtCO2e), will be calculated by dividing the present value cost by the
cumulative (undiscounted) reduction in GHG emissions. When combined with GHG impact
assessments, the results of these cost estimates will be aggregated into a sectoral summary table
and sector and economy-wide stepwise marginal cost curves.
Direct vs. Indirect Effects
“Direct effects” are those borne by the entities subject to or directly affected by the policy or
entities implementing the new policies. For example, direct costs are net of any financial benefits
or savings to the entity. Direct effects will be quantified.
“Indirect effects” are those borne by entities other than those defined for “direct effects”. Indirect
effects will not be quantified.
Non-GHG (External) Impacts and Costs
Environmental co-benefits such as reductions in criteria air pollutants, which in turn would lead
to reduced public health impacts from productive activities in New York, will not be quantified.
Qualitatively, CCS will document measures that are expected to have other non-GHG impacts,
including, but the physical and monetary costs or savings associated with these external impacts
will not be included explicitly in this analysis.
Uncertainty / Sensitivity Analysis
Key uncertainties and feasibility issues will be identified and discussed qualitatively.

Calculation of Emissions
Emission reductions will be estimated incremental to baseline emissions based on the change
(reduction) in emissions activity (e.g., reduced vehicle miles traveled—VMT), calculated either
directly, by using the same factors applied in the baseline inventory (e.g., reduction in fuel
consumed and fuel-based emission factors), or as a fraction of the baseline inventory (e.g.,
fraction of baseline VMT and associated emissions reduced).
Emissions associated with electricity consumption will be calculated based on the procedures
outlined for the PSD sector. Electric demand by vehicles may be calculated using the NYGREET model (see Section 2 below).

Calculation of Costs
Net capital, operating and maintenance (O&M), and fuel costs will be estimated for each of the
policies that are determined quantifiable. Costs will be discounted as a multi-year stream of net
costs to arrive at the “net present value cost” associated with implementing new technologies and
best practices. It is proposed that costs be discounted for all options in constant 2005 dollars
using a 5 percent annual real discount rate. The nominal discount rate will be calculated by

E-35



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

adding the projected inflation rate over the analysis period. 30 For full details on cost calculation,
see the Quantification Memo.

Documentation
Documentation of the work will be completed in a template format that addresses the following
items (among others):
Work Group Sector
Name of policy option
Policy Description
Policy Design (Goals and Timing for implementation and parties involved or affected by
implementation of the policy.)
Implementation Mechanisms
Quantification: Estimated GHG Savings and Costs per MtCO2e (GHG reduction potential in
2020 and 2030, Cumulative GHG reduction potential, net cost, data sources, and quantification
methods)
Key Assumptions and Uncertainties
Co-Benefits and External Costs (qualitative discussion)
POLICY ANALYSIS METHODS AND ASSUMPTIONS SPECIFIC TO
TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE ISSUES
Policy analysis of transportation and land use issues is inherently complex, given the interrelationships between transportation systems, land use, and other important aspects of societal
well-being. Policy analysis methods for transportation and land use as conducted by consultants
for CCS is based upon many years of well-established professional practice and methods that are
widely accepted in the fields of public policy analysis, urban and transportation planning,
transportation engineering, and environmental sciences. The information provided here provides
information about analyses relating to the potential changes in GHG emissions in the
transportation sector resulting from the combustion of transportation fuels and use of electric
power. In addition, GHG emissions associated with the production and transport of standard and
alternative fuels (‘fuel-cycle emissions’) and with construction activity and materials are
included where information and methods are readily available.

There are four general categories of factors that impact upon the emission from the transportation
sector: vehicles, fuels, systems, and travel activity. These four factors interact in a complex

30

The inflation rate for the analysis period is assumed to be 2.2%, subject to approval by the Integration Advisory
Panel and Climate Action Council. Capital and other costs reported in nominal dollars will be converted to 2005$
using the inflation rate for the NY state region as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(http://www.bls.gov/ro2/news.htm)

E-36



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

fashion to affect GHG emission. In addition, direct and indirect emissions may be associated
with construction and infrastructure.

Underlying Premises and Methodology
Simple spreadsheet modeling techniques in which assumptions are transparent will be used for
the analyses as much as possible. To ensure consistent results across options, common factors
and assumptions will be used for the following items:
Independent and integrated analyses: Each option will first be analyzed individually and then
addressed as part of an overall integrated analysis.
Fuel Costs and Projected Escalation: Fuel cost estimates will be based on common sources
wherever possible. For example, fossil fuel price escalation will be indexed to the U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) projections as indicated in their most recent Annual Energy
Outlook (AEO).
Consumption–Based Approach: The analysis uses a consumption-based approach where
emissions are calculated on the basis of the consumption of transportation fuels (represented as
direct fuel consumption or as vehicle miles traveled) to provide energy to New York consumers,
as opposed to a production-based approach, which considers the emissions from in-state
production of transportation fuels.
Life cycle Emissions: Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions are considered on a case-by-case
basis. The primary focus of the analysis of Transportation and Land Use issues is upon the direct
combustion of transportation fuels to provide energy. Energy cycle of fuels will be included, and
construction impacts will be included where practicable.
Overlap with Other Sectors: Where TLU options overlap with options being considered in other
Technical Work Groups, the analysis for these options will be conducted in close coordination
with the assumptions and other inputs used in other CCS analyses.

Data Sources
TWG members are often in a good position to obtain and provide data sources that are specific to
New York, and these will be used as much as possible, including data already provided by
NYSDOT, MTA, and others. Where New York-specific information cannot be readily obtained
from the Technical Work Group, the analysis relies on other local data available to the
consultants, and on published data from the DOE, EPA, national laboratories, other federal
agencies, and other state climate change processes.
The analysis of renewable fuels and the use of electricity for vehicles will be based on output
from the New York-specific application of the Argonne National Laboratory’s Greenhouse
Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation model (NYGREET), prepared
for this effort (also used in the baseline inventory).

E-37



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

General data sources will include:
Baseline Historical Energy Consumption by Sector
Historical energy consumption in the state, by sector, is from the DOE Energy Information
Administration (EIA) State Energy Data available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/
emeu/states/seds.html.
Baseline Historical Vehicle Fleet, Fuel Use, and Travel Activity Data
Baseline data on the state vehicle fleet, fuel use, and travel activity data is obtained from the
latest inventory and forecast provided by NYSERDA. (Data sources, and methods of analyses
for the baseline and forecast are described in the inventory and forecast.)
Baseline Forecast GHG Emissions
Baseline forecasts of future GHG emissions for the transportation and land use sector is obtained
from the inventory and forecast report.
Energy Price Projections through 2030
Energy prices by region are from the EIA Supplemental Tables to the AEO 2010, with
projections through 2030. Adjustments to the EIA projections are made on a case-by-case basis.

Cost Inclusion
The analytical methods being used can incorporate a wide variety of costs, depending on the
availability of cost data. Fuel costs are incorporated into all analyses where relevant. Other types
of costs will be explicitly considered in the analysis if they can be readily estimated. Types of
costs that may be incorporated include:
Annualized Capital costs levelized (amortized);
Operations and maintenance cost; and
Administrative costs.
Types of costs that will not be incorporated include
External costs, such as the monetized environmental or social benefits and impacts (e.g., the cost
of damage by air pollutants on structures and crops), quality-of-life improvements, and health
impacts and benefits (e.g., improved road safety);
Energy security benefits; and
Macroeconomic impacts related to reduced or increased consumer spending, and shifting of cost
and benefits among different sectors of the economy.

E-38



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix F
2050 Visioning:
Brookhaven National Laboratory Report
As part of its climate action planning, the state of New York is unique in undertaking a visioning
process to assist the long-range goal of reducing greenhouse gas emission 80 percent below the
levels emitted in 1990 by the year 2050. To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the
radical, long-term changes required to achieve the 80 by 50 goal, the Council and its technical
work groups and panel — indeed, decision makers at many levels — must be able to imagine the
kind of low-carbon clean energy future toward which they are working.
An initial step in that visioning process was a conference held January 5, 2009, Envisioning a
Low-Carbon Clean Energy Economy in New York. The conference, organized by the New York
Academy of Sciences, Brookhaven National Laboratory, the New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority, and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, involved members of the Climate Action Council, the Integration Advisory Panel,
and the Technical Work Groups.
Led by subject matter experts, the participants in the workshop explored innovative strategies for
meeting the State’s energy needs, reducing energy demand, managing greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, driving technological change, and creating economic opportunities for “green-tech” in
New York. The workshop considered specific scenarios that outlined possible pathways to
reducing GHG emissions. The purpose was not to validate a particular pathway, but rather to
explore possibilities and their implications, as well as to identify obstacles to achieving the goal.
The January conference led to the creation of the report, Envisioning a Low-Carbon Clean
Energy Economy in New York, produced by Brookhaven National Laboratory and appended here
in its entirety and keeping its original pagination.

F-1



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State
_________________________________________________________

A white paper submitted to the
New York State Climate Action Council
by Gerry Stokes and Patrick Looney
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
October 1, 2010

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Contents

Important note to readers

1

Summary

2

The Broad Context for This Paper

4

The Approach to Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050

6

Three Scenarios for 2050

8

Serious Challenges Posed by the Low-Carbon Goal

15

Bottom-Line Issues and Considerations

27

Coda

33

Appendixes

34

Supplemental Information on Methodology & Data Sources
GHG Emissions Scenario Assumptions

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

.

Important note to readers:
This is the first complete draft of a paper designed to inform the NYS Climate Action
Council’s work to develop a State Climate Action Plan.
The Council’s mandate is uncommonly broad in scope. It has a planning horizon far longer
than what most planners address. It entails large uncertainties. No clear precedent for an
enterprise of this scope exists.
Consequently, this draft paper is necessarily provisional. As the planning process proceeds,
the paper will be revised, and it will steadily gain in value as fresh insights are acquired and
the knowledge base it draws from expands.
One feature of this paper is a description of three scenarios that illustrate different versions
of a low-carbon 2050 future for the state. It’s important that readers understand that these
scenarios are offered for illustrative purposes only. In no sense do they constitute the
elements of a plan, and indeed even a casual review of them reveals that there is no way in
which they could be fashioned into a plan. Rather, they’re intended to facilitate and provoke
thinking about the future.
We hope other parties will generate their own 80x50 scenarios and share them. The ability
to imagine a sustainable future, model it rigorously, and explore it is as vital to achieving
that future as the clean-energy technologies, best management practices, and behavioral
changes that must be developed, advanced, and adopted.

1

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

SUMMARY

The State of New York aims to reduce state greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to 80% below
1990 levels by 2050. The fact that the state is already more energy efficient than most
other states makes this goal particularly ambitious. A State Climate Action Council is
charged with developing a draft Climate Action Plan by November, 2010. Toward this end, it
has organized technical work groups and an integration advisory panel of stakeholders and
experts.
To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the radical, long-term changes required to
achieve the 80x50 goal, the Council and its team must be able to imagine the kind of lowcarbon future toward which they are working. To facilitate this, the Council also formed a
2050 Visioning Advisory Panel. Comprising experts from many fields, that panel was
convened at a workshop held on January 5, 2010.
This draft visioning paper draws from insights and knowledge shared at that workshop, and
from other expert sources. It also draws from three GHG mitigation scenarios for 2050 that
we developed for the workshop to illuminate how a low-carbon future might be achieved,
and what it would mean. Making assumptions about future energy demand, patterns of
energy use, the technologies that might be available to supply needed energy with reduced
emissions, and what their levels of performance might be, we estimated emissions for each
major sector of the state’s economy. We found that reaching the 80x50 goal is challenging
and that modeling required aggressive assumptions.
Together, the workshop, scenario development, and the crafting of this visioning paper
constitute a “visioning process.” Its focus has been manifold: an examination of
technologies that might prove scalable and those that might be dead ends, of technical
issues that require assessment, of policies that favor or constrain GHG reductions, and of
management and societal changes needed to reduce emissions.
While the state’s energy future cannot be predicted, some points are already clear, among
them, these:
o

Reducing emissions is imperative because atmospheric levels of GHGs are already
perilously high, and emissions are cumulative – and there are real costs associated
with inaction.

o

The 80x50 goal is ambitious, and achieving it will require investments in new energy
systems and infrastructure that have very low or no net carbon emissions. Patterns
of energy use will also need to change.

o

Energy efficiency is an essential, but not sufficient, strategy that can be aggressively
pursued today.

2

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

A broad shift from reliance on burning fossil fuels to electricity generated from lowor no-carbon sources, or widespread use of carbon capture and sequestration, will be
needed.

o

Transportation and buildings (residential and commercial) will have to move away
from reliance on combustion of fossil fuels to alternate sources with significantly
lower carbon or no carbon emissions.

o

Development and redevelopment based on smart growth principles, as well as the
building design practices, building technologies, and construction methods can
significantly reduce the energy demand for buildings, as well as transportation.

o

Incremental, short-term planning cannot achieve the goal. Near-term decisions –
both those taken and not taken – can preclude longer-term options, such as
infrastructure projects requiring long lead times. Key climate strategies must reflect
this inexorable reality.

o

The goal must be pursued in part through extensive, long-term partnering among all
levels of government and across the region, and between the public and private
sectors. It will take sustained effort on the part of all.

3

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THE BROAD CONTEXT FOR THIS PAPER
In the face of climate change, the stakes are so high, the challenge so immense, and the
opportunities so richly promising that business as usual and conventional wisdom are
themselves risky. Innovation is imperative — not only in technology but in ways of thinking,
working, and living.
In fact, what’s demanded transcends “innovation”: transforming an entire economy from
largely carbon-based energy sources to largely carbon-neutral sources in a scant 40 years
will be a true revolution, a radical shift that can renew New York’s economy, enhance its
natural environment, and improve its citizens’ quality of life for generations to come.
For this revolution to succeed, institutions must be mobilized, businesses must adapt or fail,
and individuals, families, and communities must make better-informed energy choices. And
all of this change must be scaled up massively and rapidly.

The 80x50 challenge
Recognizing the benefits of action and the risks of inaction, in August 2009 the Governor
signed Executive Order 24, which tasks the State to reduce GHG emissions from all sources
within the state to a level 80% below the 1990 level by 2050. It establishes a Climate
Action Council that is to develop a Climate Action Plan to achieve that goal, taking into
account economic and other considerations. The plan is to be drafted by November, 2010.
The Council will hold public comment hearings on the draft and after reviewing comments
prepare a final plan.
That plan will be reviewed annually and revised as appropriate. The Executive Order says it
“is not intended to be static, but rather a dynamic and continually evolving strategy to
assess and achieve the goal of sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.”
To advance and inform its work, the Council has convened stakeholders from New York, as
well as experts from New York and beyond, and organized them into technical work groups
and an integration advisory panel. Working in support of the Council and these groups is the
Center for Climate Strategies. The Council’s comprehensive web site offers detailed
information about its work, and it links to the New York Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Inventory and Forecast. Readers unfamiliar with the Council are urged to consult the site for
essential information that complements this paper.

How visioning contributes to the Council’s work
To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the radical, long-term changes required to
achieve the 80x50 goal, the Council and its technical work groups and panel must be able to
imagine the kind of low-carbon clean energy future toward which they are working. To

4

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

facilitate this, a 2050 Visioning Advisory Panel comprising experts drawn from many fields
was convened at a January 5, 2010, workshop held at the New York Academy of Sciences.
At the workshop, the experts made presentations and responded to concerns and questions
from the floor. (The link above leads to a link to a webinar of the workshop, the slides
speakers showed, and the agenda.)
This draft paper draws from insights and information shared at the January workshop. It
also draws from many other expert sources, such as reports from the National Academies of
Science. And it draws from three GHG mitigation scenarios for 2050 that we developed for
the workshop, described below. Together, the workshop, the development of scenarios, and
the crafting of this visioning paper constitute what may be termed a “visioning process.”
The focus of the process has been manifold: an examination of technologies that might
prove scalable and of those that might be dead ends, of technical issues that must be
addressed, of policies that favor or constrain GHG reductions, and of management and
societal changes needed to reduce emissions. Of course, policies that favor GHG reductions
must be implementable. But for a time horizon so far distant, at this early stage, technical
feasibility and cost considerations can be considered only in broad-brush terms. This paper
treats them accordingly.
Our scenarios suggest that, in concept, the 80x50 goal is technically possible. The overall
visioning process makes clear that incremental, short-term planning alone cannot meet the
goal and that even a sophisticated long-term approach must surmount serious challenges.
This in turn underscores how important it is that climate change vulnerability analyses and
adaptation planning proceed on equal footing with mitigation efforts.
But the scenarios reveal a world of opportunities, too, that hold tremendous potential for
the state’s economy and its citizens’ well being.

5

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THE APPROACH TO ENVISIONING A LOW-CARBON 2050
The technical work groups that are contributing to development of the State’s Climate
Action Plan process are responsible for recommending specific strategies, policies, and
actions for the Council’s consideration. The visioning process, defined above, was designed
to complement their work. Scenarios are a uniquely valuable tool for this purpose. Scenarios
have been widely and routinely used, for many years, in many fields, as a tool for exploring
options and contingencies. The three scenarios we developed for the State’s January
visioning workshop investigated the technical feasibility of the 80x50 goal and identified
some technology options and best practices that could achieve the goal. The scenarios also
helped us identify some significant technical barriers and policy issues that might facilitate
or constrain those options.
To model and gain insight into possible futures, we “worked backward” from an imagined
mid-century New York that has far lower GHG emissions. Making assumptions about future
energy demand, patterns of energy use, what technologies might be available to supply
energy and reduce emissions and what their levels of performance might be, we estimated
emissions for each major sector of the economy, considering many interchangeable
elements that might be dictated by policy implementation, technology breakthroughs, or
market developments in the US and abroad.
The value of the scenarios is in providing a framework for thinking concretely about how
energy efficiency, new energy technologies, fuel switching, best practices, and other
matters might shape the path to a low-carbon future. Scenario modeling can also provide
insight into performance levels for new energy technologies such as plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles (PHEVs), or emission-reduction technologies such as carbon capture and storage
(CCS).
All three of the 80x50 scenarios share important characteristics:
o

An end state is postulated for each major energy-consuming sector of the economy:
Transportation, Electricity Production and Distribution, Residential Buildings,
Commercial Buildings, and Industrial. These end states are largely characterized by
their technological characteristics, such as low carbon-emitting central generation of
electricity, electric vehicles, and net-zero carbon emission buildings.

o

Next, the ramifications of these technology options are examined. For example, if the
state were to depend on hydrogen as a transportation fuel, how would the hydrogen
be produced? Similarly, if the goal is low-carbon electricity central generation, what
are the technology options for generating that power?

o

Finally, the resulting scenario is referenced to a projection of what the energy use
may be in absence of carbon abatement policies; that is, in the “business as usual
case” (BAU). This comparison illuminates, for example, the magnitude of energyefficiency gains that might be required, or the extent to which projected

6

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

transportation needs that light duty vehicles would otherwise meet could be met by
expanded mass transit instead.

7

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THREE SCENARIOS FOR 2050
Models, assumptions, and limitations
The three scenarios were designed to answer these basic questions:
o

o

What are possible, illustrative scenarios in which NYS GHG emissions would be
~80% lower than the 1990 level of ~251.4 million metric tons (MMt) of CO2
equivalent (CO2e)? (a goal of about 51 MMt)
What are the implications of such scenarios?

To support the modeling exercise, a macro model of statewide GHG emissions was
developed. Data are presented in Table 1, below. Emissions data for 2007 are the most
recent available and are considered “current” for the purpose of this paper. NYSERDA
projects that 2025 annual GHG emissions will be 266 MMT CO2e, a relatively small increase
from current levels. The relative contributions of the various sectors remain unchanged,
except that the “Other Source” category (non-fuel combustion) is projected to surpass
residential emissions by 2025. (“BAU” is the “business as usual projection.”)

Table 1. Sector GHG Emissions for Select Years (in Million Metric Tons CO2e)
1990

2007

2025

2050

(actual)

(actual)

(forecast)

(BAU
Projection)

Transportation

72.9

88.4

93.4

114.3

Electric

64.5

49.2

42.9

75.5

Electric Imports

1.7

7.4

7.6

-

Residential

34.1

37.6

34.7

40.8

Commercial

26.8

27.3

30.1

35.4

Industrial

25.0

19.2

18.7

21.9

Other

26.5

28.7

38.5

39.0

TOTAL

251.4

257.7

266.0

326.6

Scenario modeling was a rigorous process that began by estimating the total energy
demand that might have to be met in 2050 in each sector. This was done by extrapolating
current forecasts and assuming modest growth in state GDP and hence energy demand.

8

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

These assumptions create the future “business as usual” (BAU) emissions scenario – the
case that perpetuates the path we are on. BAU energy demand projection estimates the
energy supply needed to support the state’s economy in 2050 given our current patterns of
transportation, energy use and efficiency.
The foundation of our scenario development is a state-level, coupled-sector macro model of
energy supply flows and corresponding (calculated) emissions for each sector of the
economy. In addition, possible reductions in non-energy related emissions (the “Other”,
non-energy related category) were estimated.

Table 2. Estimated Energy Demand by Sector
2007

2025

2050

(actual)

(forecast)

(BAU
Projection)

LDV/HDV VMT

136B Miles

170B Miles

224B Miles

Aviation

210 Mbtu

222 Mbtu

240 Mbtu

165,000 GWh

187,000 GWh

270,000 GWh

Residential

591Tbtu

629Tbtu

721Tbtu

Commercial

533Tbtu

557Tbtu

587Tbtu

Industrial

191 Tbtu

180 Tbtu

180Tbtu

Transportation

Electric

In the table above “LDV” means ‘light duty vehicle; “HDV” means “heavy duty vehicle;
“VMT” means “vehicle miles traveled.”

We then took the energy demand forecast for each sector, presented in Table 2, above, and
traced energy flows through each sector as primary energy (e.g., coal, biomass) and energy
carriers (e.g., gasoline, #2 and #6 oil, coal, etc.) would be used for such purposes as
creating electricity, heating homes, providing power for businesses and manufacturing
sectors, and fueling light duty and heavy duty vehicles. For each of those uses, we
calculated corresponding emissions. Fuel energy content and emissions factors for
combustion come from US EPA data tables.
Significantly, unlike conventional “wedge” models, which treat sectors as freestanding, the
coupled-sector model we employed reflects the fact that switching technologies in one
sector may raise or lower demand in another. For example, two scenarios (the “Yellow” and
“Ultraviolet”) depend on widespread use of PHEVs in the transportation sector, resulting in a

9

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

decrease in gasoline demand and an increase electricity demand; thus, primary energy
demand switches to the electricity sector.
A note of caution: The scenario modeling provides insights into how technologies and
patterns of energy use may have to change to meet emissions targets. But there are
limitations to using the scenarios. This sort of modeling is not a practical planning tool, as it
does not account for the crucial factor of scalability, or for economic, regulatory, and other
barriers to the implementation of any given technology, including the availability of the raw
material required. Nor does it take into account lifecycle analyses of nuclear power and
renewable energy technologies. The models also do not consider the future interaction
between a changing climate and energy use and impacts on the performance of different
technologies.
The models do include estimates of the performance of new and emerging energy
technologies for which the predicted development time scales are commensurate with the
State’s 40-year planning timeframe. Assumptions about the performance of new, emerging
energy technologies are based on credible estimates from available literature, though there
can be no guarantee that as-built systems will meet the estimated levels of performance, be
economically viable, or penetrate the market at rates needed to meet assumed levels.
A note on methodology and references: For more information on methodology and data
sources used in our modeling, please see Appendix A. For more detail on the scenarios, see
Appendix B.

Basic strategies for reducing emissions
Developing scenarios that illustrate potential approaches to meeting the 80x50 emissions
target of ~50 MMT CO2e requires recognition of the fact that those emissions result from
activities that power our society and our economy, providing food, shelter, heating and
cooling, communications, transportation, and innumerable other things essential to wellbeing. Cutting GHG emissions could have real-world consequences if low-carbon or nocarbon energy sources don’t adequately replace fossil sources.
The scenarios rely on four key strategies to reduce GHG emissions:
o

The simplest and the most cost-effective is energy conservation through energy
efficiency.

o

Reducing combustion from fossil fuels is another obvious strategy, as that
combustion accounts for about 87% of all GHG emissions in New York State, with the
largest fraction coming from the transportation sector (38%), followed by on-site
combustion in the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors (37%), and then
from electricity generation (22%). All scenarios assume that combustion of fossil
fuels should only be used when and where necessary, or where controls such as CCS

10

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

effectively limit emissions. Minimizing point sources of combustion such as vehicles
and use of oil and natural gas for heating, and switching to electricity, coupled with
simultaneously reducing the GHG footprint of the electricity supply, thus constitutes
the second strategy.
o

The third strategy is to drive fuel switching where combustion must still be used, as
in aviation and cement production, to minimize the GHG footprint.

o

Using local, point-of-use renewable energy technologies such as solar to reduce the
reliance of homes and businesses on centrally generated electricity is the fourth
strategy.

By varying these strategies and devising portfolios of energy technologies and practices that
could implement them, we created three scenarios that we named “Yellow,” “Deep Blue,”
and “Ultraviolet.” The Yellow scenario falls far short of the 80x50 goal; the other two
scenarios meet it, in different ways.

The Yellow scenario
The Yellow scenario does not meet the ~50 MMT CO2e GHG emissions challenge. It is
intended to be a “first cut” at reducing GHG emissions through increased efficiency: the
adoption of more efficient energy technologies that are largely available today, or will be
soon. This scenario assumes a significantly different mix of light-duty vehicles (LDV) in use
in 2050, with 30% being conventional internal combustion engines with an average of 37
mpg, 30% being hybrid electric vehicles (HEV) with an average of 50 mpg, and 40% being
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) with 95% all-electric miles. This produces a modest
increase in demand in the electricity sector of about 20,000 GWh. The use of intermodal
freight shipping is assumed to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) for HDV by about 30%.
In the electricity sector, it’s assumed that New York State wind and hydro-electric
generation will be built out to meet the maximum forecasts developed by NYSERDA, and
that there will be a very significant increase (up to 100,000 GWh) of utility-scale solar
electric generation or other renewable source such as off-shore wind. Where combustion is
used for electricity, a switch to higher-efficiency natural gas combustion turbine (NGCT) and
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power plants with CCS at 90% is assumed.
It’s also assumed that present levels of nuclear power generation can be maintained.
Transmission and distribution losses are reduced by 50% to an average of 4% for the entire
system. Residential, commercial, and industrial sectors reduce electricity demand via
Energy Star+ efficiency gains.
This scenario includes elimination of 75% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sector, with natural gas and liquid fuels replaced by electricity, some generated
on-site via solar (about 10% of the energy demand), and the balance generated at utility

11

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing fossil fuel combustion overall by 75%
and using only natural gas and #2 oil; coal is eliminated in favor of natural gas.
Reductions in non-energy emissions (the “Other” category) assume elimination of sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6) dielectric from the transmission and distribution grid. Per molecule, SF6
has the highest GHG warming potential, about 23,900 times that of CO2. Reducing natural
gas line leaks (by 50%), implementing a broad and aggressive reduce, reuse, and recycle
policy, and eliminating leaks of alternative refrigerants (hydroflourocarbons [HFCs]) would
reduce emissions from these sources significantly.
The Yellow scenario results in about 114 MMT CO2e emissions, a reduction of 55 percent
below the 1990 level. It thus falls far short of the 80x50 goal – a sobering fact, given how
much it differs from today’s energy patterns.

The Deep Blue scenario
The Deep Blue scenario meets the ~50 MMT CO2e GHG emissions challenge. It begins with
the efficiency savings outlined in the Yellow Scenario and then explores alternatives if fossil
fuel combustion in the residential and commercial sectors were to be eliminated, thereby
driving an increase in electricity demand. Some of the increased electricity demand is
assumed to be met with a larger fraction of point-of-use solar.
The Deep Blue scenario explores the impact of widespread adoption of hydrogen-powered
light-duty vehicles for 100% of the LDV VMT with an equivalent of 65 mpg. The scenario
assumes that hydrogen is produced through high-temperature steam electrolysis using gascooled high-temperature nuclear reactors. Because this approach employs a carbon-free
electricity source, emissions are minimized. The calculations suggest the need for ~5 to 7
GW of nuclear capability for electrolysis. Gas-cooled reactors are well known conceptually,
but significant technological and regulatory developments are needed. An alternative source
of electricity could involve the use of IGCC or natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) with CCS.
High-temperature steam electrolysis is an unproven technology at this time. The scenario
does not address infrastructure issues associated with the transformation to a hydrogenbased transportation system.
The scenario assumes that 100% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sectors is eliminated and that the use of natural gas and liquid fuels is replaced
by electricity, some generated onsite via solar (about 40% of the energy demand), the
balance generated at utility plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing fossil fuel
combustion overall by 75% and using only natural gas and #2 oil; coal is eliminated in favor
of natural gas. Importantly, 8.4 MMT of the 13 MMT in emissions in the industrial sector are
residual emissions from asphalt, petrochemical production, etc. It will be important to
devise methods for curbing emissions from asphalt production to make further reductions.

12

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Electricity demand is met from carbon-free sources, including 30% from nuclear (including 2
new plants that would increase nuclear power generation by 25,000 GWh, not counting the
additional reactors required for hydrogen generation), 30% from renewables (maximum
hydro, wind, and 100,000 GWh of solar), and 40% from NGCC plants with 90% CCS. It is
important to note that the emission levels from NGCC limit generation from this source
unless CCS is achievable at levels higher than 90%. This would make the future use of
natural gas or coal for the electricity sector dependent upon the viability of CCS for locations
and geologies within the state, and upon the amount of CO2 that can ultimately be stored.
In addition, the Deep Blue scenario assumes that emissions in aviation and the residential,
commercial, and industrial sectors could be significantly reduced through the use of instate, bio-derived oils for transportation (diesel), aviation (jet fuel), and heating. Given the
potential for reduced emissions in the aviation, residential, and commercial sectors – as well
as for HDV transportation – these replacement fuels warrant serious consideration, as do
studies of the feasibility of supplying bio-derived oils for fuel from within the state. At
present, net carbon emissions from these sources are assumed to be zero or close to zero,
as carbon emitted by combustion of the biofuel is offset by carbon sequestered by plants
grown to supply fuel. (See EPA’s 2009 U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Report.)
Further study regarding the total carbon cycle associated with the use of these fuels is
warranted to validate the emissions assumptions.
The Deep Blue scenario estimates emissions at 53 MMT. It thus achieves a 79 percent
reduction in GHG emissions below the 1990 level.

The Ultraviolet scenario
Another possible future was devised that would also meet an 80 percent reduction by 2050.
Like Deep Blue, the Ultraviolet scenario is much more aggressive than the Yellow scenario.
It too begins with the efficiency savings outlined in the Yellow scenario and explores
alternatives if fossil fuel combustion in the residential and commercial sectors were
eliminated, thereby driving an increase in electricity demand. A part of this electricity
demand is met through local, point-of-use solar.
The Ultraviolet scenario explores the impact of shifting to widespread use of PHEVs where
95% of VMT are all-electric miles, with 5% of VMT coming from bio-ethanol at 50 mpg. This
is an aggressive goal, well beyond current predictions for most studies of PHEV market
penetration and performance improvements through 2030. Significant increases in
electricity demand are postulated via elimination of fossil fuel combustion in the
transportation sector for LDV.
The scenario assumes that 100% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sector is eliminated and that the use of natural gas and liquid fuels is replaced
by electricity, some generated onsite via solar (about 40% of the energy demand), the
balance being generated at utility plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing

13

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

fossil fuel combustion overall by 75% and only using natural gas and #2 oil; coal is
eliminated in favor of natural gas. As in the Deep Blue scenario, 8.4 MMT of the 13 MMT in
emissions in the industrial sector are residual emissions from asphalt, petrochemical
production, etc.
The significant increase in electricity demand is met largely with carbon-free sources: 35%
from nuclear (including ~10-12 new plants), 35% from renewables (maximum
hydroelectric, maximum on-shore wind, and 100,000 GWh of solar or other utility scale
renewable such as offshore wind), and 17% from NGCC plants with 90% CCS. This scenario
employs as much NGCC with CCS as is practical to meet overall emissions targets, thereby
requiring a larger fraction (and level) of carbon-free sources. They are assumed to be met
with new nuclear plants.
As with the Deep Blue scenario, this scenario relies on the use of low carbon-intensity bioderived fuels (in-state ethanol) to supply the liquid fuel needed for non-electric miles in the
LDV category, and on the use of biofuels in the aviation sector.
The Ultraviolet scenario estimates emission at 55MMT, a 78 percent reduction in GHG
emissions below the 1990 level.

14

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

SERIOUS CHALLENGES POSED BY THE LOW-CARBON GOAL
The scenarios, presentations, and discussion at the January 5 workshop illuminated issues
and challenges facing the Council. In particular three sectors – transportation, electricity
generation, and buildings – emerged as particularly challenging and significant. At present,
the transportation sector produces 34.3% of the state’s GHG inventory; electricity
generation, 19.1%; residential uses, 14.6%; commercial uses, 10.6%. The “business as
usual” (BAU) case for 2050 projects that the transportation sector will produce 35%;
electricity generation, 23.1%; residential, 12.5%; commercial, 10.8%; and industrial,
6.7%.
The text below discusses the challenges those sectors present.

Serious Challenge: Transportation
Mobility is essential to social and economic welfare. By all measures, New York is one of the
most mobile states in the nation. It has over 11 million licensed drivers, 10.5 million motor
vehicles – virtually all of them operating on fossil fuel, and joined by similar vehicles that
travel to New York from other states – and 113,000 miles of roads, along with 4,800 miles
of railroads, 18 commercial airports, and 495 public use and private airports. Ensuring a
safe, secure, reliable, efficient, low-carbon transportation system is vital to the state’s
future. (See Strategies for a New Age: New York State’s Master Transportation Plan for
2030.)
Today’s transportation systems are defined by technological, socioeconomic, land use, and
public policy factors. Transportation demand is growing, and patterns of travel are changing
and increasingly reliant on multiple, interdependent modes of transportation. Congestion in
urban areas is growing, and transportation systems in these areas are bounded by the built
environment. Over the next 40 years, the transportation system will have to support the
same or greater levels of mobility while lowering emissions dramatically. And the
importance of transportation security to national and economic security is expected to
increase.
Over the past three decades, tremendous growth in the transportation sector and the
decline in US oil production have made the US and New York increasingly dependent on
foreign supplies of petroleum. Today, about 60% of the oil consumed in the US is imported.
In New York, transportation accounts for about half of petroleum consumption, the
equivalent of about 300 million barrels per year, or about 4% of the US total. As the
potential for disruptions in world oil supply and production of refined petroleum products
increases, so does the risk of disruption to the state’s transportation system. Given
projected growth in demand for oil in emerging markets, notably China and India, the cost
of oil and the reliability of supply are important risk factors to consider.

15

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Within the transportation sector, road transport is the largest consumer of energy and the
largest source of emissions. The major contributors to emissions are light duty vehicles
(LDV), a category that includes automobiles, SUVs, motorcycles, and light trucks, and heavy
duty vehicles (HDV), which includes trucks for road freight as well as buses. After road
transportation, aviation is the next biggest contributor. Another important factor is the
impact of the design and construction of the local built environment on mobility and
patterns of use of available modes of transportation.
Addressing transportation requires a holistic look at all the factors that can improve
efficiency as well as reduce emissions. In general, approaches to transportation examine
(1) society’s future mobility needs, (2) the technical efficiency of a given mode of
transportation and the potential for improvements, (3) the effects of the operating
environment, and (4) the mix of transportation modalities and potential systems
performance improvements via changes in the mix of modalities.

Transportation and the built environment
The New York metropolitan area enjoys an extensive public transportation system that is
well integrated into the region. Some 4.8 million passengers use public transportation on a
daily basis. The high density of housing, proximity to public transportation, and its relative
ease of use contribute to this high level. Aspects of the region have attributes of “compact,
mixed-use development” – also known as “smart growth.”
In all of the mitigation scenarios, a significant reduction in projected VMT level for 2050
(240 billion miles) is assumed. The assumption is that smart growth can promote greater
reliance on public transportation and/or increase walking and bicycle travel. At the January
5 visioning workshop, success stories about smart growth in urban and suburban areas
were recounted – notably for Arlington, Virginia, and Portland, Oregon. They offer models
for New York’s suburbs and for cities other than New York City; for example, the corridors in
Long Island along the Long Island Railroad and major traffic arteries.
Over the 40-year horizon of the Climate Action Plan, many urban and suburban centers will
very likely be rebuilt or redeveloped. This will create opportunities to reshape the state’s
transportation system and its use – if transportation planning and redevelopment efforts are
approached holistically and use smart-growth practices. As redevelopment in urban and
suburban areas occurs, more compact, mixed-use development that includes higher
population and employment densities, competitive alternatives to automobile use such as
pedestrian and bicycle paths, street networks that provide connectivity between
destinations, and easy access to public transportation can all reduce residential and
commercial energy use, GHG emissions, and VMT.
A recent and comprehensive study by the Transportation Research Board of the National
Academies explores the impact of and correlation between driving behavior and the built
environment. It concludes that compact, mixed-use development can reduce VMT by

16

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

differing means and amounts depending on where the development in a region occurs. The
study reports that the literature suggests “that doubling residential density across a
metropolitan area might reduce VMT by about 5-12%, and perhaps as much as 25% if
coupled with higher employment concentrations, significant public transit improvements,
mixed uses, and other supportive demand management measures.” It also notes that more
study is needed to better understand the causal links between specific design elements in
land use, transportation pathways, high density housing, employment centers, and other
factors and reductions in VMT and increased use of public transportation.
To significantly reduce VMT would require changes in current practices and patterns of
development in suburban areas. In home-rule states like New York, land use is largely a
function of local governments, which can be reluctant to zone for higher-density housing
because local residents often resist it. Statewide change would require that state-level
policies be enhanced with incentives that encourage and support compact, mixed-use
developments that would result in greater energy efficiency, increased use of public
transportation, and reduced VMT and GHG emissions.
These efforts would be facilitated by communitywide design standards (the equivalent of
LEED certification); the development of partnerships among State and local governments
and private developers; tax incentives; coordinated State, federal, and local infrastructure
investments; coordination with regional transportation authorities and operators; and
rezoning to support appropriate transit development.

Light duty vehicles
In 2007 New York State residents drove over 140-billion VMT and consumed some 7.6
billion gallons of gasoline [EIA, Energy Consumption 2007], largely through the use of
personal vehicles. As our mitigation scenarios reveal, significant emission reductions are
possible in the transportation sector. The scenarios explore three alternative future vehicle
fleets: one a mix of conventional, hybrid, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs)
(Yellow scenario); one dominated by hydrogen vehicles (Deep Blue); and one dominated by
PHEVs (Ultraviolet). The latter two scenarios show that fuel switching will drive increased
demand for electricity production, either for vehicle re-charging or electrolysis of steam for
hydrogen production. Of course, emissions reductions would only be realized by the use of
nearly carbon-free electricity sources such as renewables, nuclear, or natural gas or coalfired plants with CCS.
What will it take for the US to realize 100% PHEV or 100% all-hydrogen powered cars on
the road in 2050? Significant changes to automobile technology, of course. However,
replacing New York’s entire fleet of automobiles will take time. The lifetime of a car is long;
the mean lifetime is about 15 years: half the cars sold today will still be on the road in 15
years, and it will take about 25 years for 95% of the autos sold today to be retired. (See the
ORNL Transportation Energy Data Book [2009 ORNL-6984]). Thus, to achieve a fleet

17

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

composed of 100% PHEV cars in 2050, 100% of the cars sold in 2025 and every year
thereafter would have to be PHEVs. The same case applies to hydrogen-fueled cars.
Another reason why changing the entire fleet will take time is that it takes time for
transportation equipment and automobile manufacturers to adopt new technology and
integrate it into their product lines and manufacturing processes. At present, automobile
models undergo a complete redesign approximately once every 8 years, and new designs
are locked in about 2 years in advance. Thus, it could take from 5-10 years for a new
automobile design to be brought to market, and another 25 years to completely change
over the fleet.
For PHEVs, this penetration rate is more aggressive than what experts are predicting. For
example, a recent study by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), Transitions to
Alternative Transportation Technologies – Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, concluded that
PHEVs are “unlikely to achieve cost effectiveness before 2040 at gasoline prices below $4.00
per gallon,” given the higher costs when compared to conventional vehicles. Further, the
NAS PHEV study concluded that “at a maximum practical rate, as many as 40 million PHEVs
could be on the road by 2030, but various factors (e.g., high cost of batteries, modest
gasoline savings, limited availability of places to plug in, competition from other vehicles,
etc.) are likely to keep the number low.”
PHEVs are scheduled to enter the US market in the 2011-2013 timeframe. They will have an
all-electric range of ~30-60 miles. For mass-market penetration, a greater all-electric range
of around 100 miles or more would be needed – underscoring the need to develop higher
performance battery technologies. Costs must come down, too. Drivers include electronic
controls, drive trains, and batteries. Lithium-ion battery technology has been developing
rapidly, though costs are still high and, according to the NAS study, expected to decline only
by about 35% by 2020. Further technology development will likely reduce costs below these
levels, as well as increase storage density and reliability, possibly by using alternative
chemistries to lithium ion batteries.
Other notable barriers include the need for suitable charging stations or battery exchange
facilities and consumer acceptance of PHEVs, especially if PHEVs cost more than similar
functioning hybrid electric vehicles and require daily (or more frequent) recharging.
Adoption of PHEVs by large vehicle fleets, such as federal, state, and local government
fleets, may be an appropriate first step to increase adoption, if costs are reasonable.
The Deep Blue scenario explores the potential impact of fuel switching from gasoline to
hydrogen for vehicles. Hydrogen vehicle technologies largely follow two paths: direct
burning of hydrogen in a suitably modified internal combustion (IC) engine or use of
electrochemical fuel cells (proton-membrane exchange fuel cell [PMEFC]) which, in turn,
drives an electric motor. Hybrids of electric and combustion processes are also conceivable
– PMEFC with batteries, for example. It is important to note that hydrogen-based ICs and
PMEFCs have applications in local point-of-use generation of electricity. It’s conceivable that
ICs and PMEFCs could be used for hot water, lighting, and heating in residential and

18

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

commercial applications, as well. Studies of the energy efficiency of hydrogen (such as the
National Academies of Science’s The Hydrogen Economy) find that the hydrogen vehicles
would not substantially reduce total energy use per mile driven (the “wheels to wheels”
energy per mile driven) unless the hydrogen were produced from wind or solar power.
The Deep Blue scenario relies on nuclear power with high temperature electrolysis of water
to produce hydrogen, with electricity and heat generated from a nuclear reactor. Alternate
approaches include steam reforming of methane using process heat provided by a very-high
temperature nuclear reactor, or through a thermochemical cycles, such as the sulfur iodine
process. Steam reforming of methane is widely used in industry to make hydrogen today,
and this process is well established. Carbon release from steam reforming of methane would
compromise emissions gains through the use of nuclear power and is a potential
showstopper, though carbon capture is not inconceivable.
Beyond nuclear-based approaches that rely on steam reforming, several technologies are
envisioned for large-scale or central generation of hydrogen. Coal and natural gas
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) or natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) plants
could also serve as a heat source for steam reforming of methane – and for much smaller
hydrogen generation scales, solar PV or wind could be used for electrolysis. Of these
sources, only nuclear and renewable-based hydrogen production have a zero-carbon
footprint, and with the advent of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies, centralstation hydrogen production from coal or natural gas plants would have a carbon footprint
five to ten times smaller than that of gasoline. The price of hydrogen is highly dependent on
the way hydrogen would be produced and associated emissions from the generating source.
Thus, today, nuclear-based, as well as NGCC or IGCC with CCS, appear to be costcompetitive with gasoline, while the higher cost of electricity generated by renewable
sources is two to five times more expensive.
At best, hydrogen represents a long-term option. Significant technological and infrastructure
breakthroughs are needed before it’s considered viable. Significant improvement in the
energy density of hydrogen storage, reductions in fuel cell costs, increased lifetime and
reliability, as well as cost reductions in hydrogen production are needed. Safety is also an
important factor. Initially, transportation and distribution of hydrogen would entail transport
by truck to regional distribution centers, using compressed gas cylinders. Over time, the use
of hydrogen to fuel vehicles would require construction of infrastructure such as pipelines
and fueling stations.
To overcome some of the barriers to adoption of hydrogen fuel for PHEVs, New York State
would have to work with other states and the federal government to develop requirements
that drive the market toward new vehicle technologies. In the meantime, fuel efficiencies
and carbon reductions will be realized through improvements to conventional vehicle
technologies and greater market penetration of hybrid electric vehicles.

19

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Heavy duty vehicles
Trucks carry the bulk of freight transport. In New York State, 90 percent of commodities by
weight are moved by truck, while only 3 percent are moved by rail - a more efficient and
less GHG-intensive mode. Freight traffic is expected to grow significantly, with a
concomitant growth in VMT. More-efficient, less GHG-intensive modes of transport are
clearly needed. In general, there are two ways to reduce HDV emissions: directly reducing
truck emissions, and shifting freight from trucks to more efficient and less GHG-intensive
modes.
The factors that affect truck emissions and efficiency include (1) the nature of the fleet mix
(the size of the trucks), (2) the fuel-efficiency of the trucks, (3) the operating environment
(built environment, road conditions, traffic and congestion, etc.), (4) how trucks are
operated (speed and idling), (5) the nature of the cargo and truck loading (weight, density,
containerized vs. open-bed freight, etc.).
The mix of trucks and their patterns of use are extremely heterogeneous. Efforts to reduce
emissions should focus on the largest fuel consumers: tractor-trailers and straight trucks.
Tractor-trailer efficiency improvements should start with retrofits to reduce truck frame
drag. Estimates indicate that truck retrofit packages (such as aero-cab, front flaring, side
skirts, rear tail flaring, low rolling-resistance tires) can improve truck efficiency on the order
of 5-10%. Retrofit packages can be readily adopted for existing fleeting. (The Union of
Concerned Scientists offers information on green trucks. Scroll down that web page for a
link to a study by the technology firm TIAX, Heavy-Duty Truck Retrofit Technology:
Assessment and Regulatory Approach.)
In addition, future truck fleets will rely on advanced truck engine designs, such as hybridelectric engines, with an estimated efficiency increase of 7-9%. Adoption of new engine
technologies will take time, as the market is conservative and fleet turnover is much slower
than for LDVs: the median lifetime of a HDV is well over 20 years. This implies that the
penetration of a new technology will take significantly longer in the HDV market than in the
LDV market. Consideration should be given to policies that may speed adoption of new
technologies.
Biodiesel is the first advanced biofuel in large-scale commercial production. Biodiesel
produced from domestic soybean oil is assumed by the EPA to reduce GHG emissions by
57% compared to petroleum diesel fuel, and the EPA’s lifecycle analysis recognizes that the
GHG reduction could be as high as 85%. (See
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/420f10006.pdf.) In the US, biodiesel production is
now expanding rapidly (see
http://www.biodiesel.org/pdf_files/fuelfactsheets/Production_Graph_Slide.pdf). In 2005,
production was 75 million gallons; in 2007, 450 million gallons; in 2008, approximately 700
million gallons. By 2011, 1 billion gallons of biodiesel will be produced. An assessment of the
resource available to produce biodiesel indicates that feedstock available today could
produce more than 1.7 billion gallons per year.

20

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Intermodal
Convenience and cost are the key factors that determine the mode of transportation for the
shipment and distribution of goods. In New York State, the predominant method for
transport of freight is by truck, with up to 90% by weight shipped by truck. Truck
transportation is the most energy and GHG intensive modes of the movement of freight. A
key challenge to reducing GHG emissions in the transportation sector is then to reduce
emissions from truck transport of freight. This can be most readily accomplished by
reducing GHG emissions from trucks and/or shifting freight to other modes of transport with
lower emissions. New York State will have to investigate policy options to bring about modal
shifts. These would include:
•

Financial assistance to develop more efficient organization of supply-chains, including
advanced logistics capabilities and optimal positioning of trans-shipment points and
distribution centers.

•

Increasing fuel and economy standards for trucks, speed limit
reduction/enforcement, and development of anti-idling policies and electrification of
rest-stops.

•

The development and adoption of advanced technologies, particularly the
development of no or low net-carbon bio-diesel fuels and waste heat recovery
systems to power air conditioning/electronics.

•

Reducing congestion by increasing non-truck modes of transportation; provide
incentives and build infrastructure to encourage switching from truck to rail or water
transport.

Aviation
Emissions reductions in the aviation sector can come from advances in three areas:
improved efficiency through advances in technology, development, and adoption of suitable
bio-derived fuels, and improvements to operations and air traffic management.
Significant emissions reductions in the aviation system will come from new composite
materials that result in airframe weight reductions, as well as improvements to engine
design. For example, as much as 50% of the primary structure of the new Boeing
Dreamliner is made from advanced composite materials. Coupled with advanced engine
designs, this will increase fuel efficiency as much as 20% over similar sized aircraft, while
permitting air speeds characteristic of the fastest wide-bodies, mach 0.85.
The National Academies’ Airports Cooperative Research Program is examining alternatives
to fossil fuels, as is a coalition that includes the Federal Aviation Administration. Industry
interest in the subject is growing. Currently, new biofuels – “biojet” are being developed for
the military. This represents a significant opportunity for reduction of net carbon emissions

21

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

from the aviation sector if a sufficient supply of biofuels can be developed for wide-scale
adoption and use.
Changes to air traffic management are expected to lead to ~10% reductions in fuel use,
through better management of holding patterns, more efficient take-off and landing
trajectories, and minimization of suboptimal routes. Switching modes of travel can reduce
emissions, too. Many short-distance flights could be replaced by inter-city high-speed rail;
for example, between New York City and Albany, as well as Buffalo.

Serious Challenge: Electricity Supply
Electricity generation is currently among the largest sources of GHG emissions and is
projected to remain so under the BAU case. New York’s current electricity generation
system is a diverse mix of primary energy sources, with about 53% of net generated
electricity coming from fossil fuel-fired electric generating units. With a diverse resource mix
and a solid base in renewable energy, the state’s electric sector is expected to contribute
approximately 75.5 million tons of CO2e to the GHG emissions inventory in 2050
The electricity sector presents a serious challenge for a set of reasons:
o

All mitigation scenarios place increased demand on the electricity sector.
All three 80x50 scenarios assume total electricity demand in excess of 400,000 GWh, a
50% increase over the BAU case. This is typical of mitigation strategies – for example,
see the results of the Global Technology Strategy Project. The reasons are several. The
most important is that it is much easier and more cost effective to manage any residual
carbon emissions at a central electric generation facility than in highly distributed
sources like vehicles or buildings. In the 80x50 scenarios, energy demand is driven to
electricity by the almost complete conversion of the building sector to electricity, the
substitution of electricity for liquid fossil fuels as an energy carrier in the transportation
sector (most notably in the Yellow and Ultraviolet scenarios), and a general shift from
fossil fuels to electricity in the industrial sector.
The flexibility of electricity as an energy carrier has led to continued growth in its use.
The electricity sector has been well studied, and many technological improvements are
made every year. These improvements are quite important: efficiency improvements in
the conversion of energy stored in fossil fuels to electricity has a direct impact on the
capital cost of all electricity generation resources. Even more important, improvements
in the efficiency of end-uses of electrical energy reduce total demand for electricity. The
scenarios for each of the major end-uses begin with an assumption of large
improvements in end-use efficiency, ranging from 20-30%. Generally, it’s expected that
the electric generation sector could be decarbonized more easily than distributed uses of
energy could be.

22

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

Renewable resources within the state are not adequate to meet the challenge.
The major renewable sources of electric power that are carbon free are wind, solar, and
hydropower. With the exception of large hydroelectric facilities, these resources are
distributed: they collect a local resource. Moreover, in comparison with, for example, a
large thermal electric facility like coal or nuclear, they generate far less energy per unit
of land. The Yellow scenario includes practically all of the available renewable energy
resources in the state, and it includes only resources from within the state. The
renewables are over and above the renewable sources assumed to be integrated with
buildings.
Wind is a relatively mature technology, and it’s relatively easy to estimate how much
wind energy is available. The current analysis includes both on-shore and off-shore wind
resources. On-shore wind deployment is increasing around the world, but every
deployment faces challenges. The first is the actual siting of the turbines, which is often
resisted locally for aesthetic and environmental reasons. Second, wind is an intermittent
resource and places special demands on the grid, as discussed below. The scenarios are
fairly optimistic about success in siting turbines, and they assume wind power’s
straightforward integration into the grid (as estimated in a 2003 study). They also
assume that the current 873 GWh of wind can be expanded to 42,000 GWh by 2050,
meeting just over 10% of total projected demand.
Solar is a far less mature technology in terms of both efficiency of conversion and
experience with actual installation. The Yellow scenario assumes that 100,000 GWh of
demand will be met by grid-installed solar (~25% of 2050 demand); currently in New
York the value is zero. This makes the Yellow scenario quite aggressive in several
regards. First, this amount of solar energy requires a large amount of land, probably far
more than is commonly assumed. For the current generation of solar PV sited in New
York, it would take about 1% of the area of New York to generate 100,000 GWh of
electricity. Second, it requires a massive improvement in the ability to manufacture
photovoltaic (PV) devices. Most current solar technology is based on silicon, and despite
large increases in PV cell production, global consumption of silicon for solar applications
only recently passed consumption of silicon for semiconductor devices such as
computers. Without low-cost, mass production of solar cells on the scale of products like
paper or steel, large-scale deployment of solar energy is unlikely. Finally, solar, like
wind, is an intermittent resource with special requirement for integration with the grid.
New York has significant hydropower resources, thanks to Niagara/Horseshoe Falls and
the St. Lawrence Seaway. Further upgrades and expansions, with a small component of
new dams, could significantly increase electric output to the grid and reduce GHG
emissions. The Yellow scenario assumes that 10,300 GWh of hydropower will be added
to the 25,500 GWh, satisfying nearly 10% of projected 2050 electricity demand.

23

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

In summary, the relatively aggressive goals included in the Yellow scenario, which are
incorporated in the other two scenarios, meet less than 50% of projected 2050 demand,
and indeed in the future they may not be met. But other sources of renewable energy
might improve the prospects of success. The largest is probably offshore wind. In
addition, full-scale testing of kinetic, in-river hydropower applications is under way in the
East River and St. Lawrence River. These projects and maximum build-out were not
considered in our analysis, but they could add slightly to the total hydropower package
of emission reduction technologies and strategies.

o

Low carbon-emitting central generation options all entail serious issues.
The discussion of renewable electrical energy options above underscores the fact that
demand for central generation of electricity will continue. This demand must be met with
low-carbon or no-carbon conversion technologies. Currently in New York, large central
generation relies on fossil fuel and 42,500 GWh of nuclear power. Options considered in
detail in the scenarios are expanded use of nuclear generation and use of fossil fuels
with carbon capture and storage (CCS).
The future of nuclear power generation is uncertain, but nuclear power could satisfy a
good portion of a future electricity demand or hydrogen production demand (as
discussed above). All of the scenarios assume a continuation of the existing level of
nuclear power generation; each takes a different approach to nuclear. The Yellow
scenario meets the low-carbon generation option without expanding the current nuclear
fleet. The Deep Blue scenario assumes expansion of nuclear power generation by 2 new
plants that would generate 25,000 GWh, not counting the additional reactors required
for hydrogen generation. The Ultraviolet scenario expands the nuclear supply of electric
power by 118,000 GWh, meeting a total of 40% of 2050 electric demand with nuclear
power, comparable to the amount planned by Japan.
The scenarios do not speak to the resolution of specific issues associated with nuclear
power. Expanding nuclear power will require substantial capital investments and federal
loan guarantees. It would require investment in scientific research into and technological
advances in alternative fuel cycles and nuclear waste management. It would require
public acceptance of license renewals for existing nuclear power plants, expansion of
current plants, and siting of new plants.
Fossil fuel combustion with CCS is a significant component of all three scenarios,
accounting for 190,000 GWh of energy in the Yellow scenario, 170,000 GWh in Deep
Blue, and 70,000 GWh in Ultraviolet. Both coal (IGCC) and natural gas are included in
differing amounts in the scenarios. While important in implementation, the fuel choice is
non-substantive in comparison with other challenges associated with CCS. They include
efficiency of capture and storage, establishment of storage reservoirs, and construction
of infrastructure to transport CO2 from its point of generation to the point of storage.
Notably, CCS is not yet commercially available and in fact has not yet been successfully

24

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

demonstrated on a commercial scale. Moreover, the regulatory scheme that would
govern it remains to be defined, and the capacity for large scale CCS in New York is not
presently known.
Probably the most important CCS challenge is efficiency of capture and storage. The
scenarios assume a capture efficiency of 90%, with the electricity sector contributing 24,
13, and 10 MMT CO2e for the Yellow, Deep Blue, and Ultraviolet scenarios respectively.
For the latter two scenarios, which do meet the 80x50 goal, CCS still produces 20-25%
of total emissions. The improvement of CCS technology to, for example, 99% would
significantly reduce emissions.
Storage and transport of CO2 present closely related issues. The capacity to store CO2 is
not homogeneously distributed throughout the state. Further, little is yet known about
the suitability and capacity of those sites to store CO2. There will be a trade-off between
siting of generation sources and siting storage facilities. Certainly, concentrating
emissions sources near large-capacity storage reservoirs would simplify implementation
and reduce costs. But it could also further increase the burden on the grid. NYSERDA’s
studies of New York’s potential for CCS are important to defining the long-term
potential.
Finally, it should be noted that as 2050 approaches, nuclear fusion may become a viable
zero-carbon source of electricity. The scenarios assume it won’t be sufficiently well
developed to meet energy demand in 2050, but as the State looks beyond its 2050
target to continuing emissions reductions, this technology may be important. Decisions
made between now and 2050 can impact its availability in the long run.

o

Infrastructure for electricity transmission and distribution must evolve to meet demand
and other services the grid must provide.
Fortunately, growing demand for electricity is accompanied by substantial research into
and development and deployment of new technologies, which are shaping the grid of the
21st century – and at a time when capital improvements to New York’s aging grid
infrastructure are needed. The smart grid will deliver substantial benefits: greater
reliability, enhanced security, “smarter” use of information technology, integration of
renewable power generation, better storage technology, and sophisticated demandmanagement strategies. The ability to manage demand can yield another benefit:
avoidance of the huge costs of building more power-generating plants.
The 80x50 scenarios assume three significant demands on the grid. One is the need for
increased capacity to carry energy. The capacity increases can be met in two ways. The
most straightforward is to install higher-capacity transmissions lines and to increase
capacity through upgrades to substations, transformers, and distribution lines. Since all
three scenarios call for a 50% improvement in transmission and distribution (T&D)
efficiency (which contributes as much to emission reductions as all of the hydro

25

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

enhancements), the upgrades will both increase capacity and reduce T&D losses.
Another method is changing from conventional T&D lines to high-temperature
superconductors. This technology both increases capacity and decreases losses, and it’s
already employed in two locations in New York State. However, it’s complex to
manufacture, and manufacturing capabilities must be radically scaled up and costs
shrunk before it can be widely deployed.
The second demand on the grid arises from reliance on large amounts of solar and wind:
their intermittency must be managed and compensated for. As intermittent loads grow,
this becomes a larger and larger problem. In general, the approach been viewed as a
question of “what do you do when the sun goes down, or the wind stops blowing?” This
implies the availability of a backup energy resource. Because baseload power from
thermal resources (nuclear and fossil with CCS) performs best if it operates
continuously, increasingly the view is that energy storage might be the best option for
intermittent sources.
Hydro resources have some limited storage capacity, allowing their output to be
increased when demand grows. However, without “high” dams like those in western US
states, this storage is limited. NYSERDA is studying the potential of below- ground
compressed air storage potential in New York. The next step is to introduce storage
technology, such as batteries, or in the long run, superconducting magnetic energy
storage (SMES). This kind of storage has the added value of serving as a convenient
means of helping to manage transients in the system, as well. Managing storage to
compensate for intermittency will be greatly enhanced by incorporating information
technology into the smart grid.
The smart grid also facilitates another strategy for managing intermittency: demand
response, in which loss of generation is compensated for by a sophisticated demandreduction strategy that targets flexible and non-essential loads, shutting them off for a
short period of time. These loads can be at the commercial and industrial level, but
recent and ongoing demonstrations also show success in the residential sector through
use of smart meters and smart appliances.
Finally, the changing mix of end uses on the demand side will alter the temporal demand
for electricity on time scales ranging from daily to seasonal. In general, this is a design
and load-dispatch problem. What generation resources do you bring on, when, to
minimize the cost of generation? To satisfy peaks in demand with the more-expensive
generation resources and, through pricing strategies, encourage end-users to not use
resources during peak demand periods? Switching of peaks among seasons, from
summer peaking to winter peaking, for example, can create resource mismatches for
resources that may have a strong seasonal variability, such as hydro and solar.
The scenarios assume the largest new demand will come through vehicle electrification.
Studies have shown that smart electronics in, for example, PHEVs can manage that
demand to fill in periods of otherwise lower demand. This allows baseload plants to

26

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

operate more or less continuously, with consequent greater efficiency. Charging the
PHEV “appliance” can also become part of the demand-response network used to
manage intermittency – another benefit of the emerging smart grid.

Challenge: The Building Sector – Residential & Commercial
A critical challenge to reaching the 80x50 goal is in the performance of residential and
commercial buildings. Reaching mid-century GHG reduction goals will require that buildings
function with minimal or no net-energy input (input from the electric grid or from onsite use
of high-carbon fuels). New residential, commercial and industrial building systems will need
to significantly reduce, and eventually eliminate, onsite fossil fuel combustion for space
heating, water heating, cooking, and other needs, and supply electricity through onsite
generation from low-carbon energy sources.

The strategy suggested in this vision requires that buildings function with minimal or no netenergy input from onsite use of high-carbon fuels and that to the extent possible their
energy demand not be shifted to the grid.. These new residential, commercial and industrial
building systems will reduce, and eventually eliminate, onsite fossil fuel combustion for
space heating, water heating, cooking, and other needs, and will supply electricity through
onsite generation from low-carbon energy sources.

The relationship of the building sector to other sectors is a critical aspect of the 80x50
challenge. These relationships fall within four broad areas:
o

End uses: Residential and commercial buildings represent a growing sector of energy
demand. This demand is a central part of the standard of living we enjoy. An
example is the growing use of personal electronics in residences and the
development of large datacenters that support the new internet enabled economy,
particularly the global financial industry based in New York. The critical first step in
any carbon reduction strategy will be increasing the end use efficiency of the
equipment and devices within structures. Reductions of 30% in each electricity and
natural gas use is rather straightforward through the adoption of more efficient enduse technologies, such as more efficient lighting, space heating/cooling, water
heating, computers, and televisions – as well as through the use of modern controls.

o

Structures – A substantial component of the energy demand in the buildings sector is
for space conditioning. End use efficiency has an important impact on this demand,
particularly in the commercial sector where the cooling demand created by waste
heat from devices and equipment. In New York the challenge of structures is
exacerbated by the fact that much of the building infrastructure already exists. This
will lead to important challenges in improvements of the performance of building

27

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

envelopes and the creation of cost effective retro-fit options for key building systems
such as windows and increased sealing and insulation.
o

Distributed generation – One real option for building is the promise of distributed
generation. The use of both photovoltaics and passive solar heating as well as the
exploitation of geothermal resources through such technologies as ground source
heat pumps offers real promise. The greater the contribution of these technologies to
both efficiency and meeting electric demand the less the buildings sector will
contribute demand to the already growing burden on the grid. There are many
policies options that can help reduce the capital costs barrier could be strong
enablers of broader adoption of distributed generation technologies in residential and
commercial sectors.

o

Communities and the promise of smart growth – Probably the most important trend
will be the increased view of the buildings sector as a component of communities.
Many of the elements above are even more valuable when one considers collections
of structures and seeks to manage energy for these aggregations. Distributed
generation for communities can include wind and local biomass conversion for heat
and power. The community can become part of a micro-grid that not only effectively
manages the electric demand of the community but also can be the basis of using
the community as a dispatchable demand response resource for the wider grid.
Finally, if the communities take on the “smart growth” approach both in new
construction but also in re-development, the communities themselves can have
appositive impact on other sectors, most notably transportation.
There has been extensive work on energy efficiency in buildings, done by the World
Business Council on Sustainable Development, the National Academy of Science, the
Pew Center on Climate Change, and Lawrence Berkely National Laboratory, which
offer key data and insights to the energy savings potential. A difficulty in comparing
the energy efficiency potential across studies is the variation in methodologies and
measures within each of them. However, there are some common themes worth
noting.

28

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

BOTTOM-LINE ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
The scenarios that inform the visioning process can be further manipulated to yield more
insights into interrelationships among mitigation strategies for various sectors. But even at
present, and the benefit of insights and knowledge gained at the January 5 visioning
workshop and from yet other sources, it’s clear that major decisions are necessary to
achieve the 80x50 goal.
Many of those decisions must be made sooner rather than later, as they affect long-leadtime matters such as infrastructure investments and research and development strategies
that can help or hinder progress. Moreover, the early adoption of some measures won’t
preclude later adoption of others. Thus, identifying pivotal future decisions and sequencing
them becomes a serious challenge in its own right.
The text below discusses issues that follow from the discussion of serious challenges above,
and that emerged from the visioning process and other sources. Some concern single
economic sectors; some span two or more. While it can be difficult to differentiate technical
issues from policy issues, we’ve tried: the points immediately below are primarily technical
in nature; policy considerations follow.

Technical considerations
o

Gains in energy efficiency are critical to achieving a low-carbon future. The scenarios
don’t specify mechanisms, technologies, or practices necessary to achieve these gains,
but their importance is clear.

o

Very soon, a risk assessment table for critical technologies, such as CCS, nuclear, and
solar, should to be developed. This table would highlight the barriers to and compare the
types of uncertainty associated with each technology, facilitating the identification of
both policy measures and research investments.

o

Electrification is an essential strategy, too, and a move to electrification is consistent
with the energy needs of a 21st-century economy based on information technology,
biotechnology and nanotechnology. If New York’s demand for electricity nearly doubles
by 2050, a number of issues arise. For one thing, electrification transcends selecting
non-carbon emitting central generation technologies and arranging for their siting and
financing. Demand on transmission and distribution systems will increase, too. This
means that ongoing planning for the smart grid and associated technologies must be
part of the Climate Action Plan strategy.
And growing demand will alter not only the amount of electricity needed but when
demand peaks, on timescales ranging from daily to annually. How the load duration
curve, one measure of changing demand, is managed will be an important part of the
smart grid. This may include the use of storage to facilitate handling of larger quantities

29

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

of intermittent renewable resources, and the use of active demand management
technologies like demand response.
o

Electrification of buildings could create a stranded asset in the gas distribution system.
The existing infrastructure for gas and its continued expansion may create a structural
barrier to the goal of reducing highly distributed point sources of GHG emissions. On the
other hand, pipelines moving CO2 from gas combustion facilities to storage reservoirs
may be co-located along rights of way, provided they are appropriately located.

o

All scenarios call for the phase-out of fossil fuel generation that free-vents carbon to the
atmosphere. The schedule for retiring or converting existing facilities thus becomes an
issue.

o

Similarly, existing nuclear power plants are on the critical path for a future that
continues to rely on nuclear power. These plants would have to be replaced or relicensed. If relicensed, it would probably be for a maximum of 20 years; they’d then be
replaced.

o

Nuclear and/or fossil fuel combustion with CCS, which is largely undemonstrated, are
important for decarbonization of centrally generated power. Both require long lead times
and large capital outlays. CCS also requires significant infrastructure for storage, which
will include site selection and certification as well as some pipeline infrastructure.
The regulatory scheme that would govern siting and operations of CCS facilities and
storage locations remains to be defined.

o

The transformation to a hydrogen economy would require a new infrastructure for
producing and delivering hydrogen to consumers. The development of gas-cooled, hightemperature nuclear reactors to produce hydrogen would require new plant designs,
which would require licensure. Safety regulations for transportation and storage of
hydrogen would also be needed.

o

In our scenarios we’ve included some technologies that are emerging but not yet
commercial, such as CCS. Others are unproven, such as large energy storage. We
omitted nuclear fusion, an unproven technology, and direct air capture of carbon
dioxide, which is speculative at this time. These all have theoretical potential to help
achieve the 80x50 goal, but the timeline for making changes requires technologies that
are in development today, and ready for deployment at scale within approximately a
decade. The current international roadmap for fusion would have the first demonstration
reactor online in about 2040.

o

The scenarios assume complete success; for example, total conversion of the building
sector to electricity, or to net-zero carbon emissions. Inevitably, there will be “leakage,”
which will place further limitations on emissions from other sectors or technologies.

30

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

Renewable resources play a major role in all three scenarios. But even with expected
gains in renewable energy technology efficiencies, the state’s renewable resources can’t
meet all of projected future energy needs. And, distributed resources used on a large
scale would require large tracts of land for solar arrays, wind farms, and biomass
cropping. The scenarios assume all renewable resources would come from within the
state. This is consistent with the State’s desire to develop its own resource and energy
industry. But out-of-state renewable resources could be used, too, and perhaps in some
cases more cheaply. Opening the market could take pressure off in-state only resources.

o

Sustainable biomass is a limited resource. What’s the best allocation for its use? Should
it be used for transportation (as in our scenarios), to heat buildings, or for power with
CCS, which could create a carbon sink?

o

The grid-installed solar electric assumption in the scenarios is quite optimistic and may
not be met without significant energy conversion improvements in photovoltaic panels
and systems. Distributed solar awaits gains in scalability, reductions in cost, and the
creation of large-scale installation capabilities. The scenarios don’t include some
renewable technologies that may be fungible and that could help reduce emissions, such
as geothermal and hydrokinetic energy sources.

o

The transportation sector is an extremely large, diffuse source of GHG emissions. All of
the scenarios largely call for eliminating gasoline and diesel as energy carriers and
replacing them with bio-fuels, hydrogen, or electricity. The sector is diverse, with each
of the subsectors – light duty vehicles (LDV), heavy duty vehicles (HDV), mass transit,
and aviation – having its own special needs. Key issues include these:
-- Transportation options create an infrastructure demand that must be accounted
for in planning. The current network of fueling stations for LDV and HDV is pervasive,
with one or more fueling station in virtually every community and neighborhood in
the state. Pushing vehicles to electricity adds demand to the distribution system,
while a hydrogen-based vehicle system would necessitate replacement of key
components of this extensive refueling network.
-- The specifics of how to reduce VMT aren’t addressed in the scenarios. They’re
important: e.g., reducing VMT means increased demand on and expansion of mass
transit, as well as potential impacts on community design, development, and
redevelopment.
-- Significant improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency are important to the mitigation
scenarios. Whether national standards will be sufficient to drive this change is
questionable.
o

The state’s residential and commercial sectors are a major source of emissions, and
the scenarios call for substantial improvements in energy efficiency and the source of
energy used for space conditioning, hot water, and cooking. At the January

31

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

workshop, the point was made that many building professionals have little concept of
how much buildings contribute to GHG emissions, and how little it costs to mitigate
them. New York City’s new Green Codes, a major effort commissioned by the Mayor
and City Council Speaker, may offer a useful guide for other cities in the state, for
starters.
But even if all building owners, managers, and tenants were committed to greening
the existing building stock, the workforce needed to install energy retrofits may not
be adequate to the job: training may be required, along with financing schemes that
facilitate retrofits.
o

All three scenarios assume use of distributed renewable energy in the building
sector. This resource is over and above transmission-connected resources accounted
for in the electricity sector. The Deep Blue and Ultraviolet scenarios call for the
residential sector and commercial sector to be zero emissions, not net-zero. If the
strategy evolves to a net-zero standard, other emissions not accounted for in the
scenarios will have to be offset.

o

Serious methodological questions must be addressed. For example, how well
understood are interconnections among complex physical systems—the networks of
energy inputs and feedback loops—that drive emissions? That link energy use and
water use? Should estimates of GHG emissions include embedded energy, which
produces emissions beyond the state’s borders? How far should lifecycle analyses
go?

o

With a goal of 51 MMT CO2e, even small sources of emissions become important.
Emissions reductions strategies for several sources (e.g. asphalt production, SF6
leakage, etc.) are not immediately clear. Work is needed to develop strategies for
management of emissions from all sources.

o

Interdependencies. The interdependencies, and consequent vulnerabilities, of
transportation, water, energy, and communication systems have direct
consequences for system performance and thus for climate change adaptation and
mitigation. System managers and operators must be helped to understand and
manage those interdependencies.

Policy considerations
o

Incipient policy conflicts and synergies. The Climate Action Plan has pervasive
ramifications for the state’s economy and social fabric. Many existing State policies
may facilitate or hinder achievement of the 80x50 goal. Policies made by other states
and the federal government can affect New York’s ability to pursue its chosen path.
For example interstate commerce (tourism, freight, and aviation) is shaped by
federal policy. Large-scale renewable energy involves significant land-use choices,

32

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

for siting of wind and solar facilities and use of biomass resources; local choices and
policies may affect the State’s ability to meet its renewables goals.
o

Policy gaps. What regulatory scheme will be required to cover the siting for CCS
facilities, pipelines, and storage sites, and the permitting of CCS operations? For gascooled, high-temperature nuclear reactors that would produce hydrogen? For new
technologies yet to emerge? Designing and implementing regulatory “infrastructure,”
so to speak, might be no small undertaking in its own right.

o

The need for partnering. Related to policy conflicts and synergies is the great need
for partnering among all levels of government and between the public and private
sectors, with regional collaboration being a point strongly urged at the January 5
workshop. The inclusiveness and openness already demonstrated by the NYS Climate
Action Council and the State’s many other climate and energy initiatives, including
the State’s aggressive partnering with local governments through the Climate Smart
Community Pledge, augurs well for this. Obviously, close partnering with the
business community will remain a long-term necessity.

o

Long-term consequences of near-term decisions, and lack of decisions. Decisions
made, and not made, about matters that require long lead times, such as major
infrastructure projects, and that have long-term consequences, such as land-use
policy and a commitment to CCS, cast long shadows into the future. Whatever the
choice of low-carbon sources of electricity (CCS, nuclear, solar) and of energy carrier
for transportation (electricity or hydrogen), the electricity sector must plan for the
expansion of the grid and improvement of transmission and distribution. Some early
actions, such as improving energy efficiency, have value regardless of other choices
made; others may have value only in relation to specific choices of technology, such
as development of CCS infrastructure. It’s important to remember that achieving a
low-carbon future requires a portfolio of actions, and that “easy” decisions aren’t
substitutes for hard ones.

o

The rate at which policies drive change matters to success. But this important factor
is difficult to manage. The Climate Action Council is working in a field in motion, as
technologies evolve, economic conditions change, and other parties, including the
federal government, make decisions that have consequences for New York.

o

Stranded capital investments. Practically all energy-related technologies require both
infrastructure and capital investment from the private sector, and those investments
are generally large. If they are foreclosed because of decisions that support the
80x50 goal before they’ve delivered a full return on investment or reached the end of
their useful lifetimes, the result will be stranded capital investments – both a major
hidden cost of carbon mitigation and a source of resistance to future change.

o

Investments by the State. The current performance of many technologies assumed
by the mitigation scenarios – such as PV, offshore wind, large-capacity/low-cost

33

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

batteries, PHEVs, CCS, zero-energy commercial buildings and LEDs – is inadequate
to meet the 80x50 goal. Those technologies will require investment to boost
performance. Sources like DOE-National Lab Roadmaps and the National Academies’
study, America’s Energy Future, identify step-function improvements in technology
and major investments in infrastructure needed to achieve a low-carbon economy.
o

Motivating change. The scenarios make no explicit assumptions about individual
behavior. How to motivate individuals to modify their energy consumption and
patterns of use, drew considerable interest at the January workshop, and warrants
the attention the State Climate Action Council.

34

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

CODA
Insidiously, carbon emissions are cumulative: they persist in the atmosphere for up to
thousands of years. This means that as levels of emissions grow, reducing them to levels
deemed acceptable becomes ever harder. And because New York is already more energyefficient than most states, reducing emissions from what is already a low baseline is harder,
still.
Against this physical reality, the momentum of business as usual is not to be
underestimated: it’s one of the most powerful forces in the world. And yet, the nature of
business as usual continually evolves. The “installed base” of current energy technologies
represents trillions of dollars in sunk costs and powerful special interests. Fossil fuels are
cheap, abundant, and convenient. Options for scaling up alternatives to them, affordably,
are not yet in hand. Yet history tells us that technologies, and markets, continue to change.
The brutal realities of fiscal deficits are certain to constrain important efforts to achieve the
80x50 goal. And yet they also make the very real economic opportunities generated by that
goal even more compelling.
Notably, the assets and advantages that the State enjoys can be game-changers, too.
Executive Order 24 is soundly and sensibly conceived. The Climate Action Council’s
approach to its task is exemplary. It enjoys the benefit of committed top-down leadership;
many motivated state employees who possess technical expertise, policy savvy, and insight
into how government and the political system work; a broad-spectrum approach that
engages a large number of committed stakeholders in the NGO and private sectors; and a
deep commitment to achieving environmental justice.
Crucially, the Council is rapidly gaining insight into the staggering magnitude of the
challenge it has been tasked to address and the nature of the strategies it can employ.
Over coming decades, New Yorkers – long celebrated for being tough, resourceful, and
creative – may well prove to be the equal of the 80x50 challenge. Every megaton of GHG
emissions avoided will be a gain, and the societal and economic transformation achieved in
vigorous pursuit of sustainability will create a future for our children and grandchildren and
generations beyond that is better than the present we inhabit.

35

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

APPENDIX A
Supplemental Information on Methodology & Data Sources
for the Baseline Forecast of Energy Demand
and the “Business as Usual” Case
The input to the macro coupled-sector modeling is the baseline projection for energy
demand by sector and fuel type in 2050. These values were estimated by a constant growth
(% per year) extension of the modeling conducted in the development of the New York
State Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and Forecast for the 2009 State Energy Plan,
which estimated the GHG emissions by sector and fuel type to 2025.
Forecasts of petroleum and coal use for residential, commercial, industrial, and non-highway
transport sectors were based on U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) forecasts for
Mid-Atlantic fuel demand, along with natural gas projections provided by Energy and
Environmental Analysis, Inc. (ref: Energy Demand and Price Forecast, 2009 State Energy
Plan).
Forecasts for fuel use for the electricity sector and net imports of electricity were based on
output from ICF International's Integrated Planning Model® (IPM), an electricity sector
modeling software used to support the development of the 2009 State Energy Plan. Energy
demand by sector and fuel type was modeled to 2025. From 2025 to 2050, a constant
annual rate of growth or decline was assumed. In addition, emissions projections for 2025
and 2050 are also estimated and presented in Table 2 above. These projections include
estimated emission reductions due to RGGI and partial implementation of New York's 15x15
energy efficiency goal.
Forecasts of NYS vehicle miles of travel (VMT) were estimated from historical NYS
Department of Transportation VMT data (https://www.nysdot.gov/divisions/policy-andstrategy/darb/dai-unit/ttss/repository/vmt_0.pdf). NYDOT estimates that VMT will continue
to grow at a 1.1% per year growth rate out to 2030, and is assumed to grow at this pace to
2050. The annual rate of growth of VMT was 2.5% between 1975 and 1990, and 1.7%
between 1990 and 2005 (See Strategies for a New Age: New York State’s Transportation
Master Plan for 2030.) On-highway diesel and gasoline fuel use was based on NYS VMT
along with the Department of Energy’s Energy Information Agency-projected vehicle
economy, and was the basis the estimate of emissions from the transportation sector.
Finally, non-fuel combustion GHG emission forecasts for the industrial sector were based on
the projected growth of New York industries. These forecasts were created using Policy
Insight® version 8.0, macroeconomic modeling software from Regional Economic Models
Inc. Estimates for emissions from hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerant substitutes are scaled
from EPA projections for national emissions by New York State’s relative use of air
conditioning, refrigerators, and freezers. Emissions from electricity transmission and
distribution were assumed to continue to decline, following the long-term historical trend.

36

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

A more detailed explanation of the forecasting methods can be found in the NYS State
Energy Plan Energy Demand and Price Forecast Assessment. GHG emission forecasts are in
large part based on these energy-use forecasts. A more detailed explanation of the sources
and methodologies for GHG emissions can be found in the New York State Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Inventory and Forecast for the 2009 State Energy Plan.

37

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Appendix B

GHG Emissions Scenario Assumptions
Sector

Transportation

Electricity

Yellow

Deep Blue

Ultraviolet

Smart growth reduces VMT Demand 10% for LDV
Fleet mix composed of CV/HEV/PHEV* = 30/30/40
CV reaches 37 mpg; HEV miles at 50mpg
95% of VMT for PHEV are all-electric
50% of HDV miles switch to freight transport by rail
30% efficiency gains in aviation

Smart growth reduces VMT demand 40% for LDV
100% of VMT for LDV from hydrogen (nuclear-based) @65
mpg equivalent
50% HDV VMT switch to freight transport to rail; 40% of
balance of miles from biodiesel
30% efficiency gains in aviation, 50% reduction of aviation
emissions from biofuel

Smart growth reduces VMT demand 40% for LDV
95% of VMT from LDV are all-electric miles
Balance of LDV VMT 50 mpg with in-state E85/biodiesel
50% HDV VMT switch to freight transport to rail
30% efficiency in aviation sector; 50% reduction of aviation
emissions from biofuel

~51.3 MMT CO2e

~15 MMT CO2e

~20 MMT CO2e

25% electricity efficiency in Residential
25% electricity efficiency in Commercial
10% electricity efficiency in Industrial
Minimize combustion; what is left switches to IGCC, NGCC
w/ CCS
Max hydro, wind
No new nuclear
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY

Significant efficiency gains as in Yellow Scenario
Eliminate all combustion
Maximize hydro
30% from carbon-free (nuclear [+2 new plants producing
25K GWh] + hydro)
30% from renewables (utility-scale solar (100,000 GWh),
max wind)
40% from NGCC and CCS (@90%)
H2 via electrolysis of high-temperature steam using high-T
gas-cooled reactors (5-8 plants)
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY

Significant efficiency gains as in Yellow Scenario
Maximize hydro, max wind
35% from carbon-free (nuclear [15 new nuclear plants; 24
total], max hydro)
35% from renewables (utility scale solar (100,000 GWh),
wind)
17% from NGCC and CCS (@90%)
35%- 40% energy demand in Res./Comm from local solar
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY
~10 MMT CO2e

~24 MMT CO2e
~13 MMT CO2e

Residential

Commercial

20% efficiency gains in energy demand for heat/hot water
10% of electricity needs met from local solar
Reduce combustion by 70-80%

30% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
50% delivered gas/liquid fuels from biomass
40% of balance of energy demand left met by local solar
generation
Balance to energy demand from grid

50% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate all combustion of gas, oil
40% of balance of energy demand met by local solar PV

~7.5 MMT CO2e
Reduce natural gas/oil combustion by 75%
10% of electricity needs met from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

ZERO MMT CO2e
20%-30% efficiency gains
50% delivered liquids fuels from biomass
~30% of electricity demand from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

ZERO MMT CO2e
20%-30% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate all combustion of gas, oil
~ 50% of energy demand from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

~4.5 MMT CO2e

ZERO MMT CO2e

ZERO MMT CO2e

38

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Industrial

Other

Eliminate all coke/coal use
Reduce natural gas/oil combustion by 50%
Switch coke/coal to natural gas
Balance of energy need shifted to electricity

20%-40% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate natural gas, oil combustion
Eliminate coke at cement/boilers; switch to natural gas
Residual of emissions from asphalt, petrochemical, other
(8.4 MMT)

20%-40% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate natural gas, oil combustion
Eliminate coke at cement/boilers; switch to natural gas
Residual of emissions from asphalt, petrochemical, other
(8.4 MMT)

~14 MMT CO2e

~13MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

~13MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
50% reduction in line leaks in natural gas
RRR policy
Eliminate HFC leaks
Reduce process CO2

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
Eliminate hydrofluorocarbon emissions
Eliminate 90% line leaks in natural gas
RRR policy to eliminate 100% municipal methane/waste
emissions
Eliminate HFC emissions

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
Eliminate hydrofluorocarbon emissions
Eliminate 90% line leaks in natural gas
RRR Policy to eliminate 100% municipal methane/waste
emissions
Eliminate HFC emissions

~12 MMT CO2e

~12 MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

~12 MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

CV = Conventional Vehicle; HEV = Hybrid Electric Vehicle; PHEV = Plug-in Electric Hybrid Vehicle; LDV = Light Duty Vehicle; HDV = Heavy Duty Vehicle; VMT = Vehicle Miles Travelled;
MMT CO2e = Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

39

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

40

October 1, 2010



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix F
2050 Visioning:
Brookhaven National Laboratory Report
As part of its climate action planning, the state of New York is unique in undertaking a visioning
process to assist the long-range goal of reducing greenhouse gas emission 80 percent below the
levels emitted in 1990 by the year 2050. To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the
radical, long-term changes required to achieve the 80 by 50 goal, the Council and its technical
work groups and panel — indeed, decision makers at many levels — must be able to imagine the
kind of low-carbon clean energy future toward which they are working.
An initial step in that visioning process was a conference held January 5, 2009, Envisioning a
Low-Carbon Clean Energy Economy in New York. The conference, organized by the New York
Academy of Sciences, Brookhaven National Laboratory, the New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority, and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, involved members of the Climate Action Council, the Integration Advisory Panel,
and the Technical Work Groups.
Led by subject matter experts, the participants in the workshop explored innovative strategies for
meeting the State’s energy needs, reducing energy demand, managing greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, driving technological change, and creating economic opportunities for “green-tech” in
New York. The workshop considered specific scenarios that outlined possible pathways to
reducing GHG emissions. The purpose was not to validate a particular pathway, but rather to
explore possibilities and their implications, as well as to identify obstacles to achieving the goal.
The January conference led to the creation of the report, Envisioning a Low-Carbon Clean
Energy Economy in New York, produced by Brookhaven National Laboratory and appended here
in its entirety and keeping its original pagination.

F-1



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State
_________________________________________________________

A white paper submitted to the
New York State Climate Action Council
by Gerry Stokes and Patrick Looney
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
October 1, 2010

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Contents

Important note to readers

1

Summary

2

The Broad Context for This Paper

4

The Approach to Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050

6

Three Scenarios for 2050

8

Serious Challenges Posed by the Low-Carbon Goal

15

Bottom-Line Issues and Considerations

27

Coda

33

Appendixes

34

Supplemental Information on Methodology & Data Sources
GHG Emissions Scenario Assumptions

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

.

Important note to readers:
This is the first complete draft of a paper designed to inform the NYS Climate Action
Council’s work to develop a State Climate Action Plan.
The Council’s mandate is uncommonly broad in scope. It has a planning horizon far longer
than what most planners address. It entails large uncertainties. No clear precedent for an
enterprise of this scope exists.
Consequently, this draft paper is necessarily provisional. As the planning process proceeds,
the paper will be revised, and it will steadily gain in value as fresh insights are acquired and
the knowledge base it draws from expands.
One feature of this paper is a description of three scenarios that illustrate different versions
of a low-carbon 2050 future for the state. It’s important that readers understand that these
scenarios are offered for illustrative purposes only. In no sense do they constitute the
elements of a plan, and indeed even a casual review of them reveals that there is no way in
which they could be fashioned into a plan. Rather, they’re intended to facilitate and provoke
thinking about the future.
We hope other parties will generate their own 80x50 scenarios and share them. The ability
to imagine a sustainable future, model it rigorously, and explore it is as vital to achieving
that future as the clean-energy technologies, best management practices, and behavioral
changes that must be developed, advanced, and adopted.

1

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

SUMMARY

The State of New York aims to reduce state greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to 80% below
1990 levels by 2050. The fact that the state is already more energy efficient than most
other states makes this goal particularly ambitious. A State Climate Action Council is
charged with developing a draft Climate Action Plan by November, 2010. Toward this end, it
has organized technical work groups and an integration advisory panel of stakeholders and
experts.
To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the radical, long-term changes required to
achieve the 80x50 goal, the Council and its team must be able to imagine the kind of lowcarbon future toward which they are working. To facilitate this, the Council also formed a
2050 Visioning Advisory Panel. Comprising experts from many fields, that panel was
convened at a workshop held on January 5, 2010.
This draft visioning paper draws from insights and knowledge shared at that workshop, and
from other expert sources. It also draws from three GHG mitigation scenarios for 2050 that
we developed for the workshop to illuminate how a low-carbon future might be achieved,
and what it would mean. Making assumptions about future energy demand, patterns of
energy use, the technologies that might be available to supply needed energy with reduced
emissions, and what their levels of performance might be, we estimated emissions for each
major sector of the state’s economy. We found that reaching the 80x50 goal is challenging
and that modeling required aggressive assumptions.
Together, the workshop, scenario development, and the crafting of this visioning paper
constitute a “visioning process.” Its focus has been manifold: an examination of
technologies that might prove scalable and those that might be dead ends, of technical
issues that require assessment, of policies that favor or constrain GHG reductions, and of
management and societal changes needed to reduce emissions.
While the state’s energy future cannot be predicted, some points are already clear, among
them, these:
o

Reducing emissions is imperative because atmospheric levels of GHGs are already
perilously high, and emissions are cumulative – and there are real costs associated
with inaction.

o

The 80x50 goal is ambitious, and achieving it will require investments in new energy
systems and infrastructure that have very low or no net carbon emissions. Patterns
of energy use will also need to change.

o

Energy efficiency is an essential, but not sufficient, strategy that can be aggressively
pursued today.

2

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

A broad shift from reliance on burning fossil fuels to electricity generated from lowor no-carbon sources, or widespread use of carbon capture and sequestration, will be
needed.

o

Transportation and buildings (residential and commercial) will have to move away
from reliance on combustion of fossil fuels to alternate sources with significantly
lower carbon or no carbon emissions.

o

Development and redevelopment based on smart growth principles, as well as the
building design practices, building technologies, and construction methods can
significantly reduce the energy demand for buildings, as well as transportation.

o

Incremental, short-term planning cannot achieve the goal. Near-term decisions –
both those taken and not taken – can preclude longer-term options, such as
infrastructure projects requiring long lead times. Key climate strategies must reflect
this inexorable reality.

o

The goal must be pursued in part through extensive, long-term partnering among all
levels of government and across the region, and between the public and private
sectors. It will take sustained effort on the part of all.

3

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THE BROAD CONTEXT FOR THIS PAPER
In the face of climate change, the stakes are so high, the challenge so immense, and the
opportunities so richly promising that business as usual and conventional wisdom are
themselves risky. Innovation is imperative — not only in technology but in ways of thinking,
working, and living.
In fact, what’s demanded transcends “innovation”: transforming an entire economy from
largely carbon-based energy sources to largely carbon-neutral sources in a scant 40 years
will be a true revolution, a radical shift that can renew New York’s economy, enhance its
natural environment, and improve its citizens’ quality of life for generations to come.
For this revolution to succeed, institutions must be mobilized, businesses must adapt or fail,
and individuals, families, and communities must make better-informed energy choices. And
all of this change must be scaled up massively and rapidly.

The 80x50 challenge
Recognizing the benefits of action and the risks of inaction, in August 2009 the Governor
signed Executive Order 24, which tasks the State to reduce GHG emissions from all sources
within the state to a level 80% below the 1990 level by 2050. It establishes a Climate
Action Council that is to develop a Climate Action Plan to achieve that goal, taking into
account economic and other considerations. The plan is to be drafted by November, 2010.
The Council will hold public comment hearings on the draft and after reviewing comments
prepare a final plan.
That plan will be reviewed annually and revised as appropriate. The Executive Order says it
“is not intended to be static, but rather a dynamic and continually evolving strategy to
assess and achieve the goal of sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.”
To advance and inform its work, the Council has convened stakeholders from New York, as
well as experts from New York and beyond, and organized them into technical work groups
and an integration advisory panel. Working in support of the Council and these groups is the
Center for Climate Strategies. The Council’s comprehensive web site offers detailed
information about its work, and it links to the New York Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Inventory and Forecast. Readers unfamiliar with the Council are urged to consult the site for
essential information that complements this paper.

How visioning contributes to the Council’s work
To develop a plan capable of setting in motion the radical, long-term changes required to
achieve the 80x50 goal, the Council and its technical work groups and panel must be able to
imagine the kind of low-carbon clean energy future toward which they are working. To

4

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

facilitate this, a 2050 Visioning Advisory Panel comprising experts drawn from many fields
was convened at a January 5, 2010, workshop held at the New York Academy of Sciences.
At the workshop, the experts made presentations and responded to concerns and questions
from the floor. (The link above leads to a link to a webinar of the workshop, the slides
speakers showed, and the agenda.)
This draft paper draws from insights and information shared at the January workshop. It
also draws from many other expert sources, such as reports from the National Academies of
Science. And it draws from three GHG mitigation scenarios for 2050 that we developed for
the workshop, described below. Together, the workshop, the development of scenarios, and
the crafting of this visioning paper constitute what may be termed a “visioning process.”
The focus of the process has been manifold: an examination of technologies that might
prove scalable and of those that might be dead ends, of technical issues that must be
addressed, of policies that favor or constrain GHG reductions, and of management and
societal changes needed to reduce emissions. Of course, policies that favor GHG reductions
must be implementable. But for a time horizon so far distant, at this early stage, technical
feasibility and cost considerations can be considered only in broad-brush terms. This paper
treats them accordingly.
Our scenarios suggest that, in concept, the 80x50 goal is technically possible. The overall
visioning process makes clear that incremental, short-term planning alone cannot meet the
goal and that even a sophisticated long-term approach must surmount serious challenges.
This in turn underscores how important it is that climate change vulnerability analyses and
adaptation planning proceed on equal footing with mitigation efforts.
But the scenarios reveal a world of opportunities, too, that hold tremendous potential for
the state’s economy and its citizens’ well being.

5

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THE APPROACH TO ENVISIONING A LOW-CARBON 2050
The technical work groups that are contributing to development of the State’s Climate
Action Plan process are responsible for recommending specific strategies, policies, and
actions for the Council’s consideration. The visioning process, defined above, was designed
to complement their work. Scenarios are a uniquely valuable tool for this purpose. Scenarios
have been widely and routinely used, for many years, in many fields, as a tool for exploring
options and contingencies. The three scenarios we developed for the State’s January
visioning workshop investigated the technical feasibility of the 80x50 goal and identified
some technology options and best practices that could achieve the goal. The scenarios also
helped us identify some significant technical barriers and policy issues that might facilitate
or constrain those options.
To model and gain insight into possible futures, we “worked backward” from an imagined
mid-century New York that has far lower GHG emissions. Making assumptions about future
energy demand, patterns of energy use, what technologies might be available to supply
energy and reduce emissions and what their levels of performance might be, we estimated
emissions for each major sector of the economy, considering many interchangeable
elements that might be dictated by policy implementation, technology breakthroughs, or
market developments in the US and abroad.
The value of the scenarios is in providing a framework for thinking concretely about how
energy efficiency, new energy technologies, fuel switching, best practices, and other
matters might shape the path to a low-carbon future. Scenario modeling can also provide
insight into performance levels for new energy technologies such as plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles (PHEVs), or emission-reduction technologies such as carbon capture and storage
(CCS).
All three of the 80x50 scenarios share important characteristics:
o

An end state is postulated for each major energy-consuming sector of the economy:
Transportation, Electricity Production and Distribution, Residential Buildings,
Commercial Buildings, and Industrial. These end states are largely characterized by
their technological characteristics, such as low carbon-emitting central generation of
electricity, electric vehicles, and net-zero carbon emission buildings.

o

Next, the ramifications of these technology options are examined. For example, if the
state were to depend on hydrogen as a transportation fuel, how would the hydrogen
be produced? Similarly, if the goal is low-carbon electricity central generation, what
are the technology options for generating that power?

o

Finally, the resulting scenario is referenced to a projection of what the energy use
may be in absence of carbon abatement policies; that is, in the “business as usual
case” (BAU). This comparison illuminates, for example, the magnitude of energyefficiency gains that might be required, or the extent to which projected

6

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

transportation needs that light duty vehicles would otherwise meet could be met by
expanded mass transit instead.

7

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

THREE SCENARIOS FOR 2050
Models, assumptions, and limitations
The three scenarios were designed to answer these basic questions:
o

o

What are possible, illustrative scenarios in which NYS GHG emissions would be
~80% lower than the 1990 level of ~251.4 million metric tons (MMt) of CO2
equivalent (CO2e)? (a goal of about 51 MMt)
What are the implications of such scenarios?

To support the modeling exercise, a macro model of statewide GHG emissions was
developed. Data are presented in Table 1, below. Emissions data for 2007 are the most
recent available and are considered “current” for the purpose of this paper. NYSERDA
projects that 2025 annual GHG emissions will be 266 MMT CO2e, a relatively small increase
from current levels. The relative contributions of the various sectors remain unchanged,
except that the “Other Source” category (non-fuel combustion) is projected to surpass
residential emissions by 2025. (“BAU” is the “business as usual projection.”)

Table 1. Sector GHG Emissions for Select Years (in Million Metric Tons CO2e)
1990

2007

2025

2050

(actual)

(actual)

(forecast)

(BAU
Projection)

Transportation

72.9

88.4

93.4

114.3

Electric

64.5

49.2

42.9

75.5

Electric Imports

1.7

7.4

7.6

-

Residential

34.1

37.6

34.7

40.8

Commercial

26.8

27.3

30.1

35.4

Industrial

25.0

19.2

18.7

21.9

Other

26.5

28.7

38.5

39.0

TOTAL

251.4

257.7

266.0

326.6

Scenario modeling was a rigorous process that began by estimating the total energy
demand that might have to be met in 2050 in each sector. This was done by extrapolating
current forecasts and assuming modest growth in state GDP and hence energy demand.

8

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

These assumptions create the future “business as usual” (BAU) emissions scenario – the
case that perpetuates the path we are on. BAU energy demand projection estimates the
energy supply needed to support the state’s economy in 2050 given our current patterns of
transportation, energy use and efficiency.
The foundation of our scenario development is a state-level, coupled-sector macro model of
energy supply flows and corresponding (calculated) emissions for each sector of the
economy. In addition, possible reductions in non-energy related emissions (the “Other”,
non-energy related category) were estimated.

Table 2. Estimated Energy Demand by Sector
2007

2025

2050

(actual)

(forecast)

(BAU
Projection)

LDV/HDV VMT

136B Miles

170B Miles

224B Miles

Aviation

210 Mbtu

222 Mbtu

240 Mbtu

165,000 GWh

187,000 GWh

270,000 GWh

Residential

591Tbtu

629Tbtu

721Tbtu

Commercial

533Tbtu

557Tbtu

587Tbtu

Industrial

191 Tbtu

180 Tbtu

180Tbtu

Transportation

Electric

In the table above “LDV” means ‘light duty vehicle; “HDV” means “heavy duty vehicle;
“VMT” means “vehicle miles traveled.”

We then took the energy demand forecast for each sector, presented in Table 2, above, and
traced energy flows through each sector as primary energy (e.g., coal, biomass) and energy
carriers (e.g., gasoline, #2 and #6 oil, coal, etc.) would be used for such purposes as
creating electricity, heating homes, providing power for businesses and manufacturing
sectors, and fueling light duty and heavy duty vehicles. For each of those uses, we
calculated corresponding emissions. Fuel energy content and emissions factors for
combustion come from US EPA data tables.
Significantly, unlike conventional “wedge” models, which treat sectors as freestanding, the
coupled-sector model we employed reflects the fact that switching technologies in one
sector may raise or lower demand in another. For example, two scenarios (the “Yellow” and
“Ultraviolet”) depend on widespread use of PHEVs in the transportation sector, resulting in a

9

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

decrease in gasoline demand and an increase electricity demand; thus, primary energy
demand switches to the electricity sector.
A note of caution: The scenario modeling provides insights into how technologies and
patterns of energy use may have to change to meet emissions targets. But there are
limitations to using the scenarios. This sort of modeling is not a practical planning tool, as it
does not account for the crucial factor of scalability, or for economic, regulatory, and other
barriers to the implementation of any given technology, including the availability of the raw
material required. Nor does it take into account lifecycle analyses of nuclear power and
renewable energy technologies. The models also do not consider the future interaction
between a changing climate and energy use and impacts on the performance of different
technologies.
The models do include estimates of the performance of new and emerging energy
technologies for which the predicted development time scales are commensurate with the
State’s 40-year planning timeframe. Assumptions about the performance of new, emerging
energy technologies are based on credible estimates from available literature, though there
can be no guarantee that as-built systems will meet the estimated levels of performance, be
economically viable, or penetrate the market at rates needed to meet assumed levels.
A note on methodology and references: For more information on methodology and data
sources used in our modeling, please see Appendix A. For more detail on the scenarios, see
Appendix B.

Basic strategies for reducing emissions
Developing scenarios that illustrate potential approaches to meeting the 80x50 emissions
target of ~50 MMT CO2e requires recognition of the fact that those emissions result from
activities that power our society and our economy, providing food, shelter, heating and
cooling, communications, transportation, and innumerable other things essential to wellbeing. Cutting GHG emissions could have real-world consequences if low-carbon or nocarbon energy sources don’t adequately replace fossil sources.
The scenarios rely on four key strategies to reduce GHG emissions:
o

The simplest and the most cost-effective is energy conservation through energy
efficiency.

o

Reducing combustion from fossil fuels is another obvious strategy, as that
combustion accounts for about 87% of all GHG emissions in New York State, with the
largest fraction coming from the transportation sector (38%), followed by on-site
combustion in the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors (37%), and then
from electricity generation (22%). All scenarios assume that combustion of fossil
fuels should only be used when and where necessary, or where controls such as CCS

10

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

effectively limit emissions. Minimizing point sources of combustion such as vehicles
and use of oil and natural gas for heating, and switching to electricity, coupled with
simultaneously reducing the GHG footprint of the electricity supply, thus constitutes
the second strategy.
o

The third strategy is to drive fuel switching where combustion must still be used, as
in aviation and cement production, to minimize the GHG footprint.

o

Using local, point-of-use renewable energy technologies such as solar to reduce the
reliance of homes and businesses on centrally generated electricity is the fourth
strategy.

By varying these strategies and devising portfolios of energy technologies and practices that
could implement them, we created three scenarios that we named “Yellow,” “Deep Blue,”
and “Ultraviolet.” The Yellow scenario falls far short of the 80x50 goal; the other two
scenarios meet it, in different ways.

The Yellow scenario
The Yellow scenario does not meet the ~50 MMT CO2e GHG emissions challenge. It is
intended to be a “first cut” at reducing GHG emissions through increased efficiency: the
adoption of more efficient energy technologies that are largely available today, or will be
soon. This scenario assumes a significantly different mix of light-duty vehicles (LDV) in use
in 2050, with 30% being conventional internal combustion engines with an average of 37
mpg, 30% being hybrid electric vehicles (HEV) with an average of 50 mpg, and 40% being
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) with 95% all-electric miles. This produces a modest
increase in demand in the electricity sector of about 20,000 GWh. The use of intermodal
freight shipping is assumed to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) for HDV by about 30%.
In the electricity sector, it’s assumed that New York State wind and hydro-electric
generation will be built out to meet the maximum forecasts developed by NYSERDA, and
that there will be a very significant increase (up to 100,000 GWh) of utility-scale solar
electric generation or other renewable source such as off-shore wind. Where combustion is
used for electricity, a switch to higher-efficiency natural gas combustion turbine (NGCT) and
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power plants with CCS at 90% is assumed.
It’s also assumed that present levels of nuclear power generation can be maintained.
Transmission and distribution losses are reduced by 50% to an average of 4% for the entire
system. Residential, commercial, and industrial sectors reduce electricity demand via
Energy Star+ efficiency gains.
This scenario includes elimination of 75% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sector, with natural gas and liquid fuels replaced by electricity, some generated
on-site via solar (about 10% of the energy demand), and the balance generated at utility

11

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing fossil fuel combustion overall by 75%
and using only natural gas and #2 oil; coal is eliminated in favor of natural gas.
Reductions in non-energy emissions (the “Other” category) assume elimination of sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6) dielectric from the transmission and distribution grid. Per molecule, SF6
has the highest GHG warming potential, about 23,900 times that of CO2. Reducing natural
gas line leaks (by 50%), implementing a broad and aggressive reduce, reuse, and recycle
policy, and eliminating leaks of alternative refrigerants (hydroflourocarbons [HFCs]) would
reduce emissions from these sources significantly.
The Yellow scenario results in about 114 MMT CO2e emissions, a reduction of 55 percent
below the 1990 level. It thus falls far short of the 80x50 goal – a sobering fact, given how
much it differs from today’s energy patterns.

The Deep Blue scenario
The Deep Blue scenario meets the ~50 MMT CO2e GHG emissions challenge. It begins with
the efficiency savings outlined in the Yellow Scenario and then explores alternatives if fossil
fuel combustion in the residential and commercial sectors were to be eliminated, thereby
driving an increase in electricity demand. Some of the increased electricity demand is
assumed to be met with a larger fraction of point-of-use solar.
The Deep Blue scenario explores the impact of widespread adoption of hydrogen-powered
light-duty vehicles for 100% of the LDV VMT with an equivalent of 65 mpg. The scenario
assumes that hydrogen is produced through high-temperature steam electrolysis using gascooled high-temperature nuclear reactors. Because this approach employs a carbon-free
electricity source, emissions are minimized. The calculations suggest the need for ~5 to 7
GW of nuclear capability for electrolysis. Gas-cooled reactors are well known conceptually,
but significant technological and regulatory developments are needed. An alternative source
of electricity could involve the use of IGCC or natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) with CCS.
High-temperature steam electrolysis is an unproven technology at this time. The scenario
does not address infrastructure issues associated with the transformation to a hydrogenbased transportation system.
The scenario assumes that 100% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sectors is eliminated and that the use of natural gas and liquid fuels is replaced
by electricity, some generated onsite via solar (about 40% of the energy demand), the
balance generated at utility plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing fossil fuel
combustion overall by 75% and using only natural gas and #2 oil; coal is eliminated in favor
of natural gas. Importantly, 8.4 MMT of the 13 MMT in emissions in the industrial sector are
residual emissions from asphalt, petrochemical production, etc. It will be important to
devise methods for curbing emissions from asphalt production to make further reductions.

12

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Electricity demand is met from carbon-free sources, including 30% from nuclear (including 2
new plants that would increase nuclear power generation by 25,000 GWh, not counting the
additional reactors required for hydrogen generation), 30% from renewables (maximum
hydro, wind, and 100,000 GWh of solar), and 40% from NGCC plants with 90% CCS. It is
important to note that the emission levels from NGCC limit generation from this source
unless CCS is achievable at levels higher than 90%. This would make the future use of
natural gas or coal for the electricity sector dependent upon the viability of CCS for locations
and geologies within the state, and upon the amount of CO2 that can ultimately be stored.
In addition, the Deep Blue scenario assumes that emissions in aviation and the residential,
commercial, and industrial sectors could be significantly reduced through the use of instate, bio-derived oils for transportation (diesel), aviation (jet fuel), and heating. Given the
potential for reduced emissions in the aviation, residential, and commercial sectors – as well
as for HDV transportation – these replacement fuels warrant serious consideration, as do
studies of the feasibility of supplying bio-derived oils for fuel from within the state. At
present, net carbon emissions from these sources are assumed to be zero or close to zero,
as carbon emitted by combustion of the biofuel is offset by carbon sequestered by plants
grown to supply fuel. (See EPA’s 2009 U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Report.)
Further study regarding the total carbon cycle associated with the use of these fuels is
warranted to validate the emissions assumptions.
The Deep Blue scenario estimates emissions at 53 MMT. It thus achieves a 79 percent
reduction in GHG emissions below the 1990 level.

The Ultraviolet scenario
Another possible future was devised that would also meet an 80 percent reduction by 2050.
Like Deep Blue, the Ultraviolet scenario is much more aggressive than the Yellow scenario.
It too begins with the efficiency savings outlined in the Yellow scenario and explores
alternatives if fossil fuel combustion in the residential and commercial sectors were
eliminated, thereby driving an increase in electricity demand. A part of this electricity
demand is met through local, point-of-use solar.
The Ultraviolet scenario explores the impact of shifting to widespread use of PHEVs where
95% of VMT are all-electric miles, with 5% of VMT coming from bio-ethanol at 50 mpg. This
is an aggressive goal, well beyond current predictions for most studies of PHEV market
penetration and performance improvements through 2030. Significant increases in
electricity demand are postulated via elimination of fossil fuel combustion in the
transportation sector for LDV.
The scenario assumes that 100% of all fossil fuel combustion in the residential and
commercial sector is eliminated and that the use of natural gas and liquid fuels is replaced
by electricity, some generated onsite via solar (about 40% of the energy demand), the
balance being generated at utility plants. Industrial emissions are reduced by curtailing

13

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

fossil fuel combustion overall by 75% and only using natural gas and #2 oil; coal is
eliminated in favor of natural gas. As in the Deep Blue scenario, 8.4 MMT of the 13 MMT in
emissions in the industrial sector are residual emissions from asphalt, petrochemical
production, etc.
The significant increase in electricity demand is met largely with carbon-free sources: 35%
from nuclear (including ~10-12 new plants), 35% from renewables (maximum
hydroelectric, maximum on-shore wind, and 100,000 GWh of solar or other utility scale
renewable such as offshore wind), and 17% from NGCC plants with 90% CCS. This scenario
employs as much NGCC with CCS as is practical to meet overall emissions targets, thereby
requiring a larger fraction (and level) of carbon-free sources. They are assumed to be met
with new nuclear plants.
As with the Deep Blue scenario, this scenario relies on the use of low carbon-intensity bioderived fuels (in-state ethanol) to supply the liquid fuel needed for non-electric miles in the
LDV category, and on the use of biofuels in the aviation sector.
The Ultraviolet scenario estimates emission at 55MMT, a 78 percent reduction in GHG
emissions below the 1990 level.

14

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

SERIOUS CHALLENGES POSED BY THE LOW-CARBON GOAL
The scenarios, presentations, and discussion at the January 5 workshop illuminated issues
and challenges facing the Council. In particular three sectors – transportation, electricity
generation, and buildings – emerged as particularly challenging and significant. At present,
the transportation sector produces 34.3% of the state’s GHG inventory; electricity
generation, 19.1%; residential uses, 14.6%; commercial uses, 10.6%. The “business as
usual” (BAU) case for 2050 projects that the transportation sector will produce 35%;
electricity generation, 23.1%; residential, 12.5%; commercial, 10.8%; and industrial,
6.7%.
The text below discusses the challenges those sectors present.

Serious Challenge: Transportation
Mobility is essential to social and economic welfare. By all measures, New York is one of the
most mobile states in the nation. It has over 11 million licensed drivers, 10.5 million motor
vehicles – virtually all of them operating on fossil fuel, and joined by similar vehicles that
travel to New York from other states – and 113,000 miles of roads, along with 4,800 miles
of railroads, 18 commercial airports, and 495 public use and private airports. Ensuring a
safe, secure, reliable, efficient, low-carbon transportation system is vital to the state’s
future. (See Strategies for a New Age: New York State’s Master Transportation Plan for
2030.)
Today’s transportation systems are defined by technological, socioeconomic, land use, and
public policy factors. Transportation demand is growing, and patterns of travel are changing
and increasingly reliant on multiple, interdependent modes of transportation. Congestion in
urban areas is growing, and transportation systems in these areas are bounded by the built
environment. Over the next 40 years, the transportation system will have to support the
same or greater levels of mobility while lowering emissions dramatically. And the
importance of transportation security to national and economic security is expected to
increase.
Over the past three decades, tremendous growth in the transportation sector and the
decline in US oil production have made the US and New York increasingly dependent on
foreign supplies of petroleum. Today, about 60% of the oil consumed in the US is imported.
In New York, transportation accounts for about half of petroleum consumption, the
equivalent of about 300 million barrels per year, or about 4% of the US total. As the
potential for disruptions in world oil supply and production of refined petroleum products
increases, so does the risk of disruption to the state’s transportation system. Given
projected growth in demand for oil in emerging markets, notably China and India, the cost
of oil and the reliability of supply are important risk factors to consider.

15

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Within the transportation sector, road transport is the largest consumer of energy and the
largest source of emissions. The major contributors to emissions are light duty vehicles
(LDV), a category that includes automobiles, SUVs, motorcycles, and light trucks, and heavy
duty vehicles (HDV), which includes trucks for road freight as well as buses. After road
transportation, aviation is the next biggest contributor. Another important factor is the
impact of the design and construction of the local built environment on mobility and
patterns of use of available modes of transportation.
Addressing transportation requires a holistic look at all the factors that can improve
efficiency as well as reduce emissions. In general, approaches to transportation examine
(1) society’s future mobility needs, (2) the technical efficiency of a given mode of
transportation and the potential for improvements, (3) the effects of the operating
environment, and (4) the mix of transportation modalities and potential systems
performance improvements via changes in the mix of modalities.

Transportation and the built environment
The New York metropolitan area enjoys an extensive public transportation system that is
well integrated into the region. Some 4.8 million passengers use public transportation on a
daily basis. The high density of housing, proximity to public transportation, and its relative
ease of use contribute to this high level. Aspects of the region have attributes of “compact,
mixed-use development” – also known as “smart growth.”
In all of the mitigation scenarios, a significant reduction in projected VMT level for 2050
(240 billion miles) is assumed. The assumption is that smart growth can promote greater
reliance on public transportation and/or increase walking and bicycle travel. At the January
5 visioning workshop, success stories about smart growth in urban and suburban areas
were recounted – notably for Arlington, Virginia, and Portland, Oregon. They offer models
for New York’s suburbs and for cities other than New York City; for example, the corridors in
Long Island along the Long Island Railroad and major traffic arteries.
Over the 40-year horizon of the Climate Action Plan, many urban and suburban centers will
very likely be rebuilt or redeveloped. This will create opportunities to reshape the state’s
transportation system and its use – if transportation planning and redevelopment efforts are
approached holistically and use smart-growth practices. As redevelopment in urban and
suburban areas occurs, more compact, mixed-use development that includes higher
population and employment densities, competitive alternatives to automobile use such as
pedestrian and bicycle paths, street networks that provide connectivity between
destinations, and easy access to public transportation can all reduce residential and
commercial energy use, GHG emissions, and VMT.
A recent and comprehensive study by the Transportation Research Board of the National
Academies explores the impact of and correlation between driving behavior and the built
environment. It concludes that compact, mixed-use development can reduce VMT by

16

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

differing means and amounts depending on where the development in a region occurs. The
study reports that the literature suggests “that doubling residential density across a
metropolitan area might reduce VMT by about 5-12%, and perhaps as much as 25% if
coupled with higher employment concentrations, significant public transit improvements,
mixed uses, and other supportive demand management measures.” It also notes that more
study is needed to better understand the causal links between specific design elements in
land use, transportation pathways, high density housing, employment centers, and other
factors and reductions in VMT and increased use of public transportation.
To significantly reduce VMT would require changes in current practices and patterns of
development in suburban areas. In home-rule states like New York, land use is largely a
function of local governments, which can be reluctant to zone for higher-density housing
because local residents often resist it. Statewide change would require that state-level
policies be enhanced with incentives that encourage and support compact, mixed-use
developments that would result in greater energy efficiency, increased use of public
transportation, and reduced VMT and GHG emissions.
These efforts would be facilitated by communitywide design standards (the equivalent of
LEED certification); the development of partnerships among State and local governments
and private developers; tax incentives; coordinated State, federal, and local infrastructure
investments; coordination with regional transportation authorities and operators; and
rezoning to support appropriate transit development.

Light duty vehicles
In 2007 New York State residents drove over 140-billion VMT and consumed some 7.6
billion gallons of gasoline [EIA, Energy Consumption 2007], largely through the use of
personal vehicles. As our mitigation scenarios reveal, significant emission reductions are
possible in the transportation sector. The scenarios explore three alternative future vehicle
fleets: one a mix of conventional, hybrid, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs)
(Yellow scenario); one dominated by hydrogen vehicles (Deep Blue); and one dominated by
PHEVs (Ultraviolet). The latter two scenarios show that fuel switching will drive increased
demand for electricity production, either for vehicle re-charging or electrolysis of steam for
hydrogen production. Of course, emissions reductions would only be realized by the use of
nearly carbon-free electricity sources such as renewables, nuclear, or natural gas or coalfired plants with CCS.
What will it take for the US to realize 100% PHEV or 100% all-hydrogen powered cars on
the road in 2050? Significant changes to automobile technology, of course. However,
replacing New York’s entire fleet of automobiles will take time. The lifetime of a car is long;
the mean lifetime is about 15 years: half the cars sold today will still be on the road in 15
years, and it will take about 25 years for 95% of the autos sold today to be retired. (See the
ORNL Transportation Energy Data Book [2009 ORNL-6984]). Thus, to achieve a fleet

17

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

composed of 100% PHEV cars in 2050, 100% of the cars sold in 2025 and every year
thereafter would have to be PHEVs. The same case applies to hydrogen-fueled cars.
Another reason why changing the entire fleet will take time is that it takes time for
transportation equipment and automobile manufacturers to adopt new technology and
integrate it into their product lines and manufacturing processes. At present, automobile
models undergo a complete redesign approximately once every 8 years, and new designs
are locked in about 2 years in advance. Thus, it could take from 5-10 years for a new
automobile design to be brought to market, and another 25 years to completely change
over the fleet.
For PHEVs, this penetration rate is more aggressive than what experts are predicting. For
example, a recent study by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), Transitions to
Alternative Transportation Technologies – Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, concluded that
PHEVs are “unlikely to achieve cost effectiveness before 2040 at gasoline prices below $4.00
per gallon,” given the higher costs when compared to conventional vehicles. Further, the
NAS PHEV study concluded that “at a maximum practical rate, as many as 40 million PHEVs
could be on the road by 2030, but various factors (e.g., high cost of batteries, modest
gasoline savings, limited availability of places to plug in, competition from other vehicles,
etc.) are likely to keep the number low.”
PHEVs are scheduled to enter the US market in the 2011-2013 timeframe. They will have an
all-electric range of ~30-60 miles. For mass-market penetration, a greater all-electric range
of around 100 miles or more would be needed – underscoring the need to develop higher
performance battery technologies. Costs must come down, too. Drivers include electronic
controls, drive trains, and batteries. Lithium-ion battery technology has been developing
rapidly, though costs are still high and, according to the NAS study, expected to decline only
by about 35% by 2020. Further technology development will likely reduce costs below these
levels, as well as increase storage density and reliability, possibly by using alternative
chemistries to lithium ion batteries.
Other notable barriers include the need for suitable charging stations or battery exchange
facilities and consumer acceptance of PHEVs, especially if PHEVs cost more than similar
functioning hybrid electric vehicles and require daily (or more frequent) recharging.
Adoption of PHEVs by large vehicle fleets, such as federal, state, and local government
fleets, may be an appropriate first step to increase adoption, if costs are reasonable.
The Deep Blue scenario explores the potential impact of fuel switching from gasoline to
hydrogen for vehicles. Hydrogen vehicle technologies largely follow two paths: direct
burning of hydrogen in a suitably modified internal combustion (IC) engine or use of
electrochemical fuel cells (proton-membrane exchange fuel cell [PMEFC]) which, in turn,
drives an electric motor. Hybrids of electric and combustion processes are also conceivable
– PMEFC with batteries, for example. It is important to note that hydrogen-based ICs and
PMEFCs have applications in local point-of-use generation of electricity. It’s conceivable that
ICs and PMEFCs could be used for hot water, lighting, and heating in residential and

18

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

commercial applications, as well. Studies of the energy efficiency of hydrogen (such as the
National Academies of Science’s The Hydrogen Economy) find that the hydrogen vehicles
would not substantially reduce total energy use per mile driven (the “wheels to wheels”
energy per mile driven) unless the hydrogen were produced from wind or solar power.
The Deep Blue scenario relies on nuclear power with high temperature electrolysis of water
to produce hydrogen, with electricity and heat generated from a nuclear reactor. Alternate
approaches include steam reforming of methane using process heat provided by a very-high
temperature nuclear reactor, or through a thermochemical cycles, such as the sulfur iodine
process. Steam reforming of methane is widely used in industry to make hydrogen today,
and this process is well established. Carbon release from steam reforming of methane would
compromise emissions gains through the use of nuclear power and is a potential
showstopper, though carbon capture is not inconceivable.
Beyond nuclear-based approaches that rely on steam reforming, several technologies are
envisioned for large-scale or central generation of hydrogen. Coal and natural gas
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) or natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) plants
could also serve as a heat source for steam reforming of methane – and for much smaller
hydrogen generation scales, solar PV or wind could be used for electrolysis. Of these
sources, only nuclear and renewable-based hydrogen production have a zero-carbon
footprint, and with the advent of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies, centralstation hydrogen production from coal or natural gas plants would have a carbon footprint
five to ten times smaller than that of gasoline. The price of hydrogen is highly dependent on
the way hydrogen would be produced and associated emissions from the generating source.
Thus, today, nuclear-based, as well as NGCC or IGCC with CCS, appear to be costcompetitive with gasoline, while the higher cost of electricity generated by renewable
sources is two to five times more expensive.
At best, hydrogen represents a long-term option. Significant technological and infrastructure
breakthroughs are needed before it’s considered viable. Significant improvement in the
energy density of hydrogen storage, reductions in fuel cell costs, increased lifetime and
reliability, as well as cost reductions in hydrogen production are needed. Safety is also an
important factor. Initially, transportation and distribution of hydrogen would entail transport
by truck to regional distribution centers, using compressed gas cylinders. Over time, the use
of hydrogen to fuel vehicles would require construction of infrastructure such as pipelines
and fueling stations.
To overcome some of the barriers to adoption of hydrogen fuel for PHEVs, New York State
would have to work with other states and the federal government to develop requirements
that drive the market toward new vehicle technologies. In the meantime, fuel efficiencies
and carbon reductions will be realized through improvements to conventional vehicle
technologies and greater market penetration of hybrid electric vehicles.

19

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Heavy duty vehicles
Trucks carry the bulk of freight transport. In New York State, 90 percent of commodities by
weight are moved by truck, while only 3 percent are moved by rail - a more efficient and
less GHG-intensive mode. Freight traffic is expected to grow significantly, with a
concomitant growth in VMT. More-efficient, less GHG-intensive modes of transport are
clearly needed. In general, there are two ways to reduce HDV emissions: directly reducing
truck emissions, and shifting freight from trucks to more efficient and less GHG-intensive
modes.
The factors that affect truck emissions and efficiency include (1) the nature of the fleet mix
(the size of the trucks), (2) the fuel-efficiency of the trucks, (3) the operating environment
(built environment, road conditions, traffic and congestion, etc.), (4) how trucks are
operated (speed and idling), (5) the nature of the cargo and truck loading (weight, density,
containerized vs. open-bed freight, etc.).
The mix of trucks and their patterns of use are extremely heterogeneous. Efforts to reduce
emissions should focus on the largest fuel consumers: tractor-trailers and straight trucks.
Tractor-trailer efficiency improvements should start with retrofits to reduce truck frame
drag. Estimates indicate that truck retrofit packages (such as aero-cab, front flaring, side
skirts, rear tail flaring, low rolling-resistance tires) can improve truck efficiency on the order
of 5-10%. Retrofit packages can be readily adopted for existing fleeting. (The Union of
Concerned Scientists offers information on green trucks. Scroll down that web page for a
link to a study by the technology firm TIAX, Heavy-Duty Truck Retrofit Technology:
Assessment and Regulatory Approach.)
In addition, future truck fleets will rely on advanced truck engine designs, such as hybridelectric engines, with an estimated efficiency increase of 7-9%. Adoption of new engine
technologies will take time, as the market is conservative and fleet turnover is much slower
than for LDVs: the median lifetime of a HDV is well over 20 years. This implies that the
penetration of a new technology will take significantly longer in the HDV market than in the
LDV market. Consideration should be given to policies that may speed adoption of new
technologies.
Biodiesel is the first advanced biofuel in large-scale commercial production. Biodiesel
produced from domestic soybean oil is assumed by the EPA to reduce GHG emissions by
57% compared to petroleum diesel fuel, and the EPA’s lifecycle analysis recognizes that the
GHG reduction could be as high as 85%. (See
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/420f10006.pdf.) In the US, biodiesel production is
now expanding rapidly (see
http://www.biodiesel.org/pdf_files/fuelfactsheets/Production_Graph_Slide.pdf). In 2005,
production was 75 million gallons; in 2007, 450 million gallons; in 2008, approximately 700
million gallons. By 2011, 1 billion gallons of biodiesel will be produced. An assessment of the
resource available to produce biodiesel indicates that feedstock available today could
produce more than 1.7 billion gallons per year.

20

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Intermodal
Convenience and cost are the key factors that determine the mode of transportation for the
shipment and distribution of goods. In New York State, the predominant method for
transport of freight is by truck, with up to 90% by weight shipped by truck. Truck
transportation is the most energy and GHG intensive modes of the movement of freight. A
key challenge to reducing GHG emissions in the transportation sector is then to reduce
emissions from truck transport of freight. This can be most readily accomplished by
reducing GHG emissions from trucks and/or shifting freight to other modes of transport with
lower emissions. New York State will have to investigate policy options to bring about modal
shifts. These would include:
•

Financial assistance to develop more efficient organization of supply-chains, including
advanced logistics capabilities and optimal positioning of trans-shipment points and
distribution centers.

•

Increasing fuel and economy standards for trucks, speed limit
reduction/enforcement, and development of anti-idling policies and electrification of
rest-stops.

•

The development and adoption of advanced technologies, particularly the
development of no or low net-carbon bio-diesel fuels and waste heat recovery
systems to power air conditioning/electronics.

•

Reducing congestion by increasing non-truck modes of transportation; provide
incentives and build infrastructure to encourage switching from truck to rail or water
transport.

Aviation
Emissions reductions in the aviation sector can come from advances in three areas:
improved efficiency through advances in technology, development, and adoption of suitable
bio-derived fuels, and improvements to operations and air traffic management.
Significant emissions reductions in the aviation system will come from new composite
materials that result in airframe weight reductions, as well as improvements to engine
design. For example, as much as 50% of the primary structure of the new Boeing
Dreamliner is made from advanced composite materials. Coupled with advanced engine
designs, this will increase fuel efficiency as much as 20% over similar sized aircraft, while
permitting air speeds characteristic of the fastest wide-bodies, mach 0.85.
The National Academies’ Airports Cooperative Research Program is examining alternatives
to fossil fuels, as is a coalition that includes the Federal Aviation Administration. Industry
interest in the subject is growing. Currently, new biofuels – “biojet” are being developed for
the military. This represents a significant opportunity for reduction of net carbon emissions

21

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

from the aviation sector if a sufficient supply of biofuels can be developed for wide-scale
adoption and use.
Changes to air traffic management are expected to lead to ~10% reductions in fuel use,
through better management of holding patterns, more efficient take-off and landing
trajectories, and minimization of suboptimal routes. Switching modes of travel can reduce
emissions, too. Many short-distance flights could be replaced by inter-city high-speed rail;
for example, between New York City and Albany, as well as Buffalo.

Serious Challenge: Electricity Supply
Electricity generation is currently among the largest sources of GHG emissions and is
projected to remain so under the BAU case. New York’s current electricity generation
system is a diverse mix of primary energy sources, with about 53% of net generated
electricity coming from fossil fuel-fired electric generating units. With a diverse resource mix
and a solid base in renewable energy, the state’s electric sector is expected to contribute
approximately 75.5 million tons of CO2e to the GHG emissions inventory in 2050
The electricity sector presents a serious challenge for a set of reasons:
o

All mitigation scenarios place increased demand on the electricity sector.
All three 80x50 scenarios assume total electricity demand in excess of 400,000 GWh, a
50% increase over the BAU case. This is typical of mitigation strategies – for example,
see the results of the Global Technology Strategy Project. The reasons are several. The
most important is that it is much easier and more cost effective to manage any residual
carbon emissions at a central electric generation facility than in highly distributed
sources like vehicles or buildings. In the 80x50 scenarios, energy demand is driven to
electricity by the almost complete conversion of the building sector to electricity, the
substitution of electricity for liquid fossil fuels as an energy carrier in the transportation
sector (most notably in the Yellow and Ultraviolet scenarios), and a general shift from
fossil fuels to electricity in the industrial sector.
The flexibility of electricity as an energy carrier has led to continued growth in its use.
The electricity sector has been well studied, and many technological improvements are
made every year. These improvements are quite important: efficiency improvements in
the conversion of energy stored in fossil fuels to electricity has a direct impact on the
capital cost of all electricity generation resources. Even more important, improvements
in the efficiency of end-uses of electrical energy reduce total demand for electricity. The
scenarios for each of the major end-uses begin with an assumption of large
improvements in end-use efficiency, ranging from 20-30%. Generally, it’s expected that
the electric generation sector could be decarbonized more easily than distributed uses of
energy could be.

22

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

Renewable resources within the state are not adequate to meet the challenge.
The major renewable sources of electric power that are carbon free are wind, solar, and
hydropower. With the exception of large hydroelectric facilities, these resources are
distributed: they collect a local resource. Moreover, in comparison with, for example, a
large thermal electric facility like coal or nuclear, they generate far less energy per unit
of land. The Yellow scenario includes practically all of the available renewable energy
resources in the state, and it includes only resources from within the state. The
renewables are over and above the renewable sources assumed to be integrated with
buildings.
Wind is a relatively mature technology, and it’s relatively easy to estimate how much
wind energy is available. The current analysis includes both on-shore and off-shore wind
resources. On-shore wind deployment is increasing around the world, but every
deployment faces challenges. The first is the actual siting of the turbines, which is often
resisted locally for aesthetic and environmental reasons. Second, wind is an intermittent
resource and places special demands on the grid, as discussed below. The scenarios are
fairly optimistic about success in siting turbines, and they assume wind power’s
straightforward integration into the grid (as estimated in a 2003 study). They also
assume that the current 873 GWh of wind can be expanded to 42,000 GWh by 2050,
meeting just over 10% of total projected demand.
Solar is a far less mature technology in terms of both efficiency of conversion and
experience with actual installation. The Yellow scenario assumes that 100,000 GWh of
demand will be met by grid-installed solar (~25% of 2050 demand); currently in New
York the value is zero. This makes the Yellow scenario quite aggressive in several
regards. First, this amount of solar energy requires a large amount of land, probably far
more than is commonly assumed. For the current generation of solar PV sited in New
York, it would take about 1% of the area of New York to generate 100,000 GWh of
electricity. Second, it requires a massive improvement in the ability to manufacture
photovoltaic (PV) devices. Most current solar technology is based on silicon, and despite
large increases in PV cell production, global consumption of silicon for solar applications
only recently passed consumption of silicon for semiconductor devices such as
computers. Without low-cost, mass production of solar cells on the scale of products like
paper or steel, large-scale deployment of solar energy is unlikely. Finally, solar, like
wind, is an intermittent resource with special requirement for integration with the grid.
New York has significant hydropower resources, thanks to Niagara/Horseshoe Falls and
the St. Lawrence Seaway. Further upgrades and expansions, with a small component of
new dams, could significantly increase electric output to the grid and reduce GHG
emissions. The Yellow scenario assumes that 10,300 GWh of hydropower will be added
to the 25,500 GWh, satisfying nearly 10% of projected 2050 electricity demand.

23

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

In summary, the relatively aggressive goals included in the Yellow scenario, which are
incorporated in the other two scenarios, meet less than 50% of projected 2050 demand,
and indeed in the future they may not be met. But other sources of renewable energy
might improve the prospects of success. The largest is probably offshore wind. In
addition, full-scale testing of kinetic, in-river hydropower applications is under way in the
East River and St. Lawrence River. These projects and maximum build-out were not
considered in our analysis, but they could add slightly to the total hydropower package
of emission reduction technologies and strategies.

o

Low carbon-emitting central generation options all entail serious issues.
The discussion of renewable electrical energy options above underscores the fact that
demand for central generation of electricity will continue. This demand must be met with
low-carbon or no-carbon conversion technologies. Currently in New York, large central
generation relies on fossil fuel and 42,500 GWh of nuclear power. Options considered in
detail in the scenarios are expanded use of nuclear generation and use of fossil fuels
with carbon capture and storage (CCS).
The future of nuclear power generation is uncertain, but nuclear power could satisfy a
good portion of a future electricity demand or hydrogen production demand (as
discussed above). All of the scenarios assume a continuation of the existing level of
nuclear power generation; each takes a different approach to nuclear. The Yellow
scenario meets the low-carbon generation option without expanding the current nuclear
fleet. The Deep Blue scenario assumes expansion of nuclear power generation by 2 new
plants that would generate 25,000 GWh, not counting the additional reactors required
for hydrogen generation. The Ultraviolet scenario expands the nuclear supply of electric
power by 118,000 GWh, meeting a total of 40% of 2050 electric demand with nuclear
power, comparable to the amount planned by Japan.
The scenarios do not speak to the resolution of specific issues associated with nuclear
power. Expanding nuclear power will require substantial capital investments and federal
loan guarantees. It would require investment in scientific research into and technological
advances in alternative fuel cycles and nuclear waste management. It would require
public acceptance of license renewals for existing nuclear power plants, expansion of
current plants, and siting of new plants.
Fossil fuel combustion with CCS is a significant component of all three scenarios,
accounting for 190,000 GWh of energy in the Yellow scenario, 170,000 GWh in Deep
Blue, and 70,000 GWh in Ultraviolet. Both coal (IGCC) and natural gas are included in
differing amounts in the scenarios. While important in implementation, the fuel choice is
non-substantive in comparison with other challenges associated with CCS. They include
efficiency of capture and storage, establishment of storage reservoirs, and construction
of infrastructure to transport CO2 from its point of generation to the point of storage.
Notably, CCS is not yet commercially available and in fact has not yet been successfully

24

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

demonstrated on a commercial scale. Moreover, the regulatory scheme that would
govern it remains to be defined, and the capacity for large scale CCS in New York is not
presently known.
Probably the most important CCS challenge is efficiency of capture and storage. The
scenarios assume a capture efficiency of 90%, with the electricity sector contributing 24,
13, and 10 MMT CO2e for the Yellow, Deep Blue, and Ultraviolet scenarios respectively.
For the latter two scenarios, which do meet the 80x50 goal, CCS still produces 20-25%
of total emissions. The improvement of CCS technology to, for example, 99% would
significantly reduce emissions.
Storage and transport of CO2 present closely related issues. The capacity to store CO2 is
not homogeneously distributed throughout the state. Further, little is yet known about
the suitability and capacity of those sites to store CO2. There will be a trade-off between
siting of generation sources and siting storage facilities. Certainly, concentrating
emissions sources near large-capacity storage reservoirs would simplify implementation
and reduce costs. But it could also further increase the burden on the grid. NYSERDA’s
studies of New York’s potential for CCS are important to defining the long-term
potential.
Finally, it should be noted that as 2050 approaches, nuclear fusion may become a viable
zero-carbon source of electricity. The scenarios assume it won’t be sufficiently well
developed to meet energy demand in 2050, but as the State looks beyond its 2050
target to continuing emissions reductions, this technology may be important. Decisions
made between now and 2050 can impact its availability in the long run.

o

Infrastructure for electricity transmission and distribution must evolve to meet demand
and other services the grid must provide.
Fortunately, growing demand for electricity is accompanied by substantial research into
and development and deployment of new technologies, which are shaping the grid of the
21st century – and at a time when capital improvements to New York’s aging grid
infrastructure are needed. The smart grid will deliver substantial benefits: greater
reliability, enhanced security, “smarter” use of information technology, integration of
renewable power generation, better storage technology, and sophisticated demandmanagement strategies. The ability to manage demand can yield another benefit:
avoidance of the huge costs of building more power-generating plants.
The 80x50 scenarios assume three significant demands on the grid. One is the need for
increased capacity to carry energy. The capacity increases can be met in two ways. The
most straightforward is to install higher-capacity transmissions lines and to increase
capacity through upgrades to substations, transformers, and distribution lines. Since all
three scenarios call for a 50% improvement in transmission and distribution (T&D)
efficiency (which contributes as much to emission reductions as all of the hydro

25

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

enhancements), the upgrades will both increase capacity and reduce T&D losses.
Another method is changing from conventional T&D lines to high-temperature
superconductors. This technology both increases capacity and decreases losses, and it’s
already employed in two locations in New York State. However, it’s complex to
manufacture, and manufacturing capabilities must be radically scaled up and costs
shrunk before it can be widely deployed.
The second demand on the grid arises from reliance on large amounts of solar and wind:
their intermittency must be managed and compensated for. As intermittent loads grow,
this becomes a larger and larger problem. In general, the approach been viewed as a
question of “what do you do when the sun goes down, or the wind stops blowing?” This
implies the availability of a backup energy resource. Because baseload power from
thermal resources (nuclear and fossil with CCS) performs best if it operates
continuously, increasingly the view is that energy storage might be the best option for
intermittent sources.
Hydro resources have some limited storage capacity, allowing their output to be
increased when demand grows. However, without “high” dams like those in western US
states, this storage is limited. NYSERDA is studying the potential of below- ground
compressed air storage potential in New York. The next step is to introduce storage
technology, such as batteries, or in the long run, superconducting magnetic energy
storage (SMES). This kind of storage has the added value of serving as a convenient
means of helping to manage transients in the system, as well. Managing storage to
compensate for intermittency will be greatly enhanced by incorporating information
technology into the smart grid.
The smart grid also facilitates another strategy for managing intermittency: demand
response, in which loss of generation is compensated for by a sophisticated demandreduction strategy that targets flexible and non-essential loads, shutting them off for a
short period of time. These loads can be at the commercial and industrial level, but
recent and ongoing demonstrations also show success in the residential sector through
use of smart meters and smart appliances.
Finally, the changing mix of end uses on the demand side will alter the temporal demand
for electricity on time scales ranging from daily to seasonal. In general, this is a design
and load-dispatch problem. What generation resources do you bring on, when, to
minimize the cost of generation? To satisfy peaks in demand with the more-expensive
generation resources and, through pricing strategies, encourage end-users to not use
resources during peak demand periods? Switching of peaks among seasons, from
summer peaking to winter peaking, for example, can create resource mismatches for
resources that may have a strong seasonal variability, such as hydro and solar.
The scenarios assume the largest new demand will come through vehicle electrification.
Studies have shown that smart electronics in, for example, PHEVs can manage that
demand to fill in periods of otherwise lower demand. This allows baseload plants to

26

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

operate more or less continuously, with consequent greater efficiency. Charging the
PHEV “appliance” can also become part of the demand-response network used to
manage intermittency – another benefit of the emerging smart grid.

Challenge: The Building Sector – Residential & Commercial
A critical challenge to reaching the 80x50 goal is in the performance of residential and
commercial buildings. Reaching mid-century GHG reduction goals will require that buildings
function with minimal or no net-energy input (input from the electric grid or from onsite use
of high-carbon fuels). New residential, commercial and industrial building systems will need
to significantly reduce, and eventually eliminate, onsite fossil fuel combustion for space
heating, water heating, cooking, and other needs, and supply electricity through onsite
generation from low-carbon energy sources.

The strategy suggested in this vision requires that buildings function with minimal or no netenergy input from onsite use of high-carbon fuels and that to the extent possible their
energy demand not be shifted to the grid.. These new residential, commercial and industrial
building systems will reduce, and eventually eliminate, onsite fossil fuel combustion for
space heating, water heating, cooking, and other needs, and will supply electricity through
onsite generation from low-carbon energy sources.

The relationship of the building sector to other sectors is a critical aspect of the 80x50
challenge. These relationships fall within four broad areas:
o

End uses: Residential and commercial buildings represent a growing sector of energy
demand. This demand is a central part of the standard of living we enjoy. An
example is the growing use of personal electronics in residences and the
development of large datacenters that support the new internet enabled economy,
particularly the global financial industry based in New York. The critical first step in
any carbon reduction strategy will be increasing the end use efficiency of the
equipment and devices within structures. Reductions of 30% in each electricity and
natural gas use is rather straightforward through the adoption of more efficient enduse technologies, such as more efficient lighting, space heating/cooling, water
heating, computers, and televisions – as well as through the use of modern controls.

o

Structures – A substantial component of the energy demand in the buildings sector is
for space conditioning. End use efficiency has an important impact on this demand,
particularly in the commercial sector where the cooling demand created by waste
heat from devices and equipment. In New York the challenge of structures is
exacerbated by the fact that much of the building infrastructure already exists. This
will lead to important challenges in improvements of the performance of building

27

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

envelopes and the creation of cost effective retro-fit options for key building systems
such as windows and increased sealing and insulation.
o

Distributed generation – One real option for building is the promise of distributed
generation. The use of both photovoltaics and passive solar heating as well as the
exploitation of geothermal resources through such technologies as ground source
heat pumps offers real promise. The greater the contribution of these technologies to
both efficiency and meeting electric demand the less the buildings sector will
contribute demand to the already growing burden on the grid. There are many
policies options that can help reduce the capital costs barrier could be strong
enablers of broader adoption of distributed generation technologies in residential and
commercial sectors.

o

Communities and the promise of smart growth – Probably the most important trend
will be the increased view of the buildings sector as a component of communities.
Many of the elements above are even more valuable when one considers collections
of structures and seeks to manage energy for these aggregations. Distributed
generation for communities can include wind and local biomass conversion for heat
and power. The community can become part of a micro-grid that not only effectively
manages the electric demand of the community but also can be the basis of using
the community as a dispatchable demand response resource for the wider grid.
Finally, if the communities take on the “smart growth” approach both in new
construction but also in re-development, the communities themselves can have
appositive impact on other sectors, most notably transportation.
There has been extensive work on energy efficiency in buildings, done by the World
Business Council on Sustainable Development, the National Academy of Science, the
Pew Center on Climate Change, and Lawrence Berkely National Laboratory, which
offer key data and insights to the energy savings potential. A difficulty in comparing
the energy efficiency potential across studies is the variation in methodologies and
measures within each of them. However, there are some common themes worth
noting.

28

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

BOTTOM-LINE ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
The scenarios that inform the visioning process can be further manipulated to yield more
insights into interrelationships among mitigation strategies for various sectors. But even at
present, and the benefit of insights and knowledge gained at the January 5 visioning
workshop and from yet other sources, it’s clear that major decisions are necessary to
achieve the 80x50 goal.
Many of those decisions must be made sooner rather than later, as they affect long-leadtime matters such as infrastructure investments and research and development strategies
that can help or hinder progress. Moreover, the early adoption of some measures won’t
preclude later adoption of others. Thus, identifying pivotal future decisions and sequencing
them becomes a serious challenge in its own right.
The text below discusses issues that follow from the discussion of serious challenges above,
and that emerged from the visioning process and other sources. Some concern single
economic sectors; some span two or more. While it can be difficult to differentiate technical
issues from policy issues, we’ve tried: the points immediately below are primarily technical
in nature; policy considerations follow.

Technical considerations
o

Gains in energy efficiency are critical to achieving a low-carbon future. The scenarios
don’t specify mechanisms, technologies, or practices necessary to achieve these gains,
but their importance is clear.

o

Very soon, a risk assessment table for critical technologies, such as CCS, nuclear, and
solar, should to be developed. This table would highlight the barriers to and compare the
types of uncertainty associated with each technology, facilitating the identification of
both policy measures and research investments.

o

Electrification is an essential strategy, too, and a move to electrification is consistent
with the energy needs of a 21st-century economy based on information technology,
biotechnology and nanotechnology. If New York’s demand for electricity nearly doubles
by 2050, a number of issues arise. For one thing, electrification transcends selecting
non-carbon emitting central generation technologies and arranging for their siting and
financing. Demand on transmission and distribution systems will increase, too. This
means that ongoing planning for the smart grid and associated technologies must be
part of the Climate Action Plan strategy.
And growing demand will alter not only the amount of electricity needed but when
demand peaks, on timescales ranging from daily to annually. How the load duration
curve, one measure of changing demand, is managed will be an important part of the
smart grid. This may include the use of storage to facilitate handling of larger quantities

29

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

of intermittent renewable resources, and the use of active demand management
technologies like demand response.
o

Electrification of buildings could create a stranded asset in the gas distribution system.
The existing infrastructure for gas and its continued expansion may create a structural
barrier to the goal of reducing highly distributed point sources of GHG emissions. On the
other hand, pipelines moving CO2 from gas combustion facilities to storage reservoirs
may be co-located along rights of way, provided they are appropriately located.

o

All scenarios call for the phase-out of fossil fuel generation that free-vents carbon to the
atmosphere. The schedule for retiring or converting existing facilities thus becomes an
issue.

o

Similarly, existing nuclear power plants are on the critical path for a future that
continues to rely on nuclear power. These plants would have to be replaced or relicensed. If relicensed, it would probably be for a maximum of 20 years; they’d then be
replaced.

o

Nuclear and/or fossil fuel combustion with CCS, which is largely undemonstrated, are
important for decarbonization of centrally generated power. Both require long lead times
and large capital outlays. CCS also requires significant infrastructure for storage, which
will include site selection and certification as well as some pipeline infrastructure.
The regulatory scheme that would govern siting and operations of CCS facilities and
storage locations remains to be defined.

o

The transformation to a hydrogen economy would require a new infrastructure for
producing and delivering hydrogen to consumers. The development of gas-cooled, hightemperature nuclear reactors to produce hydrogen would require new plant designs,
which would require licensure. Safety regulations for transportation and storage of
hydrogen would also be needed.

o

In our scenarios we’ve included some technologies that are emerging but not yet
commercial, such as CCS. Others are unproven, such as large energy storage. We
omitted nuclear fusion, an unproven technology, and direct air capture of carbon
dioxide, which is speculative at this time. These all have theoretical potential to help
achieve the 80x50 goal, but the timeline for making changes requires technologies that
are in development today, and ready for deployment at scale within approximately a
decade. The current international roadmap for fusion would have the first demonstration
reactor online in about 2040.

o

The scenarios assume complete success; for example, total conversion of the building
sector to electricity, or to net-zero carbon emissions. Inevitably, there will be “leakage,”
which will place further limitations on emissions from other sectors or technologies.

30

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

o

Renewable resources play a major role in all three scenarios. But even with expected
gains in renewable energy technology efficiencies, the state’s renewable resources can’t
meet all of projected future energy needs. And, distributed resources used on a large
scale would require large tracts of land for solar arrays, wind farms, and biomass
cropping. The scenarios assume all renewable resources would come from within the
state. This is consistent with the State’s desire to develop its own resource and energy
industry. But out-of-state renewable resources could be used, too, and perhaps in some
cases more cheaply. Opening the market could take pressure off in-state only resources.

o

Sustainable biomass is a limited resource. What’s the best allocation for its use? Should
it be used for transportation (as in our scenarios), to heat buildings, or for power with
CCS, which could create a carbon sink?

o

The grid-installed solar electric assumption in the scenarios is quite optimistic and may
not be met without significant energy conversion improvements in photovoltaic panels
and systems. Distributed solar awaits gains in scalability, reductions in cost, and the
creation of large-scale installation capabilities. The scenarios don’t include some
renewable technologies that may be fungible and that could help reduce emissions, such
as geothermal and hydrokinetic energy sources.

o

The transportation sector is an extremely large, diffuse source of GHG emissions. All of
the scenarios largely call for eliminating gasoline and diesel as energy carriers and
replacing them with bio-fuels, hydrogen, or electricity. The sector is diverse, with each
of the subsectors – light duty vehicles (LDV), heavy duty vehicles (HDV), mass transit,
and aviation – having its own special needs. Key issues include these:
-- Transportation options create an infrastructure demand that must be accounted
for in planning. The current network of fueling stations for LDV and HDV is pervasive,
with one or more fueling station in virtually every community and neighborhood in
the state. Pushing vehicles to electricity adds demand to the distribution system,
while a hydrogen-based vehicle system would necessitate replacement of key
components of this extensive refueling network.
-- The specifics of how to reduce VMT aren’t addressed in the scenarios. They’re
important: e.g., reducing VMT means increased demand on and expansion of mass
transit, as well as potential impacts on community design, development, and
redevelopment.
-- Significant improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency are important to the mitigation
scenarios. Whether national standards will be sufficient to drive this change is
questionable.
o

The state’s residential and commercial sectors are a major source of emissions, and
the scenarios call for substantial improvements in energy efficiency and the source of
energy used for space conditioning, hot water, and cooking. At the January

31

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

workshop, the point was made that many building professionals have little concept of
how much buildings contribute to GHG emissions, and how little it costs to mitigate
them. New York City’s new Green Codes, a major effort commissioned by the Mayor
and City Council Speaker, may offer a useful guide for other cities in the state, for
starters.
But even if all building owners, managers, and tenants were committed to greening
the existing building stock, the workforce needed to install energy retrofits may not
be adequate to the job: training may be required, along with financing schemes that
facilitate retrofits.
o

All three scenarios assume use of distributed renewable energy in the building
sector. This resource is over and above transmission-connected resources accounted
for in the electricity sector. The Deep Blue and Ultraviolet scenarios call for the
residential sector and commercial sector to be zero emissions, not net-zero. If the
strategy evolves to a net-zero standard, other emissions not accounted for in the
scenarios will have to be offset.

o

Serious methodological questions must be addressed. For example, how well
understood are interconnections among complex physical systems—the networks of
energy inputs and feedback loops—that drive emissions? That link energy use and
water use? Should estimates of GHG emissions include embedded energy, which
produces emissions beyond the state’s borders? How far should lifecycle analyses
go?

o

With a goal of 51 MMT CO2e, even small sources of emissions become important.
Emissions reductions strategies for several sources (e.g. asphalt production, SF6
leakage, etc.) are not immediately clear. Work is needed to develop strategies for
management of emissions from all sources.

o

Interdependencies. The interdependencies, and consequent vulnerabilities, of
transportation, water, energy, and communication systems have direct
consequences for system performance and thus for climate change adaptation and
mitigation. System managers and operators must be helped to understand and
manage those interdependencies.

Policy considerations
o

Incipient policy conflicts and synergies. The Climate Action Plan has pervasive
ramifications for the state’s economy and social fabric. Many existing State policies
may facilitate or hinder achievement of the 80x50 goal. Policies made by other states
and the federal government can affect New York’s ability to pursue its chosen path.
For example interstate commerce (tourism, freight, and aviation) is shaped by
federal policy. Large-scale renewable energy involves significant land-use choices,

32

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

for siting of wind and solar facilities and use of biomass resources; local choices and
policies may affect the State’s ability to meet its renewables goals.
o

Policy gaps. What regulatory scheme will be required to cover the siting for CCS
facilities, pipelines, and storage sites, and the permitting of CCS operations? For gascooled, high-temperature nuclear reactors that would produce hydrogen? For new
technologies yet to emerge? Designing and implementing regulatory “infrastructure,”
so to speak, might be no small undertaking in its own right.

o

The need for partnering. Related to policy conflicts and synergies is the great need
for partnering among all levels of government and between the public and private
sectors, with regional collaboration being a point strongly urged at the January 5
workshop. The inclusiveness and openness already demonstrated by the NYS Climate
Action Council and the State’s many other climate and energy initiatives, including
the State’s aggressive partnering with local governments through the Climate Smart
Community Pledge, augurs well for this. Obviously, close partnering with the
business community will remain a long-term necessity.

o

Long-term consequences of near-term decisions, and lack of decisions. Decisions
made, and not made, about matters that require long lead times, such as major
infrastructure projects, and that have long-term consequences, such as land-use
policy and a commitment to CCS, cast long shadows into the future. Whatever the
choice of low-carbon sources of electricity (CCS, nuclear, solar) and of energy carrier
for transportation (electricity or hydrogen), the electricity sector must plan for the
expansion of the grid and improvement of transmission and distribution. Some early
actions, such as improving energy efficiency, have value regardless of other choices
made; others may have value only in relation to specific choices of technology, such
as development of CCS infrastructure. It’s important to remember that achieving a
low-carbon future requires a portfolio of actions, and that “easy” decisions aren’t
substitutes for hard ones.

o

The rate at which policies drive change matters to success. But this important factor
is difficult to manage. The Climate Action Council is working in a field in motion, as
technologies evolve, economic conditions change, and other parties, including the
federal government, make decisions that have consequences for New York.

o

Stranded capital investments. Practically all energy-related technologies require both
infrastructure and capital investment from the private sector, and those investments
are generally large. If they are foreclosed because of decisions that support the
80x50 goal before they’ve delivered a full return on investment or reached the end of
their useful lifetimes, the result will be stranded capital investments – both a major
hidden cost of carbon mitigation and a source of resistance to future change.

o

Investments by the State. The current performance of many technologies assumed
by the mitigation scenarios – such as PV, offshore wind, large-capacity/low-cost

33

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

batteries, PHEVs, CCS, zero-energy commercial buildings and LEDs – is inadequate
to meet the 80x50 goal. Those technologies will require investment to boost
performance. Sources like DOE-National Lab Roadmaps and the National Academies’
study, America’s Energy Future, identify step-function improvements in technology
and major investments in infrastructure needed to achieve a low-carbon economy.
o

Motivating change. The scenarios make no explicit assumptions about individual
behavior. How to motivate individuals to modify their energy consumption and
patterns of use, drew considerable interest at the January workshop, and warrants
the attention the State Climate Action Council.

34

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

CODA
Insidiously, carbon emissions are cumulative: they persist in the atmosphere for up to
thousands of years. This means that as levels of emissions grow, reducing them to levels
deemed acceptable becomes ever harder. And because New York is already more energyefficient than most states, reducing emissions from what is already a low baseline is harder,
still.
Against this physical reality, the momentum of business as usual is not to be
underestimated: it’s one of the most powerful forces in the world. And yet, the nature of
business as usual continually evolves. The “installed base” of current energy technologies
represents trillions of dollars in sunk costs and powerful special interests. Fossil fuels are
cheap, abundant, and convenient. Options for scaling up alternatives to them, affordably,
are not yet in hand. Yet history tells us that technologies, and markets, continue to change.
The brutal realities of fiscal deficits are certain to constrain important efforts to achieve the
80x50 goal. And yet they also make the very real economic opportunities generated by that
goal even more compelling.
Notably, the assets and advantages that the State enjoys can be game-changers, too.
Executive Order 24 is soundly and sensibly conceived. The Climate Action Council’s
approach to its task is exemplary. It enjoys the benefit of committed top-down leadership;
many motivated state employees who possess technical expertise, policy savvy, and insight
into how government and the political system work; a broad-spectrum approach that
engages a large number of committed stakeholders in the NGO and private sectors; and a
deep commitment to achieving environmental justice.
Crucially, the Council is rapidly gaining insight into the staggering magnitude of the
challenge it has been tasked to address and the nature of the strategies it can employ.
Over coming decades, New Yorkers – long celebrated for being tough, resourceful, and
creative – may well prove to be the equal of the 80x50 challenge. Every megaton of GHG
emissions avoided will be a gain, and the societal and economic transformation achieved in
vigorous pursuit of sustainability will create a future for our children and grandchildren and
generations beyond that is better than the present we inhabit.

35

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

APPENDIX A
Supplemental Information on Methodology & Data Sources
for the Baseline Forecast of Energy Demand
and the “Business as Usual” Case
The input to the macro coupled-sector modeling is the baseline projection for energy
demand by sector and fuel type in 2050. These values were estimated by a constant growth
(% per year) extension of the modeling conducted in the development of the New York
State Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and Forecast for the 2009 State Energy Plan,
which estimated the GHG emissions by sector and fuel type to 2025.
Forecasts of petroleum and coal use for residential, commercial, industrial, and non-highway
transport sectors were based on U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) forecasts for
Mid-Atlantic fuel demand, along with natural gas projections provided by Energy and
Environmental Analysis, Inc. (ref: Energy Demand and Price Forecast, 2009 State Energy
Plan).
Forecasts for fuel use for the electricity sector and net imports of electricity were based on
output from ICF International's Integrated Planning Model® (IPM), an electricity sector
modeling software used to support the development of the 2009 State Energy Plan. Energy
demand by sector and fuel type was modeled to 2025. From 2025 to 2050, a constant
annual rate of growth or decline was assumed. In addition, emissions projections for 2025
and 2050 are also estimated and presented in Table 2 above. These projections include
estimated emission reductions due to RGGI and partial implementation of New York's 15x15
energy efficiency goal.
Forecasts of NYS vehicle miles of travel (VMT) were estimated from historical NYS
Department of Transportation VMT data (https://www.nysdot.gov/divisions/policy-andstrategy/darb/dai-unit/ttss/repository/vmt_0.pdf). NYDOT estimates that VMT will continue
to grow at a 1.1% per year growth rate out to 2030, and is assumed to grow at this pace to
2050. The annual rate of growth of VMT was 2.5% between 1975 and 1990, and 1.7%
between 1990 and 2005 (See Strategies for a New Age: New York State’s Transportation
Master Plan for 2030.) On-highway diesel and gasoline fuel use was based on NYS VMT
along with the Department of Energy’s Energy Information Agency-projected vehicle
economy, and was the basis the estimate of emissions from the transportation sector.
Finally, non-fuel combustion GHG emission forecasts for the industrial sector were based on
the projected growth of New York industries. These forecasts were created using Policy
Insight® version 8.0, macroeconomic modeling software from Regional Economic Models
Inc. Estimates for emissions from hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerant substitutes are scaled
from EPA projections for national emissions by New York State’s relative use of air
conditioning, refrigerators, and freezers. Emissions from electricity transmission and
distribution were assumed to continue to decline, following the long-term historical trend.

36

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

A more detailed explanation of the forecasting methods can be found in the NYS State
Energy Plan Energy Demand and Price Forecast Assessment. GHG emission forecasts are in
large part based on these energy-use forecasts. A more detailed explanation of the sources
and methodologies for GHG emissions can be found in the New York State Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Inventory and Forecast for the 2009 State Energy Plan.

37

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Appendix B

GHG Emissions Scenario Assumptions
Sector

Transportation

Electricity

Yellow

Deep Blue

Ultraviolet

Smart growth reduces VMT Demand 10% for LDV
Fleet mix composed of CV/HEV/PHEV* = 30/30/40
CV reaches 37 mpg; HEV miles at 50mpg
95% of VMT for PHEV are all-electric
50% of HDV miles switch to freight transport by rail
30% efficiency gains in aviation

Smart growth reduces VMT demand 40% for LDV
100% of VMT for LDV from hydrogen (nuclear-based) @65
mpg equivalent
50% HDV VMT switch to freight transport to rail; 40% of
balance of miles from biodiesel
30% efficiency gains in aviation, 50% reduction of aviation
emissions from biofuel

Smart growth reduces VMT demand 40% for LDV
95% of VMT from LDV are all-electric miles
Balance of LDV VMT 50 mpg with in-state E85/biodiesel
50% HDV VMT switch to freight transport to rail
30% efficiency in aviation sector; 50% reduction of aviation
emissions from biofuel

~51.3 MMT CO2e

~15 MMT CO2e

~20 MMT CO2e

25% electricity efficiency in Residential
25% electricity efficiency in Commercial
10% electricity efficiency in Industrial
Minimize combustion; what is left switches to IGCC, NGCC
w/ CCS
Max hydro, wind
No new nuclear
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY

Significant efficiency gains as in Yellow Scenario
Eliminate all combustion
Maximize hydro
30% from carbon-free (nuclear [+2 new plants producing
25K GWh] + hydro)
30% from renewables (utility-scale solar (100,000 GWh),
max wind)
40% from NGCC and CCS (@90%)
H2 via electrolysis of high-temperature steam using high-T
gas-cooled reactors (5-8 plants)
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY

Significant efficiency gains as in Yellow Scenario
Maximize hydro, max wind
35% from carbon-free (nuclear [15 new nuclear plants; 24
total], max hydro)
35% from renewables (utility scale solar (100,000 GWh),
wind)
17% from NGCC and CCS (@90%)
35%- 40% energy demand in Res./Comm from local solar
NO NEW OUT OF STATE RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY
~10 MMT CO2e

~24 MMT CO2e
~13 MMT CO2e

Residential

Commercial

20% efficiency gains in energy demand for heat/hot water
10% of electricity needs met from local solar
Reduce combustion by 70-80%

30% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
50% delivered gas/liquid fuels from biomass
40% of balance of energy demand left met by local solar
generation
Balance to energy demand from grid

50% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate all combustion of gas, oil
40% of balance of energy demand met by local solar PV

~7.5 MMT CO2e
Reduce natural gas/oil combustion by 75%
10% of electricity needs met from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

ZERO MMT CO2e
20%-30% efficiency gains
50% delivered liquids fuels from biomass
~30% of electricity demand from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

ZERO MMT CO2e
20%-30% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate all combustion of gas, oil
~ 50% of energy demand from local solar
Balance of energy need shifted to central electricity

~4.5 MMT CO2e

ZERO MMT CO2e

ZERO MMT CO2e

38

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

Industrial

Other

Eliminate all coke/coal use
Reduce natural gas/oil combustion by 50%
Switch coke/coal to natural gas
Balance of energy need shifted to electricity

20%-40% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate natural gas, oil combustion
Eliminate coke at cement/boilers; switch to natural gas
Residual of emissions from asphalt, petrochemical, other
(8.4 MMT)

20%-40% reduction in energy demand through efficiency
Eliminate natural gas, oil combustion
Eliminate coke at cement/boilers; switch to natural gas
Residual of emissions from asphalt, petrochemical, other
(8.4 MMT)

~14 MMT CO2e

~13MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

~13MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
50% reduction in line leaks in natural gas
RRR policy
Eliminate HFC leaks
Reduce process CO2

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
Eliminate hydrofluorocarbon emissions
Eliminate 90% line leaks in natural gas
RRR policy to eliminate 100% municipal methane/waste
emissions
Eliminate HFC emissions

Eliminate SF6 dielectric from T/D grid
Eliminate hydrofluorocarbon emissions
Eliminate 90% line leaks in natural gas
RRR Policy to eliminate 100% municipal methane/waste
emissions
Eliminate HFC emissions

~12 MMT CO2e

~12 MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

~12 MMT CO2e EMISSIONS

CV = Conventional Vehicle; HEV = Hybrid Electric Vehicle; PHEV = Plug-in Electric Hybrid Vehicle; LDV = Light Duty Vehicle; HDV = Heavy Duty Vehicle; VMT = Vehicle Miles Travelled;
MMT CO2e = Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

39

October 1, 2010



Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State

40

October 1, 2010



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix G
Electric Vehicle Workgroup Report
Background 1
The transportation sector currently produces 39.5 percent of New York State’s combustion-based
inventory of greenhouse gases (GHGs). The gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicle sector is
responsible for the vast majority of those emissions. Plug-in electric vehicles (EVs), plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV), and fuel cell vehicles (FCVs) powered by hydrogen derived
from electrolysis, offer the potential to displace a significant portion of this petroleum
consumption by using electricity for all or portions of vehicle trips. If this electricity has a lowor near-zero carbon intensity, the carbon footprint from this segment could be nearly eliminated.
The New York Climate Action Council established five Technical Working Groups representing
key sectors of the economy. Each Technical Work Group was tasked with providing technical
analysis and developing policy options for GHG reductions in each sector. The GHG reduction
potential of electrically powered vehicles will be influenced by the policies developed in three
sectors: Transportation and Land Use; Power Supply and Delivery; and Residential,
Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial Buildings and Infrastructure. The cross-sector Electric
Vehicle Subgroup 2 was established to identify how transitioning to a high penetration of gridpowered vehicles would affect multiple economic sectors and to establish, where possible, a
consensus on a comprehensive transition strategy for all sectors.

The Approach
The Cross-Sector subgroup consisted of members from the Transportation and Land Use, Power
Supply and Delivery, and Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial Technical Work
Groups. The approach used was: (1) segment the flow of electricity from source to vehicle into
five stages; (2) identify the questions and issues in each segment that need to be addressed to
achieve significant market penetration of plug-in vehicles with maximum GHG reductions; and
(3) research the issues, establish findings, and describe strategies or approaches that address the
issues. Where appropriate, the group made an attempt to identify mid- and long-term issues.
In addition to the individual sector perspective and expertise of the Technical Work Group
members, the group invited participation and presentations from several outside sources. These
included vehicle manufacturers Ford and Tesla and a manufacturer/supplier of charging station
infrastructure.

1

This report was developed by representatives from the Climate Action Council’s Transportation and Land Use
(TLU), Power Supply and Delivery (PSD), and Residential Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI) Technical
Working Groups. The report describes cross–sector issues and policies associated with a transition to electric-gridpowered vehicles.
2

Subgroup Members: Richard Drake (NYSERDA), Eleanor Stein ( NYS DPS), Matt Fronk (RIT), Jamie Van
Nostrand (Pace University), Joe Oats (Consolidated Edison), Steve Corneli (NRG Energy), Kerry-Jane King
(NYPA), Carol Murphy (ACE NY), John D'Aloia (NYS DPS), Steven Tobias (National Grid), Matt Nielsen
(General Electric), Dave Coup (NYSERDA), John Zamurs (NYS DOT), and David Gardner (NYS DEC).

G-1



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Summary
General: A top priority should be an in-depth analysis of the coincidental overlays of: EVcharging load profiles; future intermittent and non-dispatchable generation growth in New York
State; and projected residential, commercial/institutional, and industrial electrical load growth in
the state. The findings in this appendix are based on available analysis as referenced in the
report.
Power Supply—Generation
•

Through the mid-term (2025), New York State has adequate generation capacity to
accommodate the maximum (30 percent) anticipated penetration of EVs and PHEVs.

•

“Smart charging” to minimize grid impacts will be necessary.

•

New York’s current off-peak generation mix provides PHEVs significant GHG reductions, as
compared to conventional vehicles. However, to maximize GHG reductions, the transmission
grid will need to be near carbon-free.

•

Through the mid-term (2025), the state’s transmission grid has adequate capacity to
accommodate the maximum (30 percent) anticipated penetration of EVs and PHEVs with
smart charging.

Distribution
•

Near to mid-term: Local distribution (transformer) upgrades are likely to be necessary.

•

Longer term: The large number of EVs requiring quick charge may require local storage.

•

Business models, policies, and regulatory actions encouraging smart charging and allowing
third-party sale of electricity may be necessary.

Infrastructure
•

Building codes addressing Level II and Level III charging in new residential and commercial
garage construction will significantly reduce costs.

•

Building codes that address garaging hydrogen-fueled vehicles should be part of the longterm solution.

•

Policies and regulations should encourage the development of a variety of business models
for charging/refueling (battery swap, etc.).

Vehicles
•

PHEVs, EVs, and FCVs demonstrating acceptable performance are a reality.

•

Vehicles deriving their fuel from the electric grid are likely to become a cost-effective means
of achieving carbon-free mobility.

G-2



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Near term: Incentives will likely be necessary to induce adoption. Gas may need to reach
$4/gallon and research and development (R&D) will be needed to improve performance and
reduce cost before EVs and PHEVs are economically compelling without incentives. 3

•

Near- and mid-term: Battery vehicles will predominate. The advantages of FCVs having
greater range, performance, and quick fill together with lower vehicle cost may compel
commercial fleets initially and later private vehicles to invest in localized hydrogen
infrastructure based on electrolysis from off-peak carbon-free grid power.

Table G-1. Electric Grid Powered Vehicle—Climate Policy Issues by Category
A
Generation

A-1: How much
generation is
needed to meet
the new load?
A-2: What CO2e
intensity is
required to
achieve 80 by
50? How do we
achieve it?
A-3: What is the
desired load
shape for EVs to
minimize the
carbon intensity
of required
generation?

B
Transmission

C
Distribution

C-1: Do we have
B-1: Do we have
sufficient
sufficient
distribution
transmission
capacity to meet
capacity to meet
the new load?
the new load?
C-2: Does this new
B-2: Does this new
load create any
load create any
major reliability or
major reliability
infrastructure cost
issues (e.g.,
issues (e.g.,
stability, thermal,
stability, thermal,
voltage)?
voltage)?
B-3: Are there
transmission-level C-3: Are there legal,
investments that
regulatory, or
would reduce the
policy actions that
carbon intensity of
could reduce
an EV load?
transaction
obstacles and
accelerate a
transition to
electrified
transportation?
C-4: Who should pay
for any required
upgrades? The
individual
beneficiary or the
rate base?
C-5: Will fast-fill
fueling require
distribution-scale
stationary energy
storage (hydrogen
or electric)?

D
Infrastructure
(Buildings and
Facilities)

E
Vehicle + End-User

E-1: What charging
D-1: What charging
technologies are
infrastructure/
needed (e.g.,
strategy is
smart charge)?
needed?
E-2: What battery
D-2: Are changes
technologies are
necessary in retail
most suitable for
electricity rate
this application?
structures? If so,
Are they available
how should they
and costbe changed?
effective?
D-3: What kind of
E-3: What vehicle
advanced
platform(s) seems
metering is
the most viable?
needed?
Can EVs meet
D-4: What land-use
driver needs, or
issues need to be
will we need fuel
addressed?
cell or bio-PHEVs
D-5: What kind of
to meet range
consumer
requirements?
education is
E-4: Who will service
needed?
these vehicles?
D-6: How do we bring
upfront costs down E-5: What is the rate
of advanced low
for consumers?
carbon vehicle
D-7: What codes and
introduction
standards need to
needed to meet
be
80 by 50? How do
created/updated?
we get more cars
“in the pipeline”?
E-6: How do we bring
upfront costs
down for
consumers? Are
incentives
required to
overcome the
high cost of
electric vehicles?

80 by 50 = 80percent reduction in carbon from 1990 levels by 2050; CO2 = carbon dioxide; EV = electric vehicle;
PHEV = plug-in electric vehicle.
3

Transitions to Alternative Transportation Technologies, National Academy of Sciences, 2010.
G-3



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Strategies
A.

Power Supply: Generation

A-1

How much new generation is needed? 4

New York’s electric supply is sufficient to meet electric vehicle megawatt (MW) requirements in
the near-to-mid-term (2025). According to a National Renewable Energy Laboratory study, “a 50
percent penetration of PHEVs would increase the per capita electricity demand by around 5–10
percent, while increasing total electrical energy consumption (but without requiring additional
generation capacity).” However, an increased proportion of low- or zero-carbon generation to
displace traditional fossil plants must be brought on line to meet the 80 by 50 goal. This assumes
that smart charging will be implemented as grid-fueled vehicle penetration grows. It may be
necessary for public policy or rate structures to provide incentives and disincentives to
implement adoption.
•

Strategy: Near-term and long-term continued support of R&D for renewable technologies, as
well as methods to reduce carbon from fossil sources; continued financial incentives/rate
structure to encourage low-/zero-carbon generation and off-peak, valley filling charging.

A-2

What electric grid carbon dioxide (CO2) intensity is required to achieve 80 by 50? 5

The nation has experienced a significant increase in the carbon intensity of the grid over the past
20 years. Therefore, for the United States to achieve an 80 percent reduction in carbon from 1990
levels by 2050, the country must cut its current rate of 5.8 billion tons CO2/year to 1 billion
tons/year. This equates to approximately a 4 percent reduction each year for the next 40 years.
The carbon intensity of the grid varies significantly as a function of grid load, with off-peak
power having the lowest carbon footprint. In New York, the electric grid is responsible on
average for approximately 800 pounds (lb) of CO2 for every MW produced. At this level of
intensity, an all-electric car typically produces approximately 0.3 lbs. of CO2 per mile while a
conventional vehicle getting 26 miles per gallon (MPG) produces 0.77 lbs. CO2 per mile.
Therefore, with today’s generation mix, an electric vehicle provides on average a 61percent
reduction in CO2. With the current generation mix, New York State would be unable to achieve
the 80 by 50 goal, even if elective vehicles were used for all travel. While off-peak power is less
carbon intense and “smart (off-peak) charging” has the potential to provide some benefit in the
near term, a high percentage of grid-powered vehicles and a near-zero carbon footprint from the
electric grid will be required in order to achieve the 80 by 50 goal
•

Strategy: (1) Develop technologies (energy storage, smart charging) and policies (EV electric
rates) that promote vehicle charging at times when the carbon intensity of the grid is lowest

4

EPRI/NYSERDA, Grid Impact of PHEVs, 2010; NREL, An Evaluation of Utility System Impacts and Benefits of
Optimally Dispatched Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles, Oct. 2006; PNNL, Impacts Assessment of Plug-In Hybrid
Vehicles on Electric Utilities and Regional U.S. Power Grids, 2007.

5

International Energy Agency, “CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion - Highlights,” 2009; U.S. DOE, Annual
Energy Review, Table 12.2, 2009; CARB, 2050 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Analysis: Staff Modeling in Support of
the Zero Emission Vehicle Regulation, 2009.

G-4



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

(i.e., off-peak). (2) De-carbonize the grid to the greatest extent possible. Achieving more than
a 60 percent reduction in vehicle-mile carbon intensity from EVs will require a grid with a
much lower carbon footprint.
A-3

What is the desired load shape for EVs to minimize the carbon intensity of required
generation? 6

EV charging should move to off-peak charging. Conversely, charging immediately upon
returning home (4-6 p.m.) should generally be avoided, as this could compete with other
electrical loads. Furthermore, moving charging to overnight hours would correlate with the
production profile of zero-carbon wind resources in New York (as well as base-loaded hydro and
nuclear power).
•

Strategy: Create an electricity rate structure with incentives for EV owners to charge during
off-peak hours, with the highest incentives during overnight hours.

B.

Transmission

B-1

Do we have sufficient transmission capacity to meet the new load? 7

The transmission system will not require added capacity specifically for EV charging because
PHEV vehicle adoption is not anticipated to seriously affect generation (MW of supply).
•

Strategy: This assumes smart charging and other strategies to shift demand from peak hours.
Otherwise, no specific strategy is required, assuming upgrades to the transmission system
due to expected load growth outside of EV.

B-2

Does this new load create any major reliability issues (e.g., stability, thermal, voltage)? 8

System reliability could be reduced as a result of a high utilization scenario, as less reserve
capacity is available. With smart charging, reliability issues are not expected. With further
advancements in vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology, it is possible that vehicle storage may
provide benefits to transmission system reliability. While it appears that PHEVs are much better
suited to support short-term ancillary services, such as regulation and spinning reserve, a large
fleet of PHEVs could replace a moderate percentage (perhaps up to 25 percent) of conventional
low-capacity-factor (rarely used) generation used for periods of extreme demand or system
emergencies. Overall, the ability to schedule both charging and very limited discharging of
PHEVs could significantly increase power system utilization.

6

NYISO, “Alternate Route: Electrifying the Transportation Sector,” June 2009.

7

KEMA, Assessment of Plug-in Electric Vehicle Integration with ISO/RTO Systems, report for ISO/RTO Council;
PNNL, Impacts Assessment of Plug-In Hybrid Vehicles on Electric Utilities and Regional U.S. Power Grids, 2007.
(Note: KEMA is not an acronym, it is the name of an international testing and certification company.)
8

PNNL, Impacts Assessment of Plug-In Hybrid Vehicles on Electric Utilities and Regional U.S. Power Grids, 2007;
NREL, An Evaluation of Utility System Impacts and Benefits of Optimally Dispatched Plug-In Hybrid Electric
Vehicles, Oct. 2006

G-5



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Strategy: Adopting “smart charging” systems that recognize grid emergencies could mitigate
the extent and severity of these events. Continue R&D into V2G technology. Explore
financial incentives for providing grid support.

B-3

Are there transmission-level investments that would reduce the carbon intensity of an EV
load?

The issues of vehicle range, fueling infrastructure, and cost will be challenging. Quick-charge
(Level III) electric charging may require stationary storage or other upgrades. Range issues can
be overcome with FCVs; however, quick-fill public hydrogen infrastructure would require a
major investment. A third option, hybrid bio-PHEV, may be the easiest pathway on the vehicle
side; however, low-carbon cellulosic ethanol is not yet a proven option.
•

Strategy: All of the above options should be developed; all may be needed to meet the variety
of duty cycles, first cost versus operating cost constraints, and user needs. In all cases,
continuous improvements in vehicle technology will be needed, together with significant
long-term infrastructure investment. Public policy should be technology-neutral and, in the
near term, focus on low-carbon vehicle incentives, such as feebates for low-carbon vehicles
and tax credits and buy-downs for fueling infrastructure.

C.

Distribution

C-1

Do we have sufficient distribution capacity to meet the new load? 9

To achieve the penetration rates required by the 80 by 50 target, some distribution system
upgrades will undoubtedly be needed. Because of clustering and a slower penetration rate of pure
battery versus PHEV, current analysis indicates that upgrades involving distribution transformers
and customer service – not primary feeders or transformers – will be needed at a local level.
Impacts can vary greatly from system to system. Some distribution systems have a ratio of
customers to service transformers as low as 2 to 1, while others, such as Rochester Gas and
Electric, have ratios of 9 to 1. This will result in different impacts on the distribution systems in
different distribution systems. In systems that are largely underground, there is some potential
for underground cables and transformers to have inadequate cool-down periods at night, should
significant load be shifted to off-peak nighttime periods on feeders that are highly loaded during
the day. So, although the load growth rate is generally expected to be within the normal bounds
of planning activities and load growth, there will be situations requiring special consideration
and study.
•

Strategies: Smart charging, load shifting, and stationary storage all have the potential to
mitigate most of the anticipated problems for the next decade.

9

EPRI/NYSERDA, Analysis of Grid Impact of PHEVs in New York State, 2010; Quanta Technology, “Thoughts
and Opinions on the Impact of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles,” 2008.

G-6



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

C-2

Does this new load create any major reliability or infrastructure cost issues (e.g.,
stability, thermal, voltage)?

As noted in B-2, (transmission), distribution reliability issues are not expected with smart
charging. With further advancements in V2G technology, it is possible that vehicle storage may
actually provide benefits to distribution system reliability.
•

Strategies: Financial incentives for desired market transformation and disincentives for
unwanted behavior will be necessary to accelerate low-carbon vehicle market penetration.
Infrastructure investment will also be a necessary element and may require adjustments in
public policy and public investment.

C-3
•

Are there legal, regulatory, or policy actions that could reduce transaction obstacles and
accelerate a transition to electrified transportation?

Strategy: Consider revised tariffs in New York that would allow charging infrastructure
providers to resell the electricity they purchase from utilities.

C-4

Who should pay for any required upgrades? The individual beneficiary or the rate base?

It could be argued that the advent of PHEVs is similar to the widespread adoption of air
conditioning in the 1960s. The utilities incorporated this new load as a part of their normal
planning process, and the cost was added to the rate base.
•

Strategy: Costs should not be borne by individual customers. A preferred alternative is to use
revenue derived from a broader base to cover the cost of upgrades specific to the supply of
electricity for plug-in vehicle charging.

C-5
•

Will fast-fill fueling require distribution-scale stationary energy storage (hydrogen or
electric)?

Strategy: Since fast-fill charging is likely to be required by a user at a time other than offpeak hours, purchase of the stationary electrical storage may be necessary to minimize
negative grid impacts and allow the utilization of excess renewable electricity generated in
off-peak times.

D.

Infrastructure (Buildings and Facilities)

D-1

What charging infrastructure/strategy is needed?

It seems generally accepted (and reinforced with surveys, PlaNYC, Electric Power Research
Institute, etc.) that the most important locations for charging infrastructure are those facilities
where vehicles are parked routinely for extended periods, such as home garages or places of
work. New business models together with communication and transaction protocols will need to
be standardized to allow smart charging that benefits the grid and consumer.
There are potential legal and regulatory barriers or policy choices related to the introduction of
electric vehicle charging facilities on private premises and for public use. Under current New
York law, all sellers of electricity to end users are electric corporations subject to Public Service
Commission (PSC) regulation over rates and practices. New York has three overall options: (1)
New York state could exercise this jurisdiction to set prices for EV charging that encourage
G-7



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

electric car consumption and ensure off-peak charging to minimize grid impact (the Michigan
approach); (2) the state could lightly regulate or forbear from regulating EV charging, to
encourage new entrants and competition (the California approach); or (3) the state could amend
its laws to deregulate entirely the sale of electricity as a motor vehicle fuel (to open the EV
charging market completely, without any governmental oversight as to price and conditions,
while safety and reliability restrictions would remain). Each approach has its own advantages,
costs, and risks, and the policy and legal discussion is ongoing.
•

Strategies: First priority: Standardize physical interconnections (plugs, voltages, etc.) and
communications protocols. Second priority: Pursue public policy and regulatory actions that
support the development of business models that allow the sale of electricity by third parties
(non-utility), aggregation of loads for business transactions, private and public investment in
publicly accessible vehicle charging, and development and deployment of standardized
quick-charge (Level III) technology.

D-2

Are changes necessary in retail electricity rate structures? If so, how should they be
changed? 10

California’s Public Utilities Commission has established special rates for EV charging and offpeak use. Remote-controlled charging could also occur by allowing customers to charge their
vehicles at any location and be billed for the energy at a rate determined by the location of the
vehicle, rather than at a residential rate.
•

Strategy: Establish EV electric rates that encourage vehicle charging load growth that is
consistent with minimized negative impact on the grid and that provides positive economic
incentives to consumers. PHEV-specific dynamic pricing may be one way to introduce
dynamic pricing to consumers while minimizing adverse customer reaction with regard to
existing retail loads.

D-3

What kind of advanced metering is needed?

Using advanced meters, vehicle charging would be one of several home energy uses that could
be managed through automation. Even simple time-of-use residential meters could provide
customers with the incentive and the ability to manage their energy use for charging PHEVs.
•

Strategy: Advanced metering will be required to enable consumers to benefit from favorable
electric rate structures. Utility specifications and business models will determine meter
specifications. PSC tariffs allowing rate-base recovery of additional costs specific to EV
charging as opposed to unique customer cost may be helpful.

D-4
•

10

What land use issues need to be addressed?

Strategy: Provide preferential parking, high-occupancy vehicle lanes, and lower tolls for lowcarbon vehicles.

KEMA, Assessment of Plug-in Electric Vehicle Integration with ISO/RTO Systems, report for ISO/RTO Council.

G-8



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

D-5
•

Strategy: Produce television, newspaper, and web site information for consumers similar to
the current New York State Energy Research and Development Authority media campaign
promoting change-out of incandescent lighting to compact fluorescent lamps.

D-6
•

What kind of consumer education is needed?

How do we bring upfront costs down for consumers?

Strategy: See D-2 and D-3.

D-7

What codes and standards need to be created/updated?

Vehicle charging communications has received some support from automakers because it could
allow for a single industry standard for recharging mechanisms to meet the needs of the electric
utility system. Automakers would prefer to see a single vehicle standard that could be universally
implemented, as opposed to a patchwork of standards and technologies across state boundaries or
utility service territories.
The addition of Level II charging infrastructure to an existing building can typically cost $3,000,
which can be an impediment to sales. When charging infrastructure is incorporated in new
construction, the cost is $300.
•

Strategy: Develop standards that are compatible with smart-grid/smart-charging Level III and
building codes that require conforming circuitry in both residential and commercial new
garage construction. This will enable lower-cost market penetration and safer/more reliable
service. Policy and regulations should encourage standardization of vehicle charging
interfaces at the regulated utility level and with vehicle manufacturers.

E.

Vehicle (End User) Strategies 11

E-1

What charging technologies are needed (e.g., smart charge)?

Smart charging will be needed as grid-fueled vehicle penetration grows. Shifting the vehicle
charging load to off-peak time may be the biggest long-term issue. It may be necessary for public
policy or rate structures to provide incentives and disincentives to implement adoption. Society
of Automotive Engineers and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers standards are
under development, and there are several technical approaches that will enable vehicle-gridbuilding communication and smart charging. Energy storage technology will likely be necessary
to mitigate large quantities of on-peak or fast-charging use in the future.
•

Strategy: Near term: Encourage demonstrations of technical options, monitor performance,
and explore behavioral influences of rate structures and public policy. Long term: Enact
appropriate rate adjustments and incentives to mitigate grid problems, and conduct R&D of

11

National Academy of Sciences, Transitions to Alternative Transportation Technologies—Plug-in Hybrid Electric
Vehicles, 2009; The Electrification Coalition, Electrification Roadmap, 2009 (200 million EVs by 2050); CARB,
2050 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Analysis: Staff Modeling in Support of the Zero Emission Vehicle Regulation,
2009; David L. Greene and Andreas Schafer, Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from U.S. Transportation,
prepared for Pew Center on Global Climate Change, 2003.

G-9



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

energy storage technologies that can utilize large quantities of excess power generated from
renewable sources and baseload nuclear power (which are difficult to turn down) for ondemand and Level III quick-charge vehicle charging.
E-2

What battery technologies are most suitable for this application? Are they available and
cost-effective?

Continued advances are required in battery technology and manufacturing. Significant cost
reductions will be required to allow grid-charged vehicles to compete with petroleum at anything
less than $4/gallon. This may be difficult with lithium-ion technology, because of the currently
low labor costs and as-of-yet undetermined sources of cheaper materials.
•

Strategy: Continue R&D into the next generation of battery chemistry and explore innovative
business models (battery leasing, battery change out, etc.).

E-3

What vehicle platform(s) seems the most viable? Can EVs meet driver needs, or will we
need fuel cell or bio-PHEVs to meet range requirements?

The issues of vehicle range, fueling infrastructure, and cost will be challenging. Quick-charge
(Level III) electric charging may require stationary storage or other upgrades. Range issues can
be overcome with FCVs. However, quick fill public hydrogen infrastructure would require a
major investment. Hydrogen only provides significant GHG benefits over conventional hybrids
when the hydrogen is produced through electrolysis or via thermo-nuclear means. Therefore,
hydrogen is a long-term option that can provide benefits if and when there is adequate (or an
excess of) zero-carbon electricity. A third option, hybrid bio-PHEV, may be the easiest pathway
on the vehicle side. However, low-carbon cellulosic ethanol is not a proven option.
•

E-4

Strategies: None of the above options should be abandoned. All may be needed to meet the
variety of duty cycles, first cost versus operating cost constraints, and user needs. In all cases,
continuous improvements in vehicle technology will be needed together with significant
long-term infrastructure investment. Public policy should be technology-neutral and in the
near term should focus on low-carbon vehicle incentives, such as feebates for low-carbon
vehicles, a low-carbon fuel standard and tax credits, and buy-downs for fueling
infrastructure.
Who will service these vehicles?

•

Strategies: To build the skilled workforce needed, adopt public policy and financial support
for educational and workforce development programs at community colleges and the Board
of Cooperative Education Services and other publicly supported schools and provide tuition
assistance for these programs.

E-5

What is the rate of advanced low-carbon vehicle introduction needed to meet 80 by 50?
How do we get more cars “in the pipeline”?

Over 90 percent of vehicle miles are traveled with vehicles less than 15 years old. Therefore, to
achieve a near total transition to low-carbon travel by 2050, nearly all vehicles sold after 2030
would need to be low carbon.

G-10



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

E-6
•

Strategies: Offer financial incentives for desired market transformation and disincentives for
unwanted behavior to accelerate low-carbon vehicle market penetration. Fund infrastructure
investments, which may require adjustments in public policy and public investment.
How do we bring upfront costs down for consumers? Are incentives required to
overcome the high cost of electric vehicles?
Strategy: Manufacturer competition may be the most cost-effective way to reduce vehicle
cost, with battery manufacturing capacity and supply-demand being dominant factors. A
robust market can be encouraged through incentives, adequate charging infrastructure, and
education. A low-carbon fuel standard, vehicle purchase feebate, or other carbon pricing
mechanism will be needed for EVs/PHEVs to be economically competitive in the near term.

G-11



New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Appendix H
ClimAID Report Summary
Prior to the Governor Paterson’s Executive Order 24 creating the Climate Action Council
the New York Energy Supply and Development Authority (NYSERDA) was undertaking
research on climate change under its Environmental Monitoring, Evaluation, and
Protection (EMEP) program. A key project of this program is the Integrated Assessment
for Effective Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New York State, known as
ClimAID.
ClimAID was undertaken to provide decision-makers with cutting-edge information on
the state's vulnerability to climate change and to facilitate the development of adaptation
strategies informed by both local experience and scientific knowledge. Involving the
work of scientists from universities throughout New York state and key stakeholders, the
assessment identifies critical vulnerabilities, climate risks, and adaptation strategies
specific to New York State, for a range of key sectors: agriculture, coastal zones,
ecosystems, energy, public health, telecommunications, transportation, and water
resources.
A draft summary of the ClimAid project’s work, Responding to Climate Change in New
York, is appended here in its entirety keeping its original pagination. The larger materials
on which this summary is based were critical to the Council’s Adaptation Technical
Work Group. Several of the ClimAID report authors served on this group.

H-1



New York State Energy Research and Development Authority
2010
D R A F T



Authorship
ClimAID Synthesis Report Authors

Prepared for

Cynthia Rosenzweig (PI), NASA Goddard Institute for
Space Studies and Columbia University
William Solecki (PI), City University of New York, CUNY
Institute for Sustainable Cities
Arthur DeGaetano (PI), Northeast Regional Climate Center,
Cornell University
Susan Hassol (Science Writer), Climate Communication, LLC
Paul Grabhorn (Graphic Designer), Grabhorn Studio, Inc.
Megan O’Grady (Project Manager), Columbia University
Daniel Bader (Climate), Columbia University
Frank Buonaiuto (Coastal Zones), City University of New York
Jonathan Comstock (Ecosystems and Agriculture), Cornell
University
Stephen A. Hammer (Energy), Columbia University
Radley Horton (Climate), Columbia University
Klaus Jacob (Transportation and Telecommunications),
Columbia University
Patrick L. Kinney (Public Health), Columbia University
Yehuda Klein (Economics), City University of New York
Robin Leichenko (Equity and Economics), Rutgers University
David C. Major (Economics), Columbia University
Andrew McDonald (Water), New York State Water Resources
Institute
Marta Panero (Economics), New York University
Lily Parshall (Energy), Columbia University
Lesley Patrick (Coastal Zones), City University of New York
Rebecca Schneider (Water), Cornell University
Perry Sheffield (Health), Mount Sinai School of Medicine
Lee Tryhorn (Vulnerability and Adaptation), Cornell
University
Peter Vancura (Equity), Rutgers University
David W. Wolfe (Ecosystems and Agriculture),
Cornell University

The New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority
Albany, NY
www.nyserda.org
Amanda Stevens, Project Manager
Mark Watson, Program Manager
Full report may be found at www.nyserda.org/programs/
environment/emep/home.asp

Citations
Synthesis Report
NYSERDA ClimAID Team. 2010. Responding to Climate
Change in New York State, the Synthesis Report of the
Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies in New York State. C. Rosenzweig, W. Solecki, A.
DeGaetano, S. Hassol, P. Grabhorn, M. O’Grady, Eds. New
York State Energy Research and Development Authority
(NYSERDA), 17 Columbia Circle, Albany, New York, 12203.
Foundation Report
NYSERDA ClimAID Team. 2010. Integrated Assessment for
Effective Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New York State.
C. Rosenzweig, W. Solecki, A. DeGaetano, M. O’Grady,
S. Hassol, P. Grabhorn, Eds. New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority (NYSERDA),
17 Columbia Circle, Albany, New York, 12203.

All the figures and tables in this document are drawn
from the ClimAID Foundation Report: Integrated
Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies in New York State.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Responding to Climate Change in New York State
Climate change is already beginning to affect the
people and resources of New York State, and
these impacts are projected to grow. At the
same time, the state has the potential capacity
to address many climate-related risks, thereby reducing negative impacts and taking
advantage of possible opportunities.
ClimAID: the Integrated Assessment for
Effective Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies in New York State was undertaken to provide decision-makers with cutting-edge information on the state's vulnerability to climate change and to facilitate
the development of adaptation strategies
informed by both local experience and scientific knowledge.
This state-level assessment of climate change
impacts is specifically geared to assist in the development of adaptation strategies. It acknowledges the need to
plan for and adapt to climate change impacts in a range of sectors: Water Resources, Coastal Zones, Ecosystems, Agriculture, Energy,
Transportation, Telecommunications, and Public Health.
The author team for this report is composed of university and research
scientists who are specialists in climate change science, impacts, and
adaptation. To ensure that the information provided would be relevant
to decisions made by public and private sector practitioners, stakeholders from state and local agencies, non-profit organizations, and the
business community participated in the process as well.
This document provides a general synthesis of highlights from a larger
technical report that includes much more detail, case studies, and references. The larger report provides useful information to decisionmakers, such as state officials, city planners, water and energy
managers, farmers, business owners, and others as they begin
responding to climate change in New York State.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Contents
Introduction
Climate Risks
Adaptation
Equity
Economics

2
8
12
14

Water Resources

16

Coastal Zones

20

Ecosystems

24

Agriculture

28

Energy

32

Transportation

36

Telecommunications

40

Public Health

44

Conclusion and Recommendations

48

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Temperatures are increasing, precipitation
patterns are changing, and sea level is rising.
These climatic changes are projected to
occur at much faster than natural rates
because of increased amounts of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere. Some types of
extreme weather and climate events have
already increased in frequency and intensity
and these changes are projected to continue.

Interactions
Interactions between climate
change and other stresses such
as pollution and increasing
demand for resources
will create new
challenges.

These climate changes are already having
impacts in some aspects of society, the
economy, and natural ecosystems and these
impacts are expected to increase. Not all of
these changes will be gradual. When certain
tipping points are crossed, impacts can
increase dramatically. Past climate is no
longer a reliable guide to the future. This
affects planning for water, energy, and all
other social and economic systems.

Heat Waves
Heat waves will become more
frequent and intense, increasing heat-related illness and
death and posing new challenges to the energy system,
air quality, and agriculture.

Heavy Downpours

2

Heavy downpours are increasing
and are projected to increase
further. These can lead to flooding and related impacts on
water quality, infrastructure,
and agriculture.

Summer Drought
Summer drought is projected
to increase, affecting water
supply, agriculture,
ecosystems, and
energy production.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Wide Ranging Impacts
Major changes to ecosystems
including species range shifts,
population crashes, and other
sudden transformations could
have wide ranging impacts, not
only for natural systems but also
for health, agriculture, and other
sectors.

Coastal Flooding
Coastal flooding due to sea level
rise and storm surge will
increasingly put lives and property at risk. Health, water quality,
energy, infrastructure, and
coastal ecosystems are all
affected.

Opportunities
Climate change may create
new opportunities related to a
longer, warmer growing season
for agriculture, and the potential
for abundant water resources.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

3



Each region of New York State (as defined
by ClimAID) has unique attributes that will
be affected by climate change. Many of
the issues highlighted below are described
in more detail in the sector discussions
that follow.

Region 1: Western New York
Great Lakes Plain

Region 6: Tug Hill Plateau
• Important region for hydropower
• Lake effect snows could increase in the short term
• Snowmobiling opportunities decline
• Great Lakes water levels may decline
Temperature

Baseline
44ºF

2050s
+3.5 to 5.5º

2080s
+4.5 to 9.0º

Precipitation

51in

0 to +10%

+5 to 15%

• Agricultural revenue highest in state
• Relatively low rainfall, increased summer
drought risk
• High value crops could need irrigation
• Improved conditions for grapes projected
Temperature

Baseline
48ºF

2050s
+3.0 to 5.5º

2080s
+4.5 to 8.5º

Precipitation

37in

0 to +10%

0 to +15%

Region 3: Southern Tier
• Dairy dominates agricultural economy
• Milk production losses projected
• Susquehanna River flooding increases
• One of the first parts of the state hit by
invasive insects, weeds, and other pests
moving north

4

Temperature

Baseline
46ºF

2050s
+3.5 to 5.5º

2080s
+4.5 to 8.5º

Precipitation

38in

0 to +10%

+5 to 10%

Region 2: Catskill Mountains
and Hudson River Valley
• Watershed for New York City water supply
• Spruce/Fir forests disappear from mountains
• Popular apple varieties decline
• Winter recreation declines; summer
opportunities increase
• Hemlock wooly adelgid destroys trees
• Native brook trout decline, replaced by bass
Temperature

Baseline
48ºF

2050s
+3.0 to 5.0º

2080s
+4.0 to 8.0º

Precipitation

48in

0 to +10%

+5 to 10%

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Region 7: Adirondack
Mountains
• Popular tourist destination
• Loss of high-elevation plants, animals,
and ecosystem types
• Winter recreation declines; summer
opportunities increase
• Milk production declines, though less
than other regions

Temperature

Baseline
42ºF

2050s
+3.0 to 5.5º

2080s
+4.0 to 9.0º

Precipitation

38in

0 to +5%

+5 to 15%

Region 5: Hudson and
Mohawk River Valley
• Major rivers characterize this region
• Saltwater front moves further up the
Hudson River
• Potential contamination of New York
City's back-up water supply
• Propagation of storm surge up
the Hudson from the coast
• Popular apple varieties decline
Temperature

Baseline
50ºF

2050s
+3.0 to 5.5º

2080s
+4.0 to 8.0º

Precipitation

38in

0 to +5%

+5 to 10%

Region 4: New York City and Long Island
• Highest density population in the state
• Sea level rise and storm surge increase
coastal flooding, erosion, and wetland loss
• Challenges for water supply and
wastewater treatment
• Heat-related deaths increase
• Illnesses related to air quality increase
• Higher summer energy demand stresses
the energy system
Temperature

Baseline
53ºF

2050s
+3.0 to 5.0º

2080s
+4.0 to 7.5º

Precipitation

47in

0 to +10%

+5 to 10%

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

5



Projected Annual Temperature Change - 2080s (ºF)

4ºF

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

Projected Annual Precipitation Change - 2080s (%)

-2%

0

2

4

6

8

10

Average annual temperatures are projected to increase by
4.0 to 9.0ºF by the 2080s, with the lower end of this range
projected under lower greenhouse gas emissions scenarios
and the higher end under higher emissions scenarios. A midrange emissions scenario, A1B, was used for the maps
above, yielding temperature increases of about 7ºF for most
of the state. The A1B trajectory is associated with relatively
rapid increases in emissions for the first half of this century,
followed by a gradual decrease in emissions after 2050.

Precipitation across New York State may increase by
approximately 5 to 15 percent by the 2080s, with the
greatest increases in the northern parts of the state.
Much of this additional precipitation may occur during
the winter months as rain, while late summer and early
fall precipitation could decline slightly. Both maps show
the average across 16 global climate models.

Temperatures are expected to rise across the state, by
1.5 to 3°F by the 2020s, 3 to 5.5°F by the 2050s, and
4 to 9°F by the 2080s. The lower ends of these ranges
are for lower greenhouse gas emissions scenarios (in
which society reduces heat-trapping gas emissions) and
the higher ends for higher emissions scenarios (in which
emissions continue to increase). These are not the best
and worst cases, however. Sharp cuts in global emissions
could result in temperature increases lower than the
bottoms of these ranges, while a continuation of business-as-usual could result in increases higher than the
high ends.

Continuing the observed trend, more precipitation is
expected to fall in heavy downpours and less in light
rains.

Annual average precipitation is projected to
increase by up to 5 percent by the 2020s, up to
10 percent by the 2050s and up to 15 percent by
the 2080s. This will not be distributed evenly
over the course of the year. Much of this additional precipitation is likely to occur during the
winter months, with the possibility of slightly
reduced precipitation projected for the late summer and early fall.

Projected Seasonal Precipitation Change - 2050s (% change)

6

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

Sea level rise projections that do not include significant
melting of the polar ice sheets (which is already
observed to be occurring) suggest 1 to 5 inches of rise
by the 2020s, 5 to 12 inches by the 2050s and 8 to 23
inches by the 2080s. Scenarios that include rapid melting of polar ice project 4 to 10 inches of sea level rise by
the 2020s, 17 to 29 inches by the 2050s and 37 to 55
inches by the 2080s.

ClimAID Region

Winter

Spring

Summer

Fall

1. Western New York Great Lakes Plain

+5 to +15

0 to +15

-10 to +10

-5 to +10

2. Catskill Mountains and Hudson River Valley

0 to +15

0 to +10

-5 to +10

-5 to +10

3. Southern Tier

+5 to +15

0 to +10

-5 to +5

-10 to +5

4. New York City and Long Island

0 to +15

0 to +10

-5 to +10

-5 to +10

5. Hudson and Mohawk River Valley

+5 to +15

-5 to +10

-5 to +5

-5 to +10

6. Tug Hill Plateau

+5 to +15

0 to +10

-5 to +10

-5 to +10

7. Adirondack Mountains

+5 to +15

-5 to +10

-5 to +5

-5 to +10



1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100
52
54
56
Min

58

egnar lartneC

60
62
64
66
68

Observed
B1
A1B
A2
3 emissions scenarios
16 GCMs and

Max

Annual temperature (°F)

Observed and Projected Annual Temperature Change (ºF)

These climate-related risks will affect
the state's economy and environment.
Some of the most serious vulnerabilities
and potential adaptation strategies are
highlighted in this report.

Annual temperature (°F)

66
64

16 GCMs and
3 emissions scenarios
A2
A1B
B1
Observed

Max

Central range

68

62
60
58

Min

56
54
52
1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100

Higher temperatures and increased
heat waves have the potential to

Increased frequency of heavy
downpours has the potential to

Sea level rise and coastal flooding
have the potential to

• increase fatigue of materials in
water, energy, transportation and
telecommunications infrastructure;
• affect drinking water supply;
• cause a greater frequency of
summer heat stress on people,
plants and animals;
• alter pest populations and habits,
affecting agriculture and ecosystems;
• change the distribution of key
crops such as apples, cabbage,
and potatoes;
• cause reductions in dairy milk
production;
• increase electricity demand for
cooling;
• lead to declines in air quality that
cause respiratory illness; and

• affect drinking water supply;
• heighten risk of river flooding;
• flood key rail lines, roadways and
transportation hubs; and
• increase delays and hazards related to extreme weather events.

• increase risk of storm surge-related
flooding along coast;
• expand areas at risk of coastal
flooding;
• increase vulnerability of energy facilities located in coastal areas;
• flood transportation and communication facilities; and
• cause saltwater intrusion into some
freshwater supplies near the coasts.

• cause more heat-related deaths.

Projected Sea Level Rise for New York State (inches)
2050s

2080s

GCM-based

+1 to +5

+5 to +12

+8 to +23

Rapid ice melt scenario

+4 to +10

+17 to +29

+37 to +55

Modeled Sea Level Rise

2020s

The central range of sea level rise projections is shown, rounded to the
nearest inch, based on the average of the ClimAID Global Climate Modelbased (GCM) for a range of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios as reported by IPCC 2007 and the ClimAID rapid ice melt scenario (based on accelerated melting of the Greenland and West Antarctic Ice Sheets).

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

7



Adaptation refers to actions taken to prepare for
climate change, helping to reduce adverse impacts
or take advantage of beneficial ones.
Strategies can include changes in operations, management, infrastructure, and/or policies that reduce
risk and/or capitalize on potential opportunities associated with climate change. Adaptations can take
place at the individual, household, community,
organization, and institutional level. Adaptation can
be thought of as just better planning, incorporating
the most current information about climate into a
variety of decisions. Adaptation should be woven into
the everyday practices of organizations and agencies.
Adaptive capacity refers to the ability of a system
to adjust to actual or expected climate stresses or
to cope with their consequences.
New York State as a whole is generally considered to
have significant resources and capacity for effective
adaptation responses. However, the costs and benefits
of adaptation will not be evenly distributed throughout the state. There can also be a variety of unintended consequences of adaptation options. For
example, building sea walls to protect coastal property from rising sea levels can exacerbate the loss of
coastal wetlands that serve to protect coastlines from
storm surge damage.

Adaptations undertaken in one sector often have
implications for other sectors.
For example, increased use of air conditioning is an
adaptation to reduce heat-related illness and death in
the health sector as well as to reduce heat stress on
livestock in the agriculture sector. However, such a
strategy would increase peak summer energy use,
increasing demands on both energy and water
resources. If increased tree planting is used to reduce
urban heat, it will be important to plant low-pollen tree
species because allergenic pollen is on the rise in a
warmer, higher-CO2 world. These examples point to
the need for integrated thinking about adaptation
strategies to avoid creating new problems. In addition,
climate change and some adaptation options can worsen social and economic inequalities that are already
present and create new inequalities. This raises equity
issues that are discussed on the following pages.
Adaptation strategies do not directly include actions
aimed at reducing the speed and amount of climate
change.
Actions to reduce climate change, often called “mitigation,” involve lowering emissions of heat-trapping gases
or increasing their removal from the atmosphere.
Mitigation measures would reduce climate change
impacts in the longer term.

8

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



There are interactions between
adaptation and mitigation.
For example, improving insulation and
using reflective roofing material keeps
buildings cooler in summer (adaptation)
as well as reducing energy use and the related heat-trapping emissions (mitigation). There
can be a variety of interactions between mitigation
and adaptation measures. Some measures, such as
green roofs, reduce emissions by decreasing the need for air
conditioning as well as lessen impacts by keeping buildings cooler
and reducing stormwater flooding. On the other hand, increasing use
of air conditioning to adapt to rising temperatures results in increased
emissions. Thus, mitigation and adaptation measures should be considered in concert. Both are necessary elements of an effective
response strategy. These two types of responses are also linked in that
more effective mitigation measures would reduce the amount of climate change, and therefore affect the need for adaptation.
Our choices can make us more or less vulnerable to
climate change.
For example, building in coastal zones and river flood plains and
paving over large amounts of land make us more vulnerable to flooding and inundation due to sea level rise and increasing heavy downpours. In contrast, decisions made taking into account the adaptation
principles described here can make us less vulnerable, that is, better
able to withstand the impacts of climate change. However, even the
best efforts to reduce vulnerability will not be sufficient to eliminate
all damages associated with climate change in the long-term.
The goal is to create a more climate-resilient New York State.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

9



Reduce other stresses to help improve the adaptive
capacity of any system, making it more resilient to climate change. This is true for water and energy supply
systems, natural ecosystems, and other sectors.
• For ecosystems, options include reducing human transport of invasive species, controlling sprawl and other
habitat destruction, and providing dispersal corridors to
allow species range shifts in response to climate
change.
• For water and energy systems, options include lowering
demand through efficiency measures and consumer
education.
• For coasts, reducing development and preserving wetlands through various policies can help.
• For human health, pollution reduction and better management of chronic disease would increase resilience.

Take advantage of normal capital repair and replacement cycles of infrastructure to build in climate change
adaptations that are flexible to future conditions.
• When building long-lived infrastructure, such as power
plants, tunnels, and bridges, consider projected
increases in temperature and sea level, and changes in
precipitation patterns.
• Designing a 1-foot floodwall with a strong enough foundation to support an added foot or two of height if
needed is an example of flexible adaptation.
• When building new dairy barns, design for better ventilation and possibly the ability to add other cooling technologies.
• Incorporate climate change projections such as the
increase in heavy downpours and sea level rise in
capital investment decisions currently being made in
storm water and wastewater systems.

10

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Examine and revise regulatory mechanisms and land
use policies such as zoning, setbacks, building codes,
and incentives, taking climate change into account.

Improve monitoring, measurement, and data gathering
and distribution to provide the information needed to
adapt as climate change proceeds.

• Regulations concerning infrastructure such as those
that govern bridge height and clearance, dam height
and strength, materials used, dimensions of drainage
culverts for roads, roof strength, and foundation depth
should be reconsidered.
• Definitions of flood zones should be revisited and how
they may change in the future should be considered.
• Regulations that affect adaptive capacity should be
assessed. For example, stronger regulations to control
invasive species can help make ecosystems more
resilient, and stronger efficiency standards can make
water and energy systems more resilient.
• Changes in treaties such as those governing water
rights might be appropriate if the amounts and distributions of the resources change. Risk sharing mechanisms including various types of insurance and regional
planning approaches should also be examined.

• Monitor climate change science for the latest developments.
• A central repository for information on new norms for
climate, species, etc. would help to reduce uncertainty
and better inform policy.
• Monitoring the effectiveness of various adaptation
strategies is important.
• There is a need to better monitor hazards and events,
and to archive and make this information widely available. This might include air quality monitoring, citizen
watches for invasive species, and real-time data gathering on the impacts of extreme weather events (such as,
crop and timber value lost, reduction in dairy production, cost of property damaged, and numbers of heatrelated illnesses and deaths).
• In addition to monitoring hazards, events, and adaptation strategies, combine the tracking of these indicators
to improve understanding of what impacts will result
from various climate events and what adaptation strategies are effective.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

11



Employment in Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Related Activities

Climate change risks, vulnerabilities, and capacities
to adapt are uneven across regions, sectors, households, individuals, and social groups.
Certain groups will be disproportionately affected
by the impacts of climate change.
Equity issues emerge because climate change
impacts and adaptation policies can worsen existing
inequalities and can also create new patterns of
winners and losers.
Intergenerational equity issues arise from the fact
that future generations will suffer the consequences
of past and current generations' actions.

Percent of total county employment
0% - 1%
2%
3% - 4%
5% - 6%
7% - 11%

The same groups, such as the elderly, tend to be at
risk for adverse impacts of climate change across
multiple sectors.

Groups

Areas/Locations
• Rural areas, especially small
towns, are more vulnerable to,
and have less capacity to
cope with, extreme events such as floods,
droughts, ice storms and other climate-related
stressors.
• Regions that depend on agriculture and tourism
(such as fishing, skiing, and snowmobiling) may be
especially in need of adaptation assistance.
• Low-income urban neighborhoods, especially those
within flood zones, are less able to cope with climate impacts such as heat waves, flooding, and
coastal storms.
• Coastal zones are vulnerable to sea level rise and
storm surge. There are already numerous properties
in coastal zones that cannot get insurance, for
example.

• Elderly, disabled and healthcompromised individuals are
more vulnerable to climate
hazards, including floods and heat waves.
• Low-income groups have limited ability to meet
higher energy costs, making them more vulnerable
to the effects of heat waves.
• Those who lack affordable health care are more vulnerable to climate-related illnesses such as asthma.
• Those who depend on public transportation to get
to work, and lack private cars for evacuating during
emergencies, are vulnerable.
• Farm workers may be exposed to more chemicals if
pesticide use increases in response to climate
change.
• Asthma sufferers will be more vulnerable to the
decline in air quality during heat waves.

12

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Poverty Rates

Income Disparities

Median income in 2007 (dollars)

Percent below poverty line

32,409 - 40,039
40,702 - 44,487
44,511 - 52,117
52,185 - 65,205
66,296 - 87,658

4.7 - 8.0
8.1 - 11.0
11.1 - 14.0
14.1 - 20.0
20.1 - 27.1

Educational Attainment

Firms and Industries
• Smaller businesses are less
able to cope with climaterelated interruptions and
stresses than larger businesses.
• With often more limited capital reserves, smaller
firms are less able to withstand revenue loss associated with power and communication service disruptions.
• Small businesses tend to have less capital available
to make investments to promote adaptation, such
as the use of snowmaking in ski areas, or adoption
of new crops or techniques on small farms.

Percent HS Graduate or higher
68 - 80
81 - 85
86 - 88
89 - 90
91 -98
No data

There is a need for more attention to how the
impacts of climate change adaptation policies
affect different populations, areas, and industries.
Affected communities and populations should
have a voice in the adaptation policy process.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

13



ECONOMICS
New York State’s climate has already begun to change and impacts related to
increasing temperatures and sea level rise are already being felt in the state,
with associated costs. Future climate change has the potential to cause even
more significant economic costs for New York State. Additional economic
costs are likely to be tens of billions of dollars per year by the middle of this
century. However, many costs of climate change are still not known and are
difficult to estimate. Climate-change related economic impacts will be experienced in all sectors, types of communities and regions across the state.

Regions
All regions of the state will incur economic costs associated with
climate change. Specific economic impacts will affect particular
regions. For example, the negative impact on the state’s winter
recreation industry will adversely affect the Catskill and Adirondack
regions.

Types of Climate Impact Costs
Direct costs include costs that are incurred as the
direct economic outcomes of a specific climate event
or aspect of climate change. Direct costs can be
measured by standard methods of national income
accounting, including lost production and loss of
value to consumers.

Indirect costs are costs incurred as secondary outcomes of the direct costs of a specific event or facet
of climate change. Examples include jobs lost in
firms that provide inputs to firms directly harmed by
climate change.

Sectors

Impact costs are direct costs associated with the
impacts of climate change, for example the reduction
in milk produced by dairy cows due to heat stress.
Adaptation costs include direct costs associated
with adapting to the impacts of climate change, such
as the cost of cooling dairy barns to reduce heat
stress on dairy cows.

Costs of residual damage are direct costs of
impacts that cannot be adapted to, for example,
reductions in milk production due to heat stress that
may occur if cooling capacity is exceeded.

The coastal zone, because of its relative exposure and vulnerability
to storms and the concentration of residences, businesses, and
infrastructure on the shore, will experience the greatest economic
impact of any single region. The urbanized areas of the state with
high population density will incur higher public health costs because
of existing and projected urban heat island conditions.

All sectors will incur costs associated with climate change; however,
the costs will be highly uneven across and within sectors.
• All sectors are likely to experience significant economic impacts
that may alter the overall structure and function of the sector.
• Water and flooding related management costs will affect almost
all sectors.
• The highest direct economic costs of climate change are connected to large scale capital investment, housing, and commercial activity in the coastal zone.
• Sectors such as agriculture and telecommunications are inherently dynamic, changing annually, seasonally, and in some cases
even daily. The economic consequences of climate change will
be woven into the risk management and operations of the sector.

14

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Economic Diversity of Coastal Populations

New York City and Long Island are among the areas most at
risk from climate change. The areas in color on this map are
already at risk from coastal flooding during storms, and much
more land will be at risk as sea level rise accelerates. The
impacts and costs of climate change and adaptation options
in this heavily developed coastal zone will be large and
diverse. There is a great deal of property in harm’s way,
including long-lived, high-value infrastructure such as roads,
airports, bridges, and power plants. As shown on the map,
the population of this region is very diverse, from low income
inner-city neighborhoods to very high income communities.

Timing
Economic costs of climate change impacts will generally
increase throughout the century as the rate of climate
change accelerates. Some of the largest costs will be
associated with extreme events such as large scale floods
and heat waves. Costs associated with average climate
changes are expected to increase more slowly over time.
The timing of impacts could be more mixed for sectors
that are expected to experience both potential benefits
and costs. For example, in the agricultural sector, short
term costs could eventually be overwhelmed by the emergence of longer term benefits, or vice versa.

Climate Change Adaptation
Costs and Benefits
The implementation of adaptation strategies will bring economic benefits to the state. For each sector, a wide variety
of adaptation options at varying costs are available.
• Transportation, the coastal zone, and water resources
will have the most significant climate change impact
costs and will require the most adaptations.
• Energy, telecommunications, and agriculture sectors
have costs that could be large if there is no adaptation;
but adaptation to climate could be seen as a regular
part of moderate re-investment.
• The benefit-cost ratio comparing avoided impacts to
costs of adaptation is highest for the public health and
coastal zones sectors, moderate for the water
resources, agriculture, energy, and transportation sectors, and low for the telecommunications sector.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

15



Key Climate Impacts
Rising air temperatures intensify the water cycle by driving increased
evaporation and precipitation. The resulting altered patterns of precipitation include more rain falling in heavy events, often with longer dry periods in between. Such changes can have a variety of effects on water
resources.
Heavy downpours have increased over the past 50 years and
this trend is projected to continue, causing an increase in
localized flash flooding in urban areas and hilly regions.

Context
New York State has an abundance
of water resources, including large
freshwater lakes, high-yielding
groundwater aquifers and major
rivers.
Water resources are managed by
a diverse array of large and small
agencies, governments and institutions, with little statewide coordination.
Water resources are already subject to numerous human-induced
stresses, such as increasing
demand for water and insufficient
water supply coordination; these
pressures are likely to increase
over the next several decades.
Water quality is already at risk from
aging wastewater treatment
plants, continued combined
sewage overflow events, and
excess pollution from agricultural
and urban areas.

Flooding has the potential to increase pollutants in the water
supply and inundate wastewater treatment plants and other
vulnerable development within floodplains.
Less frequent summer rainfall is expected to result in additional, and possibly longer, summer dry periods, potentially
impacting the ability of water supply systems to meet
demands.
Reduced summer flows on large rivers and lowered groundwater tables could lead to conflicts among competing water
users.
Increasing water temperatures in rivers and streams will
affect aquatic heath and reduce the capacity of streams to
assimilate effluent from wastewater treatment plants.
Projected rainfall and frequency of extreme storms
Rainfall (in.)

Retur
Return
n Period (Years)
(Y
Years)
ears)
110

5.55

105

5.50

100

5.45

95

5.40

90

5.35

85

5.30

80

5.25

75

1961

1981

2001

2021

2041

2061

5.20

Return Period of Storm Equivalent to 1961-1990 100-year storm
Return
Amount of 100-year storm

16

DRAFT - November 1

The amount of rain falling in a "100-year" storm is projected to increase (red line),
while the number of years between such storms ("return period") is projected to
decrease (blue line). Thus, rainstorms will become both more severe and more frequent. These results, from the UK Met Office Hadley Centre Climate Model Version 3
(HadCM3), are broadly consistent with those of the other 15 GCMs used by ClimAID.



Adaptation Options

The number of rainfall events over one inch from 1960-2100

Adaptation can build on water managers’ existing capacity to
handle large variability. Strategies can be designed to be flexible to a range of future conditions. New York's relative
wealth of water resources, if properly managed, can contribute to resilience and new economic opportunities.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Relocate infrastructure such as wastewater treatment
plants and high-density housing to higher elevations and
outside of high risk floodplains. For infrastructure that
must remain in the floodplain, elevate structures, construct berms or levees to reduce flood damage.
• Adopt stormwater infrastructure and management practices and upgrade combined sewer and stormwater systems to reduce pollution.

Number Events > 1 in. per Y
Year
ear
10

Observed
HADCM3

8
6
4
2
1961

1981

2001

2021
2041
Y
Year
ear

2061

2081

The observed number of rainfall events exceeding one inch
from 1960 to 2000 is shown by the black line, and the projected number of such events, using the HadCM3 model, is
show by blue line. These results are broadly consistent with
those of the other 15 GCMs used by ClimAID.

Larger-scale Strategies
• Use multiple strategies to increase water use efficiency.
Conserve water through leak detection programs; use of
low-flow showerheads, toilets, and washing machines;
and rain barrels for garden watering. Research equitable
water pricing programs.
• Establish stream flow regulations that mimic natural seasonal flow patterns, including minimum flow requirements, to protect aquatic ecosystem health.
• Expand basin-level commissions to provide better oversight, address water quality issues, and take leadership on
monitoring, conservation, coordination of emergency
response, and new infrastructure.
• Develop more comprehensive drought management programs that include improved monitoring of water supply
storage levels and that institute specific conservation
measures when supplies decline below set thresholds.
Update and enlarge stockpiles of emergency equipment
to help small water supply systems and to assist during
emergencies.
Co-Benefits
Continuing and expanding current water resource management practices, such as reducing stormwater runoff into
water bodies, will benefit pollution control as well as climate
adaptation. Encouraging water conservation strategies and
minimum flow criteria to prepare for potential summer
droughts will help to guarantee water sufficiency.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

17



Particularly Vulnerable Groups

Flood Events Per County from 1994-2006

Smaller water systems are more vulnerable to drought and
other types of water supply disruptions than larger systems,
since large systems tend to be more closely managed and
often have more resources for dealing with drought.
The elderly and people with disabilities tend to be more vulnerable to immediate flood hazards due to limited mobility.
Rapidly developing, higher-income exurban communities
may experience water scarcity as demand increases in these
areas and overwhelms local supplies.

Events
0
1
2
3
4
6

Lower-income or non-English speaking populations may be
particularly vulnerable to increasing levels of disease-causing agents in the water supply or contaminants in well water
as they may be less aware of government programs and
warnings and have less access to health care.

Number of FEMA-declared flood disasters in
New York state counties. (FEMA)

Susquehanna River Flooding, June 2006
The value of preparedness
Flooding is already a major problem across New York State with damages costing an average of $50 million each
year. There are several flood management strategies that can help solve current problems while addressing possible
future ones.
The June 2006 Susquehanna River flood-the largest on record since gauging began on the river in 1912-provides
insights into strategies that can be used to reduce flood risks and impacts. Record precipitation from June 25 to
28, totaling 3 to 11 inches, culminated in significant flooding in the basin. Twelve counties in New York and 30 in
Pennsylvania were declared disaster areas. Rainfall coupled with runoff from steep hillsides contributed to river
water levels rising from less than 5 feet to nearly 21 feet in nine hours. Broome County, N.Y., incurred the most
damages.
In Broome County, about 3,350 properties were flooded. Fifty-eight percent of the flooded properties were residential and 10 percent were commercial. Nearly 30 percent of the shopping area, two sewage treatment plants, a public works facility, a hospital, and several hundred miles of roads were also flooded. The town of Conklin was the
hardest hit, with 30 percent of its properties flooded, followed by 13 percent in Kirkwood, and 10 percent in Port
Dickinson. In total, 1,020 of the properties that were flooded were not within FEMA's Special Flood Hazard Area,
including 723 residential properties. These properties were valued at more than $46.3 million and were exempt from
having federally mandated insurance.

18

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Distribution of flood risks in a select area in Broome County
Properties flooded in 2006 relative to FEMA floodzone designation

Water level of the Susquehanna River at Conklin, N.Y.
during the June 2006
g flood.
Daily Discharge
Discharge (1000 cubic feet per second)
80
60
40
20
0
5/30/06

6/19/06

7/9/06

7/29/06

Days of very heavy rain on top of already saturated soils from
weeks of rain, caused a huge spike in the level of the
Susquehanna River (chart above), flooding thousands of
properties, including Lourdes Hospital (photo below).

Despite the very rapid onset of the flood and the thousands
of properties that were inundated, there were only four
deaths, thanks to the Susquehanna River Basin's well-developed flood-response system. The area has an excellent
warning-and-response system that links NOAA-based
weather forecasts to real-time USGS streamflow data and coordinates with regional and local emergency response
teams. The June 2006 response included pre-flood community-wide warnings and evacuations, water pumping
and sand bag efforts, and emergency evacuations and medical services during the flood. Such a system is not
inexpensive to operate; a single USGS gauge can cost nearly $20,000 per year to maintain and the system has
nearly 10 such gauges. However, the value of such an early warning system is apparent when large floods do
occur, and remains important for the future.
While the area has extensive levees and dams, some are outdated and the current system is not adequate to deal
with potential higher-magnitude floods. Development within the floodplains behind these barriers has intensified,
making communities more vulnerable and damages greater when floods occur. Strategies to help further reduce
flood risk include moving out of the highest risk areas with homeowner buyouts following floods, and relocating
infrastructure, such as wastewater treatment plants, out of floodplains. This strategy was used successfully in
Conklin, and elsewhere. It reduces subsequent flood risk, both to lives and buildings, and monetary costs can be
comparable to or less than costs to expand levees. It also expands natural flood-control processes by expanding
the undeveloped areas so that floodwaters can spread out and dissipate instead of being forced downstream. In
some areas, downstream flooding can also be lessened by reducing stormwater runoff through improving soil infiltration capacity, expanding vegetated surfaces, and decreasing impervious surfaces such as roads.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

19



Key Climate Impacts
High water levels, strong winds, and heavy precipitation resulting from strong
coastal storms already cause billions of dollars in damages and disrupt transportation and power distribution systems. Sea level rise will lead to more frequent and extensive coastal flooding. Warming ocean waters raise sea level
through thermal expansion and have the potential to strengthen the most
powerful storms.
Barrier islands are being dramatically altered by strong coastal
storms as ocean waters overwash dunes, create new inlets,
and erode beaches.

Context
New York's coastal zones are becoming
more developed, further increasing the
consequences of flooding, coastal erosion, and sea level rise.
More than a half million people live within
the 100-year coastal floodplain in New
York State.
Coastal marshes and wetlands are highly
sensitive and must maintain a delicate
balance as they are affected by rapid sea
level rise, wave erosion, sediment deposition and other forces. These important
ecosystems provide wildlife habitat, protect coastlines against storms, and
absorb pollution.
Coastal impacts propagate into inland
areas, such as up the Hudson River, all
the way to the Troy Dam.

The impacts of climate change occur in the context of numerous other stresses, many of which are also caused by human
activities. While climate change increases air and water temperatures and alters precipitation and runoff patterns, nitrogen
from agricultural areas is an additional stress that harms fish
and shellfish in the coastal zone. The map shows shellfish closures for the Peconic River Estuary in 2005 and the agricultural
land use practices that contribute to such closures.
20

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

Sea level rise will greatly amplify risks to coastal populations
and will lead to permanent inundation of low-lying areas,
more frequent flooding by storm surges, and increased beach
erosion.
Loss of coastal wetlands reduces species diversity, including
fish and shellfish populations.
Some marine species, such as lobsters, are moving north out
of New York State, while other species, such as the blue claw
crab, are increasing in the warmer waters.
Saltwater could reach farther up the Hudson River and in
estuaries, contaminating water supplies. Tides and storm
surges may propagate farther, increasing flood risk both near
and far from the coast.
Sea level rise may become the dominant stressor acting on
vulnerable salt marshes.
Closures of Shellfish Harvesting Related to Agricultural Practices



Adaptation Options
Implementation of adaptation strategies in coastal zones
is complicated by the complex interactions of natural and
human systems and competing demands for resources.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure
Strategies
• Move sand onto beaches, although doing so can lead
to habitat disruption and erosion in the area of
removal, and is only a temporary solution. Add sediment from shipping channels to marshes, although this
may not keep up with the rate of loss.
• Consider use of engineering-based strategies such as
constructing or raising sea walls, and bio-engineered
strategies including restoring or creating wetlands.
• Site new infrastructure and developments outside of
future floodplains, taking into consideration the effects
of sea level rise, erosion of barrier islands and coastlines, and wetland inundation.
Larger-scale Strategies
• Buy out land or perform land swaps to encourage people to move out of flood-prone areas and allow for wetlands to shift inland. Enact rolling easements to help
protect coastal wetlands by prohibiting seawall construction while still allowing some near-shore development.
• Improve building codes to promote storm-resistant
structures and increase shoreline setbacks.

Particularly Vulnerable Groups
Within the coastal zone, elderly and disabled residents
and households without cars are particularly vulnerable
to flood hazards as they have more difficultly evacuating
in a timely manner.
Low-income populations living in coastal and nearcoastal zones will be less able to recover from damages
resulting from extreme weather events than will wealthier populations.

New York's highly developed and
populated coastlines are vulnerable to
severe coastal storms, such as hurricanes.
Projected Flooding

Projected flood map for 1-in-10 year storm event for Long
Beach and surrounding bay communities for ClimAID rapid
ice melt scenario.

Co-benefits
Protecting wetland areas has mitigation and other
ecosystem service co-benefits because they provide critical functions such as capturing carbon, providing habitat for fish and other species, and serving as a buffer for
storm surge.

Racial and ethnic minorities are more vulnerable to
extreme events than nonminority populations; African
Americans and Latinos represent a significant portion of
the people living in the New York City flood zone.
Coldwater marine species, such as lobsters, are vulnerable to increases in sea surface temperature and some are
already beginning to move north out of New York State
waters.
Freshwater ecosystems in estuaries are vulnerable to
saltwater intrusion as sea level rises.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

21



Effects of sea level rise on vital coastal wetlands
Salt marshes are essential ecosystems in New York State that provide a
number of services including protection against coastal storm damage,
habitat for migratory birds, nurseries for local fisheries, and recreation
opportunities for residents. Over the past several decades, the area of
these essential ecosystems has declined dramatically.
While sea level rise is currently a relatively minor component among
several human-induced stressors (including draining of marshes, building
seawalls, and dredging navigation channels) that may be contributing to
the submergence and loss of vulnerable marshes, sea level rise may
become the dominant factor in future decades.
At Jamaica Bay in New York City, island salt marsh area declined by 20
to 35 percent between the mid-1920s and mid-1970s. Since the mid
1970s, despite the implementation of regulations limiting dredging and
filling activity, the rate of loss has accelerated; by 2008 close to 70 percent of the mid-1920s marsh area had been lost. In a 2003 pilot project
at Big Egg Marsh, sediment was sprayed to a thickness of up to 3 feet
and plugs of Spartina alterniflora, a marsh plant, were planted. In 2006 at
Elder's Point East, a large-scale, $12 million restoration project used
sand from maintenance dredging to artificially elevate the marsh. At both
sites, the elevated stands of marsh plants are currently thriving. The successes of these two projects led to initiation of the 2010 restoration at
Elder's Point West with plans underway for Yellow Bar Hassock.

Salt Marsh Loss Comparisons
1951

1974

1999

2005

Udalls Cove Park in Queens and Pelham Bay Park
in the Bronx have also experienced significant
marsh loss. At Udalls Cove Park, marsh area has
declined by 38 percent since 1974 and by 33 and
45 percent at two locations in Pelham Bay Park.
Monitoring stations have been established in these
parks to track the changes. The data are being
used in combination with projected rates of sea
level rise and aerial photographs to assist park
managers, scientists and public advocates in managing and thereby perhaps minimizing salt marsh
loss in the coming decades.

Udalls Cove Park Preserve, Queens, NY

22

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Sea level rise and severe coastal storms
Vulnerability of urban and suburban communities

Sea level rise will lead to
more frequent and extensive
coastal flooding.

New York's highly developed and populated coastlines are vulnerable to
severe coastal storms, such as hurricanes. The urban and suburban regions
of Long Beach and the communities along the mainland coastline of Great
South Bay are two examples of areas at risk. Flood adaptation strategies for
such areas require a holistic approach that promotes resiliency across
communities.
Sea level rise in combination with a coastal storm that currently occurs
about once every 100 years on average is expected to place a growing
population and more property at risk from flood and storm damage. In
2020, nearly 96,000 people in the Long Beach area alone may be at risk
from sea level rise under the rapid ice melt scenario; by 2080, that number
may rise to more than 114,500 people. The value of property at risk in the
Long Beach area under this scenario ranges from about $6.4 billion in 2020
to about $7.2 billion in 2080.
To help protect against the effects of sea level
rise and coastal storm flooding, a number of
adaptation strategies could be undertaken. In
terms of financial cost, relocating agricultural and
low-density residential development further away
from the coast is an appropriate adaptation
strategy. Engineering-based strategies, such as
constructing levees and sea walls, can be
appropriate for moderate- and high-density
development, although they involve tradeoffs.
Each adaptation measure may create new patterns of winners and losers.
For example, sea walls may protect some people within a community while
others are left vulnerable to flooding. Seawalls also prevent wetlands from
migrating inland, resulting in the loss of wetlands that are important nurseries for marine species and that also help protect the coastline from damage during storms. Relocating infrastructure to higher elevation areas may
result in gentrification in the upland community, making low-income populations more vulnerable. Such patterns of vulnerability need to be considered
when planning for adaptation to reduce climate change impacts.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

Flood Zone for a 1-in-100 Year Storm
in Great South Bay

The map shows areas projected to be
flooded in three future time periods based
on projections from 7 global climate models, 3 emissions scenarios, and the rapid
ice melt scenario used in ClimAID.

23



Key Climate Impacts
Within the next several decades New York State is likely to see widespread shifts in species composition in the state's forests and other natural landscapes, with the loss of spruce-fir forests, alpine tundra and
boreal plant communities.

Context
The vast majority of New York's
forests and other natural landscapes
are privately owned (more than 90
percent of the state's 15.8 million
acres of potential timberland), with
implications for land-use planning
and policies.
Urbanization and other land-use
changes have fragmented large,
connected habitats important for
species dispersal and migration.

Climate change will favor the expansion of some invasive species into
New York, such as the aggressive weed, kudzu, and the insect pest,
hemlock woolly adelgid. Some habitat and food generalists (such as
white-tailed deer) may also benefit.
A longer growing season and the potential fertilization effect of
increasing carbon dioxide could increase the productivity of some
hardwood tree species, provided growth is not limited by other factors
such as drought or nutrient deficiency.
Carbon dioxide fertilization tends to preferentially increase the growth
rate of fast growing species, which are often weeds and other invasive
species.
Lakes, streams, inland wetlands and associated aquatic species will be
highly vulnerable to changes in the timing, supply, and intensity of
rainfall and snowmelt, groundwater recharge and duration of ice cover.
Increasing water temperatures will negatively affect brook trout and
other native coldwater fish.

Increasing deer populations cause
economic losses to agricultural
crops and urban landscapes, and
their selective feeding in natural landscapes alters plant community structure with cascading effects on other
species.
Many non-climate stressors currently
have negative effects on New York's
ecosystems. These stressors include
invasive species, air pollution, acid
precipitation, and excess nitrogen
and phosphorus in the state's
waterways.

24

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



New York's state fish, the brook
trout, is at particular risk from
hemlock loss and is already at risk
from increasing temperatures.

Adaptation Options
When considering adaptation strategies for ecosystems, it is important to manage primarily for important ecosystem services and biodiversity rather than attempting to maintain the current mix of species.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Develop management interventions to reduce vulnerability
of high-priority species and communities, and determine
minimum area needed to maintain boreal or other threatened ecosystems.

Ecoregions

Larger-scale Strategies
• Maintain healthy ecosystems so they are more tolerant or
better able to adapt to climate change by minimizing other
stressors such as pollution, invasive species, and sprawl and
other habitat-destroying forces.
• Facilitate natural adaptation by protecting riparian zones
and migration corridors for species adjusting to climate
changes.
• Institutionalize a comprehensive and coordinated monitoring effort and accessible database to track species range
shifts and other indicators of habitat and ecosystem response to
climate change. Identifying and prioritizing what to monitor and,
in some cases, developing new indicators will be required.
Co-benefits
Maintaining healthy ecosystems in a changing climate will allow
them to continue to provide services such as provision of water
resources, maintenance of biodiversity, and recreation.

Ecosystem Services
Healthy ecosystems are our life support system, providing us with
essential goods and services that would be extremely expensive or
impossible to replace. Ecosystems purify air and water, and provide
flood control. They supply us with products like food and timber,
and sequester carbon and build soils. They provide recreation,
hunting, and fishing, and wild places in which to enjoy nature.
Human disruption of ecosystems, through climate change and
other factors such as habitat destruction and pollution, can reduce
ecosystems’ ability to provide us with these valuable services.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

25



Particularly Vulnerable Groups
Communities whose economies depend on skiing and snowmobiling will be negatively affected by higher temperatures and
reduced snowpack.
Communities that depend on tourism associated with coldwater
fisheries such as trout could be particularly vulnerable, although
there could be increases in warmer water fish species that could
help offset these losses.

Seasonal Snow Depth at Wanakena, N.Y. (Adirondacks)
Snow depth (inches)
20
16

Historical 1971-2000
HADCM3 1971-2000
HADCM3 2020s
HADCM3 2050s
HADCM3 2080s

12
8
4
0

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Snowpack is projected to decline sharply due to future
warming. The black line shows historical snowpack, and
the colored lines show projected snowpack over the
months with snow for three future time periods under one
relatively high emissions scenario (A2) using one global climate model, UK Met Office Hadley Centre Model version
3 (HadCM3). These projections are broadly consistent
with those of other models used in ClimAID.

Characteristics that make species and communities highly vulnerable to climate change include: being adapted to cold or
high-elevation conditions; being near the southern boundary of
their ranges; having a narrow range of temperature tolerance;
having specialized habitat or food requirements; being susceptible to new competitors, invasive species, or pests; having poor
dispersal ability; having low genetic diversity; and having low
population levels.
Vulnerable species and ecosystems include: spruce-fir forests of
the Adirondack and Catskill mountains; boreal and alpine tundra communities of the Adirondack mountains; hemlock
forests; brook trout, Atlantic salmon, and other coldwater fish;
snow-dependent species such as snowshoe hare, voles and other
rodents, and their winter predators such as fox and bobcat;
moose; bird species such as Baltimore oriole and rose-breasted
grosbeak; amphibians and other wetland species.

Annual Trout Angler Expenditure
(dollars)

20,853 - 265,674
265,675 - 662,583

Bobcat

Snowshoe Hare

662,584 - 878,936
878,937 - 1,824,593

26

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Cascading effects of climate change on animals, plants, and the economy
Shaded and cool hemlock forests provide unique wildlife habitat and are the single most
prevalent conifer species in New York state. Suitable habitat for the eastern hemlock is expected to decline in New York as a result of increasing average
summer temperatures as well as the spread of the invasive insect, the
hemlock woolly adelgid. The hemlock woolly adelgid is already
well established in New York and recently has spread to the
central part of the state, in part due to rising winter temperatures that are allowing the insect to survive the winter.
Hemlocks already are dying from infestations in New York's southern and Hudson Valley regions. Currently there is no way to prevent the spread or
the effects of the insect. Extensive loss of hemlock forests will have cascading, farreaching effects on a variety of wildlife species and their ecosystems.

Infested Counties
Eastern Hemlock
Range
Newly Infested (2009)

New York's state fish, the brook trout, is at particular risk from hemlock loss and is
already at risk from increasing temperatures. The southern extent of the habitable
range for brook trout is in New York and the historical abundance of the fish is likely to be severely
reduced by warming. Brook trout depend on coldwater refuges in streams and lakes to survive.
Lakes that are unstratified lack coldwater refuges and are likely to lose all of their trout. These represent about 41 percent of brook trout lakes in the Adirondack Mountains, for example. Brook trout in
streams and rivers will also be vulnerable as water temperatures rise along with air temperatures.
Their vulnerability will be complicated by the extensive loss of hemlock forests, which shade and
maintain lower water temperatures in streams.

The loss of brook trout will cause changes in New York's fishing economy and may have disproportionate effects on
small, fishing-dependent communities in which millions of dollars are spent by tourists who come to fish for trout.
Possible adaptation strategies for keeping steams cool enough for brook trout include maintaining or increasing vegetation that provides shade along rivers, streams, and lake shorelines, and minimizing disturbances that would impede
water flows and groundwater inputs.
Even more important from an economic perspective are the broader impacts of climate change on mountain forests.
The local economies of the Adirondacks, Catskills, and Finger Lakes are dominated by tourism and recreation. Twothirds of the current tree species in mountainous areas of the Adirondacks will be outside of their sustainable climate
zone and in severe decline by the end of this century if current emissions trends continue.
Hunting, fishing and wildlife viewing make significant contributions to New York State's economy. More than 4.6 million people fish, hunt, or wildlife watch in the state, spending $3.5 billion annually on equipment, trip-related expenditures, licenses, contributions, land ownership and leasing and other items. The loss of spruce-fir forests and alpine
meadows will negatively affect these experiences and their economic contributions to the state.
Winter recreation is another major component of the economic value of the state's natural ecosystems. New York has
more ski areas than any other state, hosting an average of 4 million visitors each year, contributing $1 billion to the
state's economy and employing 10,000 people. New York is also part of a six-state network of snowmobile trails that
totals 40,500 miles and contributes $3 billion each year to the Northeast regional economy. Shorter, warmer winters
27
and reduced snowpack will have significant negative impacts on winter recreation in the state and the region.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Key Climate Impacts
Increased summer heat stress will negatively affect cool-season crops and
livestock unless farmers take adaptive measures such as shifting to more
heat-tolerant crop varieties and improving cooling capacity of livestock
facilities.
Increased weed and pest pressure associated with longer
growing seasons and warmer winters will be an increasingly important challenge.

Context
The agriculture sector in New York
State encompasses more than
34,000 farms that occupy about
one-quarter of the state's land area
(more than 7.5 million acres) and
contribute $4.5 billion annually to
the state's economy.

Water management will be a more serious challenge for
New York farmers in the future due to increased frequency of heavy rainfall events, and more frequent and
intense summer water deficits by mid to late century.
Opportunities to explore new crops, new varieties, and
new markets will come with higher temperatures and a
longer growing season.

A large majority of New York agriculture is currently rain-fed without
irrigation, but summer precipitation
is currently not sufficient to fully
meet crop water needs most years.
Economic pressures have led to
consolidation into fewer, larger
farms, particularly in the dairy industry. The costs of adapting to climate
change may exacerbate this trend.
Agriculture is sensitive to the volatile
and rising costs of energy, a challenge that climate change is likely to
exacerbate.

Early season produce can provide a large fraction of a farmer’s income.
Heavy downpours can delay spring planting and/or damage crops, greatly
reducing this important source of revenue.
28

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Adaptation Options
A changing climate presents challenges and potential
opportunities for New York state farmers. Responding
will necessitate both on-farm and state-level strategies.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure
Strategies
• Change planting dates, varieties or crops grown.
Increase farm diversification.
• Improve cooling capacity, including the use of fans
and sprinklers in dairy barns.
• Increase use of chemical and non-chemical techniques
for controlling pests, pathogens, and weeds.
• Develop new crop varieties for projected New York
climate and market opportunities.
• Invest in irrigation and/or drainage systems.

Larger-scale Strategies
• Develop decision tools to assist farmers in determining the optimum timing and magnitude of investments to
cope with climate change.
Co-benefits
There are several opportunities for reducing greenhouse
gas emissions with agriculture adaptation options including improved manure management, generation of on-site
energy, increasing the use of soil organic matter, and
using nitrogen fertilizer more efficiently.

Changes for the grape industry
New York's grape harvest ranked third in the nation in 2007, with the crop valued at nearly
50 million dollars. In recent years, however, challenges associated with cold injury to crops
have cost the states agriculture industry millions of dollars. Increasing temperatures at the beginning of winter reduce cold hardiness and can raise the probability of midwinter damage. In late
winter or early spring (after the winter-chilling requirement has been met), an earlier arrival of
spring or a prolonged warm period may lead to premature budding and increased vulnerability to
spring frost. Projections indicate a slight increase in the
Changing Date of the Day of Last Frost
potential for spring frost injury in Concord grapes.
Day of year

In the long term, warmer winters and a longer growing
season may bring opportunities to introduce a wider
range of high value, less cold-tolerant European red
wine grape varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon and
Zinfandel, that currently are constrained by the state's
climate.

130
120

Historical
HADCM3 B1
HADCM3 A2
HADCM3 B1 Trend
HADCM3 A2 Trend

110
100
90

80
Adaptation strategies to avoid damage from spring frost
events (such as using wind machines that pull warmer
70
1970
1990
2010
2030
2050
2070
2090
air down from high above ground during temperature
inversions, and changing pruning and mulching
As climate warms, the date of last frost comes ever earlier in the
strategies) are well established. New research will
year. The chart shows the date of last frost as the number of days
after January 1. The black line shows observations. The red line
be required to integrate weather forecasts into
shows a model projection (HadCM3) based on a lower emissions
early-warning systems for extreme events such as
scenario (B1) while the green line shows that model's projection
hard freeze and spring frost events. Linking these
based on a higher emissions scenario (A2). Higher emissions
mean more warming and hence cause the last frost day to occur
warning systems to the susceptibility of crops to
even earlier in the year. This model's projections are broadly condamage could help reduce losses.
sistent with those of the other models used in ClimAID.



Particularly Vulnerable Groups
Dairy milk production and the productivity and/or quality of
some cool-season crops such as apples, potatoes, and cabbage
will be particularly vulnerable to increases in summer heat
stress. Adaptations such as improving cooling capacity of dairy
barns or changing varieties or crops are straightforward but will
not be cost-free or risk-free. For example, the state could lose
some favorite varieties of apples, such as McIntosh and Empire,
for which it currently has national recognition, and have to
replace them with more heat-tolerant varieties.

Projected Degree Days above 60ºF Prior to Last Frost
Degree Days
250

Historical
HADCM3 B1
HADCM3 A2

200

Budbreak
threshold
150

Smaller farms may have less information and training and less
capital to invest in adaptation strategies such as stress-tolerant
plant varieties, increased chemical and water inputs, and
enhanced livestock cooling. By adding to already severe competitive pressure, climate change is likely to exacerbate current
trends towards consolidation into fewer, larger farms, especially
in the dairy sector.
Farms specializing in cool-season crops may have challenges
finding appropriate new varieties that meet both production
demands and market expectations.

100

Without pro-active development of non-chemical approaches,
increased pesticide and fertilizer use could harm sensitive environments, such as streams and rivers.

50

0
1970

1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

As temperatures rise, plants flower earlier in the spring.
This can make them more vulnerable to damage from
late spring frost. Climate change has the potential to
exacerbate this vulnerability in Concord grapes grown
in New York state. The dotted blue line represents a
cumulative degree-day threshold that would lead to
bud break prior to the last spring frost for Concord
grapes in the Fredonia region. Years exceeding the
threshold would have a high risk of frost damage. As
the chart shows, under a higher emissions scenarios
(A2, green line), this is projected happen much more
frequently in the later part of this century. These results
are broadly consistent with the other global climate
models used in ClimAID.

Seasonal Differences in Soil-Water Balance
W
Water
ater (inches)
6

Precipitation
Precipitation
PET
Water loss from soils & plants
Runof
ff
Runoff

5
4
3
2
1
0

J

F

M

A

M

J
J
Month

A

S

O

N

D

The chart shows historical averages for each month of the year for precipitation, evaporative water loss from soils and plants, and runoff. Runoff is the
fraction of precipitation that is not evaporated and exceeds the soil-holding
capacity and thus passes into deep groundwater or into streams. The red
line shows that there is a moisture deficit in summertime as evaporative
losses increase due to higher temperatures, resulting in virtually no runoff
during the warmest months. ClimAID projections show that both the summer deficit and winter excess are expected to increase in a warming climate.

30

DRAFT - November 1, 2010.



By the 2080s, the
magnitude of annual
N.Y. milk production
decline associated with
heat stress is projected to
increase six-fold compared
to current heat stressrelated declines.

Dairy Heat Stress
Heat stress has both short- and
long-term effects on the health and
performance of dairy cattle
depending on severity and timing of
the stress. Short-term impacts
include decreases in feed intake
and milk production. Under heat stress cows spend less time
resting and more time standing and walking. A decrease of 1
hour of resting time is associated with a decrease of 2 to
3 pounds of milk produced per cow. Severe heat stress
can cause lameness and poor reproductive performance
(calving), with subsequent long-term negative effects on
milk production. While short-term responses can be partially reversed after a heat wave, long-term effects are
less easily reversed.
By the 2080s, the magnitude of annual N.Y. milk production decline associated with heat stress is projected to
increase six-fold compared to current heat stress-related
declines. Economic losses associated with the projected
increase in heat stress range from $37 to $66 per cow
per year. These ClimAID estimates took into account only
short-term heat stress effects. They did not consider the
potential long-term effects of severe stress on milk
production, so they may underestimate losses.
Modifying feeding and providing adequate water can help
ameliorate heat stress in cows, but cannot substitute for
improving cooling capacity in dairy barns (for example,
through improved ventilation, high airspeeds directly over
the cows, and sprinkler systems). Many ventilation systems are inherently more cost-effective when deployed for
larger barns. Small farms that cannot afford these kinds of
adaptation measures will be most vulnerable to the
impacts of warming.

Variations in Dairy Sales

Sales per county (dollars)
571,000 - 14,800,000
14,800,001 - 29,350,000
29,350,001 - 47,597,000
47,597,001 - 85,630,000
85,630,001 - 178,920,000
No data

Distribution of Dairy Operations

Number of Operations
1 - 23
24 - 89
90 - 192
193 - 276
No data

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

31



Key Climate Impacts
Context
The energy system in New York State is
designed to cope with a wide range of
climate variability.
Climate change is likely to exacerbate
existing risks rather than create new
ones.
Extreme, short-term weather events and
changes in demand are particularly
important to the energy industry.
The state's annual electricity load has
increased by about 4.3 percent per year.
New York City and Long Island account
for about half of the total demand.
New York State's electricity sources vary
regionally. For example, about half the
fossil fuel-fired plants are in New York
City and Long Island while most of the
state's hydropower is in central and
northern New York.
Wind power deployment is expected to
increase across the state.
Natural gas is the most commonly used
source of heating energy in buildings,
although there are strong regional differences, which reflect the lack of gas
service in many parts of the state.
Energy prices vary widely, with higher
prices in eastern New York than in
western parts of the state.

Impacts of climate change on energy demand are likely to be more significant than impacts on supply. Climate change will adversely affect system
operations, increase the difficulty of ensuring adequate supply during peak
demand periods, and exacerbate problematic conditions, such as the urban
heat island effect.
More frequent heat waves will cause an increase in the use
of air conditioning, stressing power supplies and increasing
peak demand loads.
Increased air and water temperatures will decrease the efficiency of power plants, as they decrease cooling capacity.
Coastal infrastructure is vulnerable to flooding as a result of
sea level rise and coastal storms.
Hydropower is vulnerable to projected increases in summer
drought.
The availability and reliability of solar power systems are vulnerable to changes in cloud cover although this may be offset by advances in technology; wind power systems are similarly vulnerable to changes in wind speed and direction.
Biomass energy availability depends on weather conditions
during the growing season, which will be affected by a
changing climate.
Transformers and distribution lines for both electric and gas
supply are vulnerable to extreme weather events, such as
heat waves and flooding.
Higher winter temperatures are expected to decrease winter
heating demand, which will primarily affect natural gas markets, while increases in cooling demand will affect electricity
markets; such changes will vary regionally.
The indirect financial impacts of climate change may be
greater than the direct impacts of climate change. These
indirect impacts include those to investors and insurance
companies as infrastructure becomes more vulnerable and
those borne by consumers due to changing energy prices
and the need to use more energy.

32

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Adaptation Options
Planning for climate change must balance the need to
make energy systems more resilient with the cost of such
investments and changes. One way to do this is to incorporate adaptation planning into the replacement cycles of
system assets, which have a long but relatively fixed lifespan. As temperatures rise, it will be even more important
to encourage the use of energy efficient cooling methods
such as shading buildings and windows, or using highly
reflective roof paints to reduce buildings’ temperatures.
Although demand-side management, which encourages
consumers to use energy more efficiently, is already a key
state policy, it could be made an even greater priority.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Use transformers and wiring that function efficiently at
higher temperatures.
• Construct berms and levees to protect infrastructure
from flooding; install saltwater-resistant transformers to
protect against sea level rise and saltwater intrusion.
• Review and revise tree trimming practices to account
for changes in vegetation due to climate change.
Larger-scale Strategies
• Adjust reservoir release policies to ensure sufficient
summer hydropower capacity.
• Improve energy efficiency in areas that are likely to have
the largest increases in demand.
Co-benefits
Increasing energy efficiency can help people to adapt to
higher temperatures while reducing greenhouse gas emissions in order to mitigate climate change.

Projected changes in peak electricity demand for heating and
cooling - 2020s (compared to current peak demand)
Weather Station

Heating Season
Cooling Season
Decrease in MWp Electricity Increase in MWp Electricity
Demand in 2020s

Demand in 2020s

Buffalo

14 - 27

55 - 111

Rochester

9 - 18

53 - 105

Syracuse

19 - 37

61 - 122

Massena

5 - 10

7 - 15

Watertown

11 - 21

29 - 57

Albany

15 - 29

63 - 126

Poughkeepsie

12 - 25

72 - 145

NY City (LGA)

40 - 80

249 - 497

Islip

27 - 58

194 - 387

ClimAID global climate models project that average annual temperature will rise by 1.5 to 3.0°F in the 2020s compared to the 19701999 baseline period. An analysis of the sensitivity of energy
demand to these changes shows that while heating energy use will
decrease slightly, cooling energy use will increase much more.

New York State Electricity Generation
by Fuel Type (2008)

Fuels used for residential heating in New York State by ClimAID Region

Wind
1%

Hydro
19%

Natural Gas
13%

Oil & Gas
23%

Coal
13%

Methane/waste/
solar/wood
2%

Nuclear
29%

33

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Particularly Vulnerable Groups
For lower-income residents, increased energy costs associated with air
conditioning may be difficult to afford.
Low-income residents living in urban areas, which are already subject to
urban heat island effects, may be especially vulnerable to higher energy
costs.
New energy facilities to power the increased demand for air conditioning
may place burdens on communities located nearby.
Elderly, disabled, and health-compromised residents are especially
vulnerable to energy outages associated with extreme climate events.

Impacts of Extreme Heat in Cities
Sustained high temperatures contribute to
increased energy usage during heat waves,
primarily for cooling indoor space and industrial equipment. When high temperatures persist overnight during these extended heat events, the likelihood of outages increases. While the network design of local grids
tends to isolate outages geographically, limiting the number of customers affected, prolonged heat waves
can cause multiple outages across a city. The impacts of power outages can extend well beyond the energy
sector, affecting health, transportation, and telecommunication.
In New York City, urban heat island effects already contribute to an increase in energy demand during hot
summer periods. Worsening heat waves under climate change pose a challenge for the city's energy sector.
Existing urban heat island patterns will become more intense, such that areas that are already warmer due
to heat island effects will become relatively hotter during a heat wave. The effects of heat islands are especially prominent in many lower income neighborhoods, such as Fordham in the Bronx and Crown Heights in
Brooklyn. These neighborhoods often have fewer trees on the street and higher building density, both of
which contribute to hotter conditions.
Higher poverty areas of New York City, particularly in northern Manhattan, the South Bronx, and parts of
Brooklyn, have lower rates of home air conditioning than other areas, putting them at greater risk for heatrelated health problems. But even households that have air conditioning in these areas may be reluctant to
use it because of the high cost of energy, which represents a large portion of their household income.
34

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Location and elevation of power plants in New York City

The majority of New York
City’s power plants are
located at low elevations
on the coast and are thus vulnerable to
sea level rise and storm surge.

Air conditioning distribution and neighborhood level poverty

Neighborhoods with higher poverty rates, including Central Harlem,
Washington Heights, Fordham, the South Bronx, Greenpoint,
Williamsburg, Bedford-Stuyvesant and others, have lower rates of
in-home air conditioning than more affluent parts of the city.

To provide enough power during heat waves to meet the increase in peak demand, less efficient and more
highly polluting sources of power may be used. High ozone levels due to the combination of high temperatures and air pollution are particularly harmful for the elderly and ill.
Power outages and other disruptions to supply have significant financial impacts, with costs to U.S. consumers ranging from $119 billion to $188 billion per year. The workforce-especially those living farther from
their jobs or who are more dependent on forms of transportation that become inoperable during power outages-are likely to bear these losses. During the 2003 Northeast blackout, loss of wages was estimated to
account for two-thirds of the total financial losses.
Those providing emergency services, including emergency health professionals, also may have difficulty getting to work during a power outage, thereby increasing risks to individuals in need of assistance. During the
2003 Northeast blackout, the health services sector had the second highest workforce losses as a result of
business closures. Demand for emergency services during the outage increased significantly as did the rate
of respiratory device failure.
To protect against severe power outages, smart grid technology can be used to help avoid them altogether
by providing network operators with clearer metrics of the potential risk. Reducing demand and distributed
generation (which generates electricity from many small sources) can also help lessen the risk of power outages. During heat waves and in advance of peak demand, voluntary and mandatory load-reduction programs that call for customers to reduce usage also can be employed.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

35



Key Climate Impacts
Over the next few decades, heat waves and heavy precipitation events
are likely to dominate the causes for moderate, more frequent transportation problems such as flooded streets and delays in mass transit.

Context
New York State is home to a
113,000-mile network of Interstate
and State Highways including 16,000
bridges, a 4,600-mile rail network
including the largest mass transit system in the U.S., some 500 public and
private aviation facilities, more than
130 public transit operators, four port
authorities, and numerous private
ports. Transportation contributes
about 10 percent, or $100 billion
annually, to the state's economy.
The highest concentration of transportation infrastructure is generally
located in regions that are population
centers and vital drivers of the global,
national and state economy. Threats
to these dense metropolitan transportation systems (especially New
York City) would have far-reaching
impacts.
Ground transportation systems (roads
and rails) in coastal population centers are often placed underground in
tunnels very close to or below sea
level.
Since transportation is a networked
system, delays and failures in one
system can affect other systems.

36

DRAFT - November 1

By later this century, it is very likely that coastal flooding will be more
frequent and intense due to sea level rise. Major adaptations are likely to
be needed, not only in the coastal zones, but also in Troy and Albany as
sea level rise and storm surge propagate up the tide-controlled Hudson
River.
Materials used in transportation infrastructure, such as asphalt and train
rails, are vulnerable to increased temperatures and frequency of extreme
heat events.
Air conditioning requirements in buses, trucks, and trains, and ventilation requirements for tunnels will increase.
Low-lying transportation systems such as subways and tunnels, especially
in coastal and near-coastal areas, are at particular risk of flooding as a
result of sea level rise, storm surge, and heavy precipitation events.
Transportation systems are vulnerable to ice and snowstorms, although
requirements for salting and snow removal may decrease as precipitation
tends to occur more often as rain than snow. Freeze/thaw cycles that disturb roadbeds may increase in some regions as winter temperatures rise.
Runways may need to be lengthened in some locations since hotter air
provides less lift and hence requires higher speeds for take off. Newer,
more powerful aircraft can reduce this potential impact.
The Great Lakes may see a shorter season of winter ice cover, leading to
a longer shipping season. However, reduced ice cover may result in an
increase in “lake effect” snow events, which cause various transportation-related problems.
New York State has the most days per year of freezing rain in the nation.
This affects air and ground transportation directly and also indirectly
through electric and communication outages. It is unknown how climate
change will influence the frequency of freezing rain in the future.



Adaptation Options

NY City Streets at Risk of Flooding

Disaster management studies have shown that every $1
invested in preventative measures saves $4 in losses not
incurred.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Perform engineering-based risk assessments of assets and
operations and complete adaptation plans based on these
assessments, including financing.
• Protect coastal transportation infrastructure with levees,
sea walls and pumping facilities; elevate bridge landings,
roads, railroads, airports, and collision fenders on bridge
foundations; design innovative gates at subway, rail and
road tunnel entrances and ventilation openings.
• Relocate critical systems to higher ground out of future
flood zones.
• Lengthen airport runways and expansion joints on bridges;
upgrade to energy-efficient air conditioning on trains, subways, and buses; use heat-resistant construction materials
for pavements and rail tracks.
Larger-scale Strategies
• Change standards for engineering specifications related to
climate such as for heat-resistant materials and the
capacity of drainage systems.
• Form alliances to set performance standards to
reduce climate risks; form mutual insurance pools
that spread risks.

As sea level rises, many more New York City streets will be
at risk of flooding. The chart shows the total length in miles
of NY City streets at risk of flooding under current sea level
with a 100-year storm, and with 2 feet and 4 feet of sea
level rise (consistent with the ClimAid projections). Under
current conditions, about 11 percent of city streets are at
risk. With 2 feet of sea level rise, that increases to about 25
percent. And with 4 feet of sea level rise, about 34 percent
of NY City streets are at risk.

Co-benefits
Making improvements to public transportation
systems will not only facilitate adaptation,
but also enhance energy efficiency and
increase ridership, thus helping to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate
climate change.

New York City's Expanding Flood Zones

100-year flood zones for the New
York City area under observed conditions (red, from FEMA), with 2 feet
of sea level rise (yellow), and 4 feet
of sea level rise (green), as projected
by the ClimAID rapid ice melt sea
level rise scenario for the 2080s.

FEMA 100 Year flood zone
2 feet of sea level rise
4 feet of sea level rise

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

37



Particularly Vulnerable Groups
Low-income and elderly populations, especially in urban areas, are particularly vulnerable to disruption to transportation services, limiting their ability to
get to work or evacuate during emergencies and extreme weather events.
Transport interruptions take a particular toll on working women, who tend to
have less spare time because of child and family care and on average earn less
than men.
Workers on hourly payrolls can less afford transportation-related work loss or
delays compared to more affluent, salaried employees whose pay does not
depend on the number of hours worked.

100-year flood with 4-foot Sea Level Rise

38

Lower income neighborhoods, whether rural, suburban, or urban, generally
have already poor transportation options and little or no redundancy.
Increases in extreme events will worsen their situation.

A 100-year flood with a 4-foot rise in sea level (consistent with the ClimAID
rapid ice melt scenario projections in the 2080s) would flood a large fraction of
Manhattan subways, including virtually all of the tunnels crossing into the
Bronx beneath the Harlem River and the tunnels under the East River. Blue
lines on the maps show flooded subway lines and tunnels. Background colors
indicate topography, with areas greater than 30 feet in elevation in yellow.
Since subway tracks are typically 20 feet below the street level, areas in yellow could avoid flooding given the ClimAID storm surge and sea level rise pro-

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Sea level rise and a 100-year coastal storm
Impacts on New York City metropolitan area
Sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge has the ability to severely damage transportation
systems in New York-particularly those in New York City and the surrounding metropolitan region since
much of the systems are located at low elevations, and some in tunnels below sea level. By the end of
this century, the ClimAID projections show that sea level is expected to rise by 2 to 4 feet with significant
implications for the transportation sector.
Damages from a coastal storm in the New York City metropolitan area that currently occurs on average
once every 100 years would be significant. At current sea level, economic losses from such a storm
would amount to about $58 billion. Losses under a 2-foot sea level rise scenario increase to $70 billion
and to $84 billion under a 4-foot sea level rise scenario. All sectors of the transportation system would
be affected, including roads, railways, subways, airports, and seaports.
The effects of such a flooding scenario would occur rapidly. For example, many of the tunnels lying
below flood heights (including subway, highway, and rail) would fill up with water in less than 1 hour. At
the low-lying La Guardia airport, sea level rise would wipe out the effectiveness of existing levees, even
for less severe storms. The outage times estimated for the various transportation systems range from 1
to 29 days, depending on the infrastructure and sea level rise scenario. More detailed engineering-based
vulnerability assessments are needed to improve these preliminary estimates.
The social and economic effects of a 100-year storm would not be distributed evenly. People with limited
mobility and transportation options would be affected the most, including low-income households, the
disabled, and the elderly. These populations also may be less likely to access relief from centralized facilities located beyond walking distance.
To protect against the impacts of a 100-year storm, sea walls, floodgates, and pumping stations could
be constructed in the short term. In the long term, transportation infrastructure could be relocated to
higher elevation areas, outside of the future floodplain, and some tunnel structures could be outfitted with
engineered flood protection. The sustainability of a proposed barrier system to protect the entire New
York harbor has not been established and requires careful cost/benefit assessments of long-term risks
and of exit strategies when prolonged sea level rise combined with coastal storm surge begins to exceed
the finite design elevations of any such barrier system.
Annualized losses from the expected climate hazards for the entire metropolitan transportation systems
are estimated in the hundreds of millions of dollars per year now, increasing to billions of dollars per year
by mid-century. Required annual capital costs to make the transportation systems resilient to climate
hazards in this coastal setting are on the order of one quarter of the expected losses that are estimated
to occur if no protective adaptation measures were undertaken. Therefore preventive measures are likely
to be highly cost-effective, but require engineering assessments, and must be in place before irreparable
flood damage occurs. This will require capital investments.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

39



Key Climate Impacts
Communication service delivery is vulnerable to hurricanes, lightning, ice,
snow, and wind storms, and other extreme weather events, some of which are
projected to change in frequency and/or intensity.
The delivery of telecommunication services is sensitive to
power outages, such as those resulting from the increased
demand associated with heat waves, which are expected to
increase with climate change.
Communication lines and other infrastructure are vulnerable
to heavy precipitation events, flooding, and/or freezing rain.

Context

In coastal and near-coastal areas, sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge flooding will be a considerable
threat later this century.

Telecommunications infrastructure is vital to New York State's economy and welfare; its
capacity and reliability are essential to the effective functioning of emergency services as
well as global commerce and the state's economy.
The sector is largely privately operated, but it has important public functions.
Because of rapidly changing telecommunications technology and deregulated, fiercely
competitive markets, some operators often focus on short-term market share and profitability rather than pursuing long-term strategies to achieve reliability and redundancy.
Under current climate conditions and severe weather events, there are already serious
vulnerabilities that in many instances prevent the telecommunications sector from delivering services to the public. If the sector could be made more resilient to the current climate, then the incremental threat from climate change is likely to be more manageable.
The sector is tightly coupled to the energy sector, with power outages affecting the reliability of communication services; many of its communication lines also are located on the
same poles as power lines.
Modern digital technologies, including telecommunication services based on fiber optics,
broadband, and the Internet, can be more vulnerable to power outages than traditional
landline technology that was - or in some places still is - self-powered.
Wireless mobile phone services and landlines often share the same backbone network.
In these instances, redundancy is essential to avoid simultaneous breakdowns.
Reports of service outages to federal or state regulators are not accessible to the public
and are not uniformly mandatory across the different types of services.

40

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Adaptation Options

Cable Modem Broadband Availability - 2009

Changes to telecommunications infrastructure to make it more
robust, resilient, and redundant will reduce future climate-related
outages.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Trim trees near communication lines; place communication
cables underground where technically and economically feasible.
• Provide backup power at cell towers with generators, solar-powered battery banks, and “cells on wheels” that can replace disabled towers. Extend the fuel storage capacity to run back-up
generators for extended times.
• Relocate central communications offices out of future floodplains.
• Improve backup cell phone charging options by standardizing
charging interfaces, including for car chargers, which allow any
phone to be recharged by any charger.
Significant weather-related U.S. electric grid disturbances
• Assess, develop, and expand alternative communication
100
25
technologies to increase redundancy and/or reliability.
Weather-related
Larger-scale Strategies
• Reassess industry performance standards combined with
appropriate, more uniform regulation across all types of
telecommunication services. Provide better enforcement
of regulations, including uniform mandatory reporting of
outages.
• Develop high-speed broadband and wireless services in
low population-density rural areas.
• Diversify communication media by separating cable and
phone services and increasing the use of internet-based
telephone services.
• Decouple telecommunications infrastructure from electric grid
infrastructure to the extent possible.
100

25

Number of Incidents

20

80

15

Weather-related
Yes
No

10

5

60

Undefined weather
Wildfire
Temperature extremes
Ice/snow/winterstorm
Thunderstorm, tornado, lightning
Windstorm, hurricane, severe storm

0‘92

‘96 ’00 ‘04 ’08

40

20

1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

Co-benefits
Increasing redundancy and reliability in the telecommunications
sector will reduce outages not only from a changing climate, but
also from other non-climate related risks. Improving telecommunications technology reliability will also help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from travel.

Number of Incidents

20
15

80

Undefined weather
Wildfire
Temperature extremes
Ice/snow/winterstorm
Thunderstorm, tornado, lightning
Windstorm, hurricane, severe storm

Yes
No

10
5

60

0
‘92 ‘96 ’00 ‘04 ’08

40

20

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Telecommunication technologies are dependent on reliable
and consistent electric power. The number of electric grid
disruptions caused by extreme weather has increased tenfold since 1992. The fraction of all grid disturbances caused
by weather-related phenomena has more than tripled from
about 20 percent in the early 1990s to about 65 percent in
recent years. While the figure does not demonstrate a
cause and effect relationship between climate change and
grid disruptions, it does suggest that weather and climate
extremes have important effects on grid disruptions.
Projections of future increases in extreme events suggest
increased risks for the electric grid and the telecommunications that depend on it.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

41



Particularly Vulnerable Groups
Customers in rural, remote areas are more vulnerable to service disruptions
than customers in urban areas, because they have fewer backup service
options and often lack wireless and broadband services.
Restoration of communication services following a storm typically happens
first in urban areas and then in rural areas, with smaller, remote communities
likely to be restored last; this places people in rural areas at increased risk
during emergencies.
Within remote, rural areas, elderly, disabled, and health-compromised populations are especially vulnerable to communication service disruptions associated with storm events due to their more limited mobility.
Lower-income populations are more likely to drop landline services; this
increases their risk during emergency situations, as a result of their more limited communication options.
Customers Without Power by Locality - December 2008 Ice Storm
Emergency Radio Calls - 1998 Ice Storm

The chart shows the number of emergency radio calls
per day (blue) and blocked radio calls (red) because of
overload, in one New York state county during the
1998 ice storm. The graph covers 13 days, with a
peak number of over 40,000 calls in one day. The first
five days show normal background call traffic before
the storm hit.

42

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Winter Storm in Central, Western and Northern New York
Vulnerability of telecommunication services
Severe winter storms in New York generally follow this pattern: a low-pressure system
moves up the Atlantic Coast bringing warm moist air that encounters cold dry air in a
high-pressure system over Canada and extends into the northern parts of New York.
The northward movement of the counterclockwise-rotating storm system causes warm
air to overrun the cold air mass. This typically forms three moving bands of precipitation
as illustrated on the map to the right.
It is uncertain how climate change will influence extreme winter storms. A hypothetical
composite of historical extreme winter storms is described. While the three types of precipitation (rain,
freezing rain, and snow) would not necessarily be expected to occur concurrently in these proportions,
each of these types of extreme winter precipitation is currently expected to occur on average at least once
per century.
• Up to 8 inches of rain fall in the rain band in near-coastal New York over a period of 36 hours.
• Up to 4 inches of freezing rain falls in the ice band in central New York, of which between 1 and 2 inches
accumulates as ice, over a period of 24 hours.
• Up to 2 feet of snow accumulates in the snow band in northern and western New York over a period of
48 hours.
A storm of this magnitude could result in widespread power and communication outages, with most people who lose electricity also losing communication services. In the Central New York ice storm area, about
a half million people would be without power. It would take up to 10 days to restore power to half of these
customers living in the larger cities such as Albany, Binghamton, and Schenectady, and up to five weeks to
fully restore services to those living in remote, rural areas. Fewer people would be affected in the western
and northern New York snow accumulation area. There services may be restored more quickly, first in cities
and progressing to rural areas.
Economic damages from productivity losses alone would amount to about 900 million dollars. Costs associated with direct damages - such as spoiled food, damaged orchards, replacement of downed poles and
electric and phone wires, medical costs and emergency shelter expenses - would be of a similar magnitude. In total, productivity and direct damage costs would amount to about $2 billion. These numbers,
however, likely underestimate the total costs, given that a 1998 ice storm resulted in losses of about $5.4
billion in Canada alone.
Those most vulnerable to power and communication service disruptions are those that are unable to leave
their homes (those with limited transportation options) and those who lack access to cell phones, including
elderly, low-income, disabled, and rural populations.
To protect against communication and power outages, trees near power and communication lines can be
trimmed, backup poles and wires can be stocked to replace those that are damaged, and readiness of
emergency crews to assist with restoration can be arranged in advance of storms. Increasing the fuel supply to extend the duration of emergency backup power at mobile phone cell towers with difficult road
access is especially important in areas with low landline, broadband, and internet penetration.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

43



Key Climate Impacts
Demand for health services and the need for public health surveillance and
monitoring will increase as climate continues to change.
Heat-related illness and death are projected to increase, while cold-related
death is projected to decrease. Increases in heat-related death are projected
to outweigh reductions in cold-related death.

Context
New York State relies primarily on a
county-based system for public
health service delivery, resulting in a
decentralized system in which core
services are not provided uniformly.
Information and the capacity to integrate climate change into public
health planning remains limited at the
local level.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading
cause of death in the state and is
made worse by extreme heat and
poor air quality.

More intense precipitation and flooding along the coasts and rivers could
lead to increased stress and mental health impacts, impaired ability to deliver
public health and medical services, increased respiratory diseases such as
asthma, and increased outbreaks of gastrointestinal diseases.
Cardiovascular and respiratory-related illness and death will be affected by
worsening air quality, including more smog, wildfires, pollens, and molds.
Vector-borne diseases, such as those spread by mosquitoes and ticks (like
West Nile virus), may expand or their distribution patterns may change.
Water supply, recreational water quality, and food production will be at
increased risk due to increased temperatures and changing precipitation patterns.
Water- and food-borne diseases are likely to increase without adaptation
intervention.
Projected Temperature-related Deaths in NY County

Childhood asthma is an important
current health challenge in many
parts of New York State, especially in
the five counties that comprise New
York City, and is made worse by poor
air quality.
New York State has experienced the
emergence of several vector-borne
diseases (those spread by carriers
such as mosquitoes and ticks) in the
past few decades.

44

As climate continues to warm, heat-related deaths are expected to increase,
while cold-related deaths are expected to decrease. A preliminary study of all of
these temperature-related deaths from 2010 to 2100 in New York County was
undertaken using 5 climate models from the set of ClimAID models under lower
(B1) and higher (A2) emissions scenarios. The results suggest that increases in
heat-related deaths will outweigh reductions in cold-related deaths, resulting in a
net increase in deaths due to climate change. The lower-emission scenario (B1) is
projected to result in substantially fewer deaths by the 2080s. The chart shows
the results from 5 models for the higher (A2) emissions scenario. These results
are broadly consistent with the other global climate models used in ClimAID.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Adaptation Options
Enhanced capacity will be needed to integrate climate
adaptation strategies into existing health programs.
Operations, Management, and Infrastructure Strategies
• Extend surveillance of climate and health indicators,
including a statewide network of publicly available data
monitoring airborne pollen and mold.
• Evaluate extreme heat response plans, focusing particularly on expanding access to cooling services during heat
events. Build on this knowledge to develop similar systems for other climate health risks. Target strategies and
messages for the most vulnerable populations.
• Plant low-pollen trees in cities to reduce heat without
increasing allergenic pollen.
Larger-scale Strategies
• Environment and health initiatives should be better integrated so that they address both human and ecosystem
health and avoid the divide that often exists between
them.
Co-benefits
Adaptation strategies which maximize co-benefits, such as
cleaner air, improved nutrition or increased physical activity, should be given priority. Investing in structural adaptations to reduce heat vulnerability, including tree planting,
green roofs, and high-reflectivity building materials, will
help to reduce energy demand and expense while reducing
heat-related risks.

West Nile virus in mosquitoes, New York State, 2008

1
8

1
1

Positive test results
Samples submitted
No positive test result
(did not perform surveillance or did
not report any positive test results)

1
3

29 12

57

41

While West Nile virus infections in humans and birds have
only been reported in a limited part of the state, the prevalence of West Nile virus in mosquitoes is more widespread
throughout the state.

Particularly Vulnerable Groups
• Without intervention, existing health disparities are
likely to be exacerbated by climate change.
• Age, preexisting illness, neighborhood infrastructure
and/or poverty put people at elevated risk.
• In urban areas, the elderly, persons with impaired
immune systems, children, and poor are at particular
risk for heat-related illness and death.
• People in northern parts of the state who are not
accustomed to extreme heat are at particular risk for
heat-related death.
• People with asthma are particularly vulnerable to
ozone and fine-particle air pollution, which could lead
to increased illness and death.

• Low-income individuals are more likely to go to the
hospital for asthma attacks than wealthier individuals
with health insurance who are under doctor supervision and have access to asthma control medications.
• Children, outdoor laborers, and athletes also may be
at greater risk for respiratory diseases than those who
spend more time indoors and are less active.
• Residents of coastal areas are vulnerable to direct
impacts of storm surge flooding, mental health stressors related to evacuation, and mold and toxic exposures when they return home.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

45



Heat and respiratory problems affect those most
vulnerable
Certain groups-including the elderly, low-income populations, and minorities-are more vulnerable than others to climate change-related health
risks including heat-related illness and death, and decreased respiratory
function.

Urban Heat Island Effect

Large amounts of concrete and asphalt
in cities absorb and hold heat. Tall buildings prevent heat from dissipating and
reduce air flow. At the same time, there
is generally little vegetation to provide
shade and evaporative cooling. As a
result, parts of cities can be up to 10ºF
warmer than the surrounding rural areas,
compounding the temperature increases
that people experience as a result of
human induced warming.

Summer heat waves have caused increased death in cities across the
United States-including in New York City. Climate change will increase
the frequency and intensity of heat waves. Urban areas are especially
vulnerable because of the high concentrations of susceptible populations
and the influence of the urban heat island effect, which makes cities hotter than surrounding areas. Health-relevant
increases in heat waves are likely to occur within
20 to 30 years, with much larger increases 50 to
100 years from now. Heat related deaths are projected to increase significantly as a result.
Home air conditioning is a critical factor for preventing heat-related illness and death. Air conditioning is especially important for elderly, very
young, and health-compromised individuals, all of
whom have a lower internal capacity to regulate
body temperature. In New York City, about 84 percent of households had air conditioning in 2003.
But, such resources are not distributed evenly
across the city. Many residents living in lower
income neighborhoods lack air conditioning and are thus more vulnerable to extreme heat events. Others, including low-income elderly residents-particularly those living alone-may be reluctant to use air conditioning even if they have it due to concerns about energy costs, even
during periods of extreme heat. However, air conditioning is highly vulnerable to power outages, pointing to the need for longer-term strategies
to reduce heat vulnerability.

46

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Hospital Discharge Rate for Children with Asthma

The health effects of extreme heat events can be
reduced through adaptation measures. Warning systems
and outreach can be used in conjunction with providing
more access to public places with air conditioning, such
as offering longer hours at community centers for seniors
and reducing fares on public transportation. Long-term,
engineering-based strategies also can be undertaken,
including tree planting, installing green or reflective roofing
and insulation in public housing to reduce indoor air temperatures.

Hospital discharge rate per
10,000 population, age 5-14, 2005 - 2007

0 - <8.3 :Q1 & Q2
8.3 - <12 :Q3
12+ :Q4

Respiratory illness and death also are likely to increase with
climate change. Rising temperatures and increasing emissions will result in more air pollution, with summer ozone levels likely to increase significantly. Ozone can increase the risk
of asthma-related hospital visits and death. Already, many
New Yorkers live in areas in which ozone levels do not meet
health standards.

Prevalence of Current Asthma among Adults, 1996-2006
14
12
10
Percent

African Americans and Hispanics are particularly vulnerable to
decreased air quality because they tend to live in urban centers where they are more exposed to air pollutants. As a
group, they are significantly more likely to be hospitalized and
die from asthma than other population groups. Children, outdoor laborers, and athletes also may be at greater risk of air
pollution exposure than those who spend more time indoors
and are less active.

Asthma is climate-sensitive as it is exacerbated by
allergies and air pollution, both of which are related to climate. Childhood asthma is an important
current health challenge in many parts of New
York State, with many asthma events severe
enough to require hospitalization. Children from
lower-income families who often lack health insurance, regular doctor visits, and medications that
can control attacks are more likely to have to seek
hospital treatment.

8
6
4

Another probable impact of climate change is increased levels
of mold and other allergens that contribute to respiratory
health problems. Dampness of households, a key variable for
mold growth, is associated with socioeconomic status, and
could intensify with projected precipitation increases. Mold
may contribute to the high rates of hospitalization for asthma
among African Americans in cities such as New York.

2
0
NewYork City
1996–1997

Rest of State
1999–2000

2001–2002

NewYork State
2003–2004

2005–2006

The number of adults with physician-diagnosed
asthma increased between 1996 and 2006. This
trend is expected to continue given ClimAID projections of rising temperatures and carbon dioxide
because asthma is exacerbated by pollen and
ground-level ozone. Pollen production increases
under high atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and
ozone tends to increase with higher temperatures.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

47



Conclusions
New York State is highly diverse, with simultaneous and
intersecting challenges and opportunities. Among them,
climate change will affect the people, sectors and regions
of the state in the coming decades. Those that are already
facing significant stress will likely be most at risk from
future climate change. The success of the state’s response
will depend on developing effective adaptation strategies
by connecting climate change with ongoing proactive policy and management initiatives. Climate change will bring
opportunities as well as constraints, and interactions of
climate change with other stresses, such as increased
resource demand, will create new challenges.
The risks associated with sea level rise and coastal flooding
are among the greatest climate-related challenges faced by
New York State, affecting public health and ecosystems as
well as critical infrastructure across many sectors including
water, energy, transportation, and communication. Heat
waves and heavy downpours will also affect many people
and sectors. These and other drivers of climate change
impacts will have a wide variety of effects that will require
a range of adaptation strategies that can help reduce these
impacts in the future. Such adaptation strategies are also
likely to produce benefits today, since they will help to
lessen impacts of climate extremes that currently cause
damages. Examples of adaptation strategies in each sector
have appeared throughout this report.
There is a range of adaptation needs, many of which can
be undertaken in the near-term at relatively modest cost.
And there are some infrastructure investments – especially
relating to transportation and coastal zones – that are likely to be needed in the long-term and that would be expensive (though less expensive than the costs incurred in the
absence of such measures). This suggests the need for
increased and on-going interaction between scientists and
policy-makers to ensure that science better informs policy,
as well as the need for increased scientific and technical
capabilities to be brought to bear on adaptations that
involve the developing infrastructure of New York State.
48

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Observed Climate Changes
• Annual average temperatures in New York State have risen
about 2.4ºF since 1970, with winter warming exceeding 4.4ºF.
• Sea level along New York’s coastline has risen about one foot
since 1900.
• Since 1900, there has been no discernible trend in annual
average precipitation for the state as a whole.
• Intense precipitation events (heavy downpours) have
increased in recent decades.

Projected Changes
• Climate models with a range of greenhouse gas emissions
scenarios suggest temperature increases across New York
State of between 1.5 to 3ºF in the 2020s, 3 to 5.5ºF in the
2050s, and 4 to 9ºF in the 2080s.
• Most climate models project a small increase in annual
precipitation. Variability is expected to continue to be large.
Projected precipitation increases are largest in winter, mainly
as rain, and small decreases may occur in late summer/early
fall.
• Sea level rise projections for the coast and tidal Hudson River
based on IPCC methods (which do not include increased melting of polar ice sheets), are 1-5 inches by the 2020s,
5-12 inches by the 2050s, and 8-23 inches by the 2080s.
• If the melting of the Greenland and West Antarctic Ice Sheets
continues to accelerate, sea level rise would exceed projections based on IPCC methods. A rapid ice melt scenario, based
on observed rates of melting and paleoclimate records, yields
sea level rise of 37-55 inches by the 2080s.
• Extreme heat events are very likely to increase, and extreme
cold events are very likely to decrease throughout New York
State.
• Intense precipitation events (heavy downpours) are likely to
increase. Short-duration warm season droughts are projected
to become more common.
• Coastal flooding associated with sea level rise is very likely to
increase. Areas not subject to coastal flooding now could
become so in the future.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

49



Recommendations
The ClimAID process has yielded some general recommendations for
potential actions that can be taken by policy makers, managers, and
researchers. These recommendations can help make New York State
more resilient to current and future climate risk by bringing cuttingedge knowledge and data to groups of empowered and collaborating
decision makers.
Recommendations aimed at statewide decision makers
• Promote adaptation strategies that enable incremental and flexible
adaptations in sectors, amongst communities, and across time.
• Identify synergies between mitigation and adaptation. Taking steps to
mitigate climate change now will reduce vulnerabilities, increase
resilience, and enhance opportunities across all sectors. At the same
time, some potential adaptation strategies present significant mitigation
opportunities while others work against mitigation.
• Improve public and private stakeholder and general public education and
awareness about all aspects of climate change. This could encourage
the formation of new partnerships for developing climate change adaptations, especially given limited financial and human resources, and advantage of shared knowledge.
• Analyze and address environmental justice issues related to climate
change and adaptation on a regular basis.
• Consider regional, federal and international climate-related approaches
when exploring climate adaptation options. This is crucial because it is
clear that New York State adaptation potential (and mitigation potential
as well) will be affected by national and international policies and
regulations as well as state-level policies.

Management recommendations associated with everyday operations
within stakeholder agencies and organizations
• Integrate adaptation responses into the everyday practices of organizations and agencies, with the potential for complimentary effects or
unintended consequences of adaptation strategies taken into account.
50

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



• Evaluate design and performance standards and policy regulations
based on up-to-date climate projections.
• Take climate change into account within organizational planning and
development efforts.
• Identify opportunities for partnerships among organizations and agencies
within the state and region.
• Create standardized, statewide climate change mitigation and adaptation
decision tools for decision makers, including a central database of climate risk and adaptation information for the state that is the result of an
ongoing partnership between scientists and stakeholders.

Recommendations for science and research
• Refine climate change scenarios for New York State on an on-going
basis as new climate models and downscaled products become
available.
• Conduct targeted impacts research in conjunction with local, state, and
regional stakeholders.
• Implement and institutionalize an indicators and monitoring program
focused on climate, impacts, and adaptation strategies.
• Improve mapping and spatial analysis to help present new impact data
and adaptation strategies.
• Focus studies on specific systems that may be subject to nonlinearities
or “tipping points.” Work should be encouraged to understand the
potential for tipping points associated with climate change impacts on
natural and social systems.
• Research climate variability, extreme events, and other stakeholder-identified variables of interest including ice storms, extreme precipitation
events, and wind patterns.
• Build on economic cost and benefit work to create a better understanding of the costs of climate change and benefits of adaptations on a sector by sector basis.

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

51



ClimAID Leadership Team
Cynthia Rosenzweig (Lead PI), NASA Goddard Institute for
Space Studies and Columbia University
William Solecki (PI), City University of New York, CUNY
Institute for Sustainable Cities (CUNY CISC)
Arthur DeGaetano (PI), Northeast Regional Climate Center,
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Science, Cornell
University;
Amanda Stevens (Project Manager), New York State Energy
Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA)
Mark Watson (Program Manager, Environmental Research),
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority
(NYSERDA)
Megan O’Grady (Project Manager), Columbia University
Lesley Patrick (Project Manager), City University of New York
Susan Hassol (Science Writer), Climate Communication, LLC
Paul Grabhorn (Graphic Designer), Grabhorn Studio, Inc.
Josh Weybright (Graphic Designer), Graphic Sky, Inc.

ClimAID Sector Teams

Ecosystems
David W. Wolfe (Sector Lead), Cornell University
Jonathan Comstock, Cornell University
Holly Menninger, Cornell University
David Weinstein, Cornell University
Kristi Sullivan, Cornell University
Cliff Kraft, Cornell University
Brian Chabot, Cornell University
Paul Curtis, Cornell University
Agriculture
David W. Wolfe (Sector Lead), Cornell University
Jonathan Comstock, Cornell University
Alan Lasko, Cornell University
Larry Chase, Cornell University
William Fry, Cornell University
Curt Petzoldt, Cornell University

Climate
Radley Horton (Lead), Columbia University
Daniel Bader, Columbia University
Arthur DeGaetano, Cornell University
Cynthia Rosenzweig, Columbia University
Lee Tryhorn, Cornell University
Richard Goldberg, Columbia University

Energy
Steve Hammer (Sector Lead), formerly with Columbia
University
Lily Parshall, formerly with Columbia University

Adaptation & Vulnerability
William Solecki, City University of New York
Lee Tryhorn, Cornell University
Arthur DeGaetano, Cornell University

Transportation
Klaus Jacob (Sector Lead), Columbia University
George Deodatis, Columbia University
John Atlas, formerly with Columbia University
Morgan Whitcomb, Columbia University
Madeleine Lopeman, Columbia University
Olga Markogiannaki, Columbia University
Zackary Kennett, Columbia University
Aurelie Morla, Columbia University

Equity & Environmental Justice
Robin Leichenko (Lead), Rutgers University
Peter Vancura, Rutgers University
Adelle Thomas, Rutgers University
Economics
Yehuda Klein, City University of New York
Robin Leichenko, Rutgers University
David Major, Columbia University
Marta Panero, New York University
Water
Rebecca Schneider (Sector Lead), Cornell University
Andrew McDonald (Sector Lead), New York State Water
Resources Institute
Stephen Shaw, Cornell University
Susan Riha, Cornell University
Lee Tryhorn, Cornell University
Allan Frei, City University of New York
Burrell Montz, East Carolina University
52

Coastal Zones
Frank Buonaiuto (Sector Lead), City University of New York
Lesley Patrick, City University of New York
Ellen Hartig, New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation
Vivien Gornitz, Columbia University
Jery Stedinger, Cornell University
Jay Tanski, Cornell University
John Waldman, City University of New York

Telecommunications
Klaus Jacob (Sector Lead), Columbia University
Nicholas Maxemchuk, Columbia University
George Deodatis, Columbia University
Aurelie Morla, Columbia University
Ellen Schlossberg, Columbia University
Imin Paung, Columbia University
Madeleine Lopeman, Columbia University
Public Health
Patrick L. Kinney (Sector Lead), Columbia University
Perry Sheffield, Mount Sinai School of Medicine
Richard S. Ostfeld, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies
Jessie L. Carr, Columbia University

DRAFT - November 1, 2010



Credits and Copyrights
All photographs and illustrations are copyright © by their respective
sources.
Cover:

Background photo, Clifford Grabhorn; NY State map, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA); Water
Resources, iStockphoto LP/Blugalexy; Coastal Zones,
iStockphoto LP/MikeRega; Ecosystems, iStockphoto
LP/lightphoto; Agriculture, iStockphoto LP/genekrebs; Energy,
Department of Energy (DOE)/National Energy Technology
Laboratory (NETL); Transportation, iStockphoto
LP/Smileyjoanne; Telecommunications, iStockphoto
LP/JLGutierrez; Public Health, iStockphoto LP/tazytaz;
Page 1: Globe, iStockphoto LP/molotovcoketail; Water Resources,
iStockphoto LP/Blugalexy; Coastal Zones, iStockphoto
LP/MikeRega; Ecosystems, iStockphoto LP/lightphoto;
Agriculture, iStockphoto LP/genekrebs; Energy, DOE/National
Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL); Transportation,
iStockphoto LP/Smileyjoanne; Telecommunications,
iStockphoto LP/JLGutierrez; Public Health, iStockphoto
LP/tazytaz;
Page 2-3: NY State map, NASA; Heat Waves, iStockphoto
LP/jimd_stock; Heavy Downpours, iStockphoto LP/fotokostic;
Interactions, iStockphoto LP/adamkaz; Summer Drought,
iStockphoto LP/Spod; Opportunities, iStockphoto
LP/genekrebs; Wide Ranging Impacts, iStockphoto
LP/lightphoto; Coastal Flooding, iStockphoto LP/mcteak;
Page 7: City photo, iStockphoto LP/adamkaz; flood photo, iStockphoto
LP/fotokostic; storm photo, iStockphoto LP/mcteak;
Page 8-9: Background, NASA; water treatment photo, NYC Department
of Environmental Protection, 2008; crop photo, iStockphoto
LP/wakila; Flooded subway, Librado Romero/New York Times;
Page 10: Ecosystem photo, iStockphoto LP/lightphoto; construction
photo, iStockphoto LP/scotto72;
Page 11: Houses photo, iStockphoto LP/crowman; Forest monitoring
photo, Chris Hildreth;
Page 12: Areas, iStockphoto LP/genekrebs; Groups, iStockphoto
LP/Kalulu;
Page 13: Firms and industries, iStockphoto LP/robcocquyt;
Page 14: Snowmobile photo, iStockphoto LP/spepple22;
Page 15: Orchard photo, iStockphoto LP/ranplett; lighthouse photo,
iStockphoto LP/MikeRega
Page 16: Catskills photo, iStockphoto LP/DenisTangneyJr; storm photo,
Paul Grabhorn; flood photo, iStockphoto LP/fotokostic; crop
photo, iStockphoto LP/Creativeye99; river photo, iStockphoto
LP/NetaDegany;
Page 17: Shoreline photo, iStockphoto LP/Blugalexy; water treatment
photo, NYC Department of Environmental Protection, 2008;
Niagara Falls, iStockphoto LP/sumankarki;
Page 19: Lourdes Hospital, D. Lupardo;
Page 20: Long Island coast (upper left), iStockphoto LP/crowman;
Coastal photos (2) and shellfish harvest photo (map inset), see
Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies in New York State (Foundation Report); lobster
photo, iStockphoto LP/RASimon; Lower Hudson Valley,
iStockphoto LP/mdgmorris; marsh photo, Ellen K. Hartig;
Page 21: Lighthouse, iStockphoto LP/MikeRega;
Page 22: Long Island wetland, iStockphoto LP/crowman;
Page 23: storm photo, iStockphoto LP/mcteak;
Page 24: Adirondack Mountains, iStockphoto LP/capecodphoto;
Mt Marcy, iStockphoto LP/makalu;
Page 25: Header photo, iStockphoto LP/lightphoto; Shelving Rock Falls,
iStockphoto LP/wsmahar;
Page 26: Whiteface Mountain, iStockphoto LP/eyedias; Bobcat,
iStockphoto LP/through-my-lens; Snowshoe Hare, iStockphoto
LP/janeff;

Page 27: Adirondack photo (top), iStockphoto LP/luchcogs; forest
damage photo, iStockphoto LP/PetePattavina; trout photo,
iStockphoto LP/invs572517; fisherman photo, iStockphoto
LP/jacomstephens;
Page 28: Orchard photo, iStockphoto LP/ranplett; pest photo,
iStockphoto LP/PrairieArtProject; ditch photo, iStockphoto
LP/martb; soybean crop photo, iStockphoto LP/macmaniac;
flooded corn crop, iStockphoto LP/djperry;
Page 29: Agriculture header farm photo, iStockphoto LP/genekrebs;
Grapes photo, iStockphoto LP/MvH;
Page 30: Crop photo, iStockphoto LP/wakila;
Page 31: Cow photo, iStockphoto LP/BirdofPrey;
Page 32: Power line photo, JUPITERIMAGES bxp39992; nuclear power
plant photo, iStockphoto LP/WilshireImages; Hydroelectric
photo, United States Army Corps of Engineers; Solar cell
photo, JUPITERIMAGES bxp40015; Wind generator photo,
JUPITERIMAGES bxp40017; Biomass photo, DOE; Storage
tanks photo, JUPITERIMAGES bxp40013;
Page 33: Energy header photo, DOE/NETL; Cityscape photo,
iStockphoto LP/Nikada;
Page 34: Transmission lines photo, Electric Power Research Institute
(EPRI); Aerial photo, NASA;
Page 36: Mid Hudson bridge photo, iStockphoto LP/lightphoto; Elevated
train photo, iStockphoto LP/Terraxplorer;
Page 37: Transportation header photo, iStockphoto LP/Smileyjoanne;
Road erosion photo, NYCERDA;
Page 38: Subway photo, iStockphoto LP/contour99;
Page 40: Fiber optics image, EPRI; transmission line photo, EPRI; storm
photo, iStockphoto LP/bobbieo; communications tower photo,
iStockphoto LP/pkruger
Page 41: Communications header photo, iStockphoto LP/JLGutierrez;
Page 42: Storm photo, iStockphoto LP/ebrind;
Page 44: Children photo, iStockphoto LP/Krakozawr;
Page 45: Public Health header photo, iStockphoto LP/tazytaz;
Page 46: Cityscape, iStockphoto LP/adamkaz; Thermometer,
iStockphoto LP/jimd_stock; Heat islands, ;
Page 50: Background image, NASA;
Page 51: Water Resources, iStockphoto LP/Blugalexy; Coastal Zones,
iStockphoto LP/MikeRega; Ecosystems, iStockphoto
LP/lightphoto; Agriculture, iStockphoto LP/genekrebs; Energy,
Department of Energy (DOE)/National Energy Technology
Laboratory (NETL); Transportation, iStockphoto
LP/Smileyjoanne; Telecommunications, iStockphoto
LP/JLGutierrez; Public Health, iStockphoto LP/tazytaz;

DRAFT - November 1, 2010

53

