Oregon Climate Action Plan (OCAP)
Governor Brown’s 2020 Executive Order on Climate
In March 2020, Oregon Governor Kate Brown made history by taking sweeping executive
action (EO 20-04) to address the climate crisis. Citing the scientific, economic and moral
imperative for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adopting climate mitigation
measures, the Oregon Climate Action Plan (OCAP) will ensure that Oregonians across the
state benefit from a competitive economy and healthy communities. OCAP directs 16
different state agencies to take action in support of one primary overarching goal: reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in Oregon by at least 80% below 1990 levels by the year 2050.
Here’s how the program aims to achieve that:

Transportation

Health

Why it matters: The transportation sector is

Why it matters: From increased rates of asthma,

responsible for nearly 40% of Oregon’s total

lung and heart disease related to air pollution,

greenhouse gas emissions. Increased investment

dehydration and other illness resulting from

is needed in low-carbon modes of transportation,

extreme heat, and the physical harm and

including transit, biking and walking.

psychological stress caused by wildfires, flooding
and other natural disasters, human health is yet

How OCAP will help: OCAP will cut transportation
emissions by: a) strengthening Oregon’s Clean
Fuels Program, setting a bold new goal of
reducing the carbon intensity of Oregon’s
transportation fuels by 25% by 2035— the
strongest in the nation; b) significantly expanding
the number of electric vehicles on the road and
charging stations to fuel them; and c) directing the
Department of Transportation to help advance
transportation and land use plans that achieve the
state’s emission reduction goals, and evaluating

another casualty of unmitigated climate change
How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the Oregon
Health Authority to produce a report on the public
health impacts of climate change in Oregon. The
report will place a particular emphasis on the risks
faced by vulnerable populations—including seniors,
children, low-income communities and communities
of color—reflecting the fact that these groups will
disproportionately feel the health impacts inflicted
by climate change.

the greenhouse gas emissions of transportation

How Oregonians will benefit: With dangerous

projects in planning processes.

wildfires increasing in frequency and intensity
across Oregon, and more air-polluting vehicles on

How Oregonians will benefit: OCAP will support

our roads, climate change threatens to worsen

Oregon jobs and investments in communities

public health outcomes across Oregon. OCAP’s

across the state, all while cutting harmful,

report on climate change and public health will

climate-change causing pollutants from our air.

better our ability to ensure healthy families and
communities across the state.

OREGON ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL

1



Oregon Climate Action Plan (OCAP)

Food

Buildings

Why it matters: Food waste alone is responsible for

Why it matters: Buildings can either guzzle or sip

at least 2.6 percent of greenhouse gas emissions in

energy and currently run on a significant amount

the U.S—the equivalent to more than 37 million cars

of fossil fuel energy, both from electricity and

on the road. When wasted food goes to a landfill, it

natural gas. Because buildings can last for more

creates methane, a potent greenhouse gas.

than 100 years, building things well in the first
place saves money in the long run.

How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the Department
of Environmental Quality to take actions to cut

How OCAP will help: OCAP sets new building

Oregon’s food waste in half by 2030.

energy efficiency goals for residential and
commercial construction, representing at least a

How Oregonians will benefit: Cutting food waste

60% reduction in new building energy

will reduce harmful methane emissions and save

consumption from 2006. It also directs Oregon

the energy required to grow, process, transport

to adopt energy efficiency standards for

and cook food. It will also save Oregonians

appliances to be consistent with stronger

money: the average U.S. household of four loses

standards among West Coast jurisdictions.

an estimated $1,350 to $2,275 every year as a
result of uneaten food.

How Oregonians will benefit: Maximizing the
energy efficiency of buildings will reduce
operating costs for businesses and save renters
and homeowners money on their utility bills.

Equity
Why it matters: Climate change has a
disproportionate effect on the physical, mental,
financial and cultural wellbeing of impacted
communities, including Native American tribes,
communities of color, rural communities, and other
traditionally underrepresented communities.
How OCAP will help: Through OCAP, the
Governor’s office will convene an interagency
workgroup on climate impacts to impacted
communities to develop strategies to guide climate
actions, with participation by 15 state agencies and

Youth
Why it matters: As the reality of climate change
becomes more dire, young people are
increasingly anxious and depressed about what it
means for their futures.
How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the Oregon
Health Authority to conduct a timely study the
impacts of climate change on youth depression
and mental health in Oregon.

departments.

How Oregonians will benefit: With more young

How Oregonians will benefit: By engaging

Oregonians struggling with mental health than

impacted communities in the policymaking

ever, it is critical that we better understand the

process, we can ensure equitable, lasting

relationship between the global climate crisis

solutions to achieve Oregon’s climate objectives.

and youth depression here at home.

OREGON ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL

2



Oregon Climate Action Plan (OCAP)

Innovation

Lands

Why it matters: Innovation and technological

Why it matters: Natural and working lands play a

development will be critical in order for industry to

critical role in carbon sequestration and climate

effectively decarbonize and reduce greenhouse

mitigation. The science is clear: in order to avoid

gas emissions.

climate catastrophe, we must radically transform

How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the
Environmental Quality Commission to limit and

the way we use our land—from how we grow our
food to how we manage our forests.

reduce emissions from large stationary sources and

How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the Oregon

major fossil fuels emitters. In doing so, OCAP

Global Warming Commission to propose state goals

encourages innovation, incentivizing the adoption

for carbon sequestration and storage by Oregon's

of new technologies and processes to reduce

natural and working landscapes, including forests,

emissions across Oregon’s industrial sector.

wetlands, and agricultural lands.

How Oregonians will benefit: Industrial

How Oregonians will benefit: Increasing the

innovation and technological development will

capacity of our natural and working lands to

help Oregon maintain economic

remove and store carbon means preserving the

competitiveness and growth, while advancing

Oregon we love—its forests, wetlands and

the state’s emission reduction goals.

agricultural lands—for future generations.

Clean Energy
Why it matters: Electricity is the second largest
contributor to climate pollution in Oregon and big
energy investment decisions will be made over the
next few years. Oregon’s way of regulating utilities

More information
Nora Apter, Climate Program Director
Phone: 503.222.1963 ext. 102
Email: noraa@oeconline.org

has been based on “least cost, least risk,” but not
“least carbon.”

Krista Snell, Communications Director

How OCAP will help: OCAP directs the Oregon

Phone: 503.222.1963 ext. 111
Email: kristas@oeconline.org

Public Utility Commission to prioritize proceedings
and activities that advance decarbonization and
make rapid reductions to greenhouse gas
emissions in the utility sector.
How Oregonians will benefit: Increased renewable

Oregon Environmental Council
222 N.W. Davis Street, Suite 309
Portland, OR 97209-3900

energy and energy efficiency will help ensure a
diversified energy supply, more jobs, cleaner air
and healthier communities across Oregon.

OREGON ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL

3

