The Flagstaff Carbon
Neutrality Plan
An evolving framework for action
June 2021

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Table of Contents
I. Taking Action .......................................................................................................................... 5
Goals ............................................................................................................................................................... 6
Our Path to Carbon Neutrality ....................................................................................................................... 7
About this Plan.............................................................................................................................................. 13
II. Our Approach ...................................................................................................................... 16
Carbon Neutrality Is … ................................................................................................................................. 17
Flagstaff Will… .............................................................................................................................................. 23
Climate Action in Flagstaff Will:.................................................................................................................... 30
III. Implementation .................................................................................................................. 35
IV. The Path to Carbon Neutrality .............................................................................................. 43
Focus One: Our Neighborhoods ................................................................................................. 45
Community Resilience .................................................................................................................................. 46
Equitable Systems ........................................................................................................................................ 49
Decreased Dependence on Cars .................................................................................................................. 53
Focus Two: Our Energy Sources ................................................................................................. 65
Electric Mobility ............................................................................................................................................ 66
Clean Electricity ............................................................................................................................................ 71
Building Fuel Switching ................................................................................................................................ 77
Focus Three: Our Consumption.................................................................................................. 84
Reduced Building Energy Use ...................................................................................................................... 85
Sustainable Consumption and Waste Management ................................................................................... 91
Focus Four: Our Commitment .................................................................................................... 96
Carbon Dioxide Removal .............................................................................................................................. 97
V. BACKGROUND ..................................................................................................................... 102
Climate Change in Flagstaff ........................................................................................................................104
Flagstaff’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions........................................................................................................106
THANK YOU ............................................................................................................................. 109
Appendix A ............................................................................................................................. 110

Cover image: Flagstaff students protest for climate action in the fall of 2018. Photo credit: Jake Bacon.

Page | 2

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Letter from the Flagstaff City Council
To the Flagstaff community,
Thank you. Flagstaff’s climate action is rooted in the efforts and energy of the community members that
hold us to the climate leadership goals we set for ourselves. Community members initiated the Climate
Emergency Declaration, which is the foundation for this document. The community helped to develop the
Flagstaff Carbon Neutrality Plan and will be integral in achieving Flagstaff’s climate goals.
This document represents Flagstaff’s hopeful, ambitious, and necessary approach to climate action. It is
Flagstaff’s contribution to the international effort to restore a safe climate, protect the earth’s diversity of
culture and life, and prioritize vulnerable communities. This Plan outlines nine target areas and
accompanying strategies to proactively reduce emissions, build a stronger community, and prepare for
coming change.
We take on this work with the knowledge that climate change will challenge Flagstaff and will negatively
affect Flagstaff’s vulnerable community members, including low-income families, communities of color,
and the elderly. Equity and climate justice will be foundational elements of our work, to avoid harm to
underserved groups and to ensure the benefits of climate action are fairly distributed.
The path to carbon neutrality will require leadership, bold action, perseverance and
creativity. Each step closer to carbon neutrality offers hope for a healthy, prosperous, and equitable
future for the Flagstaff community—and the world.
We invite all community members to remain involved as we work to achieve the goals of this Plan.
Community voices will be needed to assist in our efforts – to create creative partnerships, to bring more
residents into the conversation, to ensure we act equitably, and to help us remain accountable to our
goals. Residents can receive assistance in home energy retrofits, join a neighborhood clean-up, review our
greenhouse gas emissions reports, or learn how to talk to their neighbors about climate change. Find out
more ways to get involved at www.flagstaff.az.gov/CNP.
In partnership,
The Flagstaff City Council

Page | 3

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

KEY TERMS
Climate terms used throughout this Plan are defined below to clarify their meaning in the context of
Flagstaff's work.
The fundamentals of climate action:


Climate change: A shift in long-term, average weather patterns fueled by increased greenhouse gas
emissions into the atmosphere. Globally, climate change is leading to increased temperatures and
instability in the atmosphere, causing extreme weather events like drought, rising sea levels, and
catastrophic wildfires.



Greenhouse gas emissions: Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions include carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases that are released into the atmosphere naturally or through
human activities. The increased concentration of GHG emissions in the atmosphere causes climate
change. GHG emissions are often standardized and reported in metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalent (MT CO2E).



Carbon neutrality: A state where an entity has achieved a net zero GHG emissions footprint. This is
achieved by balancing every ton of human-caused GHG emissions produced with an equivalent
amount of GHG emissions removed from the atmosphere, on an annual basis.

There are three types of climate action:


Adaptation: Actions that increase the ability to withstand, respond to, or cope with climate change
impacts.



Mitigation: Actions that decrease GHG emissions, which cause climate change.



Equity: The just distribution of the benefits of climate protection and alleviation of unequal
burdens created by climate change.

These terms represent emerging types of climate action:


Carbon dioxide removal (CDR): Refers to techniques and processes that remove carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere.



Clean electricity: Electricity generated from sources that do not produce GHG emissions.



Fuel switching: Converting appliances, machines, and systems that rely on fossil fuels like natural
gas, oil, or coal to another power source. This includes electrification, which is switching fuels to
electricity.



Electric mobility: The use of modes of transportation that are fueled by electricity instead of fossil
fuels, including electric buses, electric bikes, small electric devices like scooters and hoverboards
(electric micro-mobility), and electric vehicles (EVs).

Page | 4

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

I. TAKING ACTION
Climate change, accelerated by human-caused greenhouse gas emissions, is disrupting global weather
patterns and threatening communities across the world. While climate shifts have occurred in the past,
current climate change is happening at a faster rate than any recorded in history. If the increasing amount
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is not reduced, life as we understand it will be altered irreversibly.
On June 23, 2020, the Flagstaff City Council declared a climate emergency, calling on each of us to do all
we can to protect the earth's diversity of culture and life. See page 103 for a copy of the Climate
Emergency Declaration.
The Flagstaff Carbon Neutrality Plan (the Plan) establishes a vision for how Flagstaff will create a carbonneutral future. Achieving this goal will require reducing our greenhouse gas emissions through drastic
shifts in how we heat and power our buildings, travel from place to place, and manage our waste. These
shifts must occur at multiple levels within our community, as well as across the state, our country, and the
world. This Plan includes nine target areas for reducing our community's emissions, each with specific
strategies to guide Flagstaff's work. This Plan updates the 2018 Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation
Plan (CAAP) and draws upon its goals of adaptation and equity.
Climate action can create a stronger Flagstaff and reduce the negative economic, social and
environmental costs of climate change – reducing the amount of global warming will pay dividends for
generations. Yet our work to reduce emissions and prepare for change isn’t just about avoiding costs – it is
about improving life here in Flagstaff. Climate action can have co-benefits ranging from lower home
energy costs and air that’s easier to breathe, to healthier forests, neighbors who can rely on each other,
and more enjoyable ways to get to work.
The voice of the Flagstaff community will provide critical guidance to the City of Flagstaff as we work
together to reach carbon neutrality. The path to carbon neutrality will not be easy: it will require
perseverance and creativity. Yet each step closer to carbon neutrality offers hope for a healthier, safer, and
more prosperous future for the Flagstaff community—and the world.

VISION FOR THE FUTURE
The Flagstaff community takes ambitious action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build
community resilience, resulting in a higher quality of life for all residents. This transformation involves the
entire community, is supported by collaborations with regional and tribal partners, provides
opportunities, and centers vulnerable communities in an equitable transition towards carbon neutrality.

Page | 5

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Overarching Goals
Goal One:

Achieve carbon neutrality by 2030.
Flagstaff will arrive at carbon neutrality, also known as net-zero community greenhouse
gas emissions, by 2030. Carbon neutrality will be achieved through a combination of
emissions reductions and carbon dioxide removal (CDR) initiatives. For more information
on carbon neutrality, see the Approach Chapter starting on page 16.
Mitigation target: Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 44% by 2030, from
the business as usual emissions projection.
Flagstaff will reduce greenhouse gas emissions as much as possible: this Plan
aims to reduce Flagstaff’s annual community emissions by 44% compared to the
business as usual (BAU) scenario - our predicted emissions if we took no climate
action.
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) target: Balance any remaining greenhouse gas
emissions with carbon dioxide removal, to achieve carbon neutrality by
2030.
To achieve carbon neutrality, we will measure the emissions produced each year
by the Flagstaff community on an annual basis, and then balance those emissions
with an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide removal (CDR). In 2030, Flagstaff
will need to remove approximately 471,000 tons of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere – equivalent to our 2030 emissions.

Goal Two:

Prepare Flagstaff's communities, systems, and resources to be more resilient to
climate change impacts.
Climate changes have already taken place in northern Arizona; natural and societal shifts
will continue to occur. The Flagstaff community must begin to respond to climate
change through adaptation, or preparing for change and strengthening our community's
social, economic, and infrastructure systems. Adaptation actions will ensure Flagstaff is
better equipped for and can thrive amidst both short-term disruptions and long-term
change.

Goal Three:

Address climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most impacted and
ensures the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are equitably
distributed.
Climate change disproportionally impacts vulnerable communities like older adults,
people of color and low-income neighborhoods. As we act, we must consider how both
climate change and climate action can affect people differently. The City of Flagstaff will
center equity in its climate action decisions to ensure all communities in Flagstaff can
benefit from a carbon neutral future.

The Climate Emergency Declaration calls for ambitious action on adaptation and equity alongside
mitigation. Goals two and three reflect the adaptation and equity goals established in the 2018 Flagstaff
Climate Action and Adaptation Plan. Read more about these principles on page 27.

Page | 6

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Our Path to Carbon Neutrality
To reach carbon neutrality, we will…

Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence on
Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy Use

Carbon Dioxide
Removal

Clean
our energy
sources
Clean
Electricity

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

consumption
and waste
management

Page | 7

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

TARGET AREAS AND STRATEGIES
Flagstaff will achieve carbon neutrality by taking action in the following target areas:


Community Resilience



Building Fuel Switching



Equitable Systems



Reduced Building Energy Use



Decreased Dependence on Cars





Electric Mobility

Sustainable Consumption and Waste
Management



Clean Electricity



Carbon Dioxide Removal

Target areas and their supporting actions are detailed starting on page 43.

1. FOCUS ONE: WE WILL STRENGTHEN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
Community resilience
 CR-1:
 CR-2:

Ensure all mitigation actions improve Flagstaff’s ability to adapt to the future.
Strengthen existing community systems to create resilience to both short-term shocks
and long-term change.

Equitable systems
 ES-1:
 ES-2:
 ES-3:
 ES-4:

Incorporate equity as a foundational element of every climate action the City develops
and implements.
Proactively engage community members on an ongoing basis.
Design targeted climate policies and programs to serve vulnerable communities first.
Actively seek to recognize past harms, repair trust, and build deeper relationships with
community members.

Decreased Dependence on Cars
 DD-1:
 DD-2:
 DD-3:
 DD-4:
 DD-5:
 DD-6:

Page | 8

Encourage vibrancy, appropriate density, and attainability in existing neighborhoods, so
that more residents live within walking distance of their daily needs.
Create inclusive networks for walking and biking that are continuous, attractive, safe,
comprehensive, and convenient for people of all ages.
Encourage Flagstaff residents and visitors to walk, bike, roll and take the bus.
Transform transportation policies and planning to incorporate greenhouse gas emissions
analysis and reduce dependence on driving.
Invest in comprehensive and equitable transit.
Proactively invest to protect Flagstaff’s clean air status.

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

2. FOCUS TWO: WE WILL CLEAN OUR ENERGY SOURCES
Electric Mobility
 EM-1:
 EM-2:
 EM-3:

Advance the electrification of buses across Flagstaff.
Welcome electric micro-mobility devices as legitimate, healthy, affordable, and lowcarbon modes of transportation.
Support residents, businesses and institutions in the transition to electric vehicles.

Clean electricity
 CE-1:
 CE-2:
 CE-3:

Produce 100% renewable electricity to cover all City of Flagstaff municipal electricity
needs.
Increase renewable energy installations and usage in new buildings.
Support solar installations on existing residential and commercial buildings.

Building Fuel Switching
 FS-1:
 FS-2:
 FS-3:
 FS-4:

Reduce or remove natural gas usage in municipal buildings
Encourage new buildings to rely on the electric grid as their main energy source.
Support fuel switching in existing residential and commercial buildings.
Provide training and education on fuel switching.

3. FOCUS THREE: WE WILL MANAGE OUR CONSUMPTION
Reduced Building Energy Use
 BE-1:
 BE-2:
 BE-3:

Achieve net zero energy City of Flagstaff facilities.
By 2030, require new homes in Flagstaff to be net zero energy homes.
Reduce energy use in existing buildings.

Sustainable Consumption and Waste Management
 MM-1:
 MM-2:
 MM-3:
 MM-4:

Manage emissions from the Cinder Lake Landfill.
Encourage sustainable consumption.
Divert more waste from the landfill.
Reduce organic waste going to the landfill and feed hungry people.

4. FOCUS FOUR: WE WILL UPHOLD OUR COMMITMENT
Carbon Dioxide Removal
 CD-1:
 CD-2:

Develop a portfolio of local and regional carbon dioxide removal initiatives to meet
Flagstaff's commitment to carbon neutrality.
If local carbon dioxide removal projects are insufficient, obtain high-quality carbon offsets
and CO2 Removal Certificates (CORCs).

Page | 9

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

THE PATH TO CARBON NEUTRALITY STARTS WITH A 44% REDUCTION IN
EMISSIONS
Carbon neutrality involves two core actions: first one must reduce emissions by as much as possible, and
then balance the remaining emissions with carbon dioxide removal.
The City’s carbon neutrality strategy starts with significant emissions reductions. Without action, we
project that the Flagstaff community will produce approximately 846,000 metric tons of greenhouse gas
emissions in 2030 – this is called the business as usual scenario. Compared to this scenario, the strategies
and outcomes envisioned by the Plan will lead to a 44% reduction in emissions. While significant, our
community will still produce an estimated 471,000 tons of greenhouse gasses in 2030 (MTCO2e).
To achieve carbon neutrality, Flagstaff will need to pursue carbon dioxide removal initiatives at an
equivalent scale. If 471,000 tons of greenhouse gasses are still produced over the course of a year, then
471,000 tons will need to be removed.

GHG Emissions - Metric Tons of Carbon
Dioxide Equivalent (MTCO2e)

The two graphs below, Image A and Image B, display these emission reductions, in different ways.

Figure 1: Remaining emissions still produced in 2016 (measured) and 2030 (projected). This bar graph
only considers the emissions produced and does not consider the net impact that carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) initiatives would have.

Page | 10

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

GHG Emissions
Metric Tons of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent

Waste
Vehicle miles traveled
Electric vehicles
Residential sector
COF buildings
Commercial sector
Industrial sector
Carbon dioxide removal

Carbon neutrality in 2030
Reductions from waste
Flaring and diversion
Reductions in vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
Maintain 2019 VMT levels
Reductions from electric vehicles
30% of vehicle miles will come from electric
vehicles
Reductions from residential sector
43% reductions in total energy use. 62%
reduction in emissions from natural gas. 72%
of electricity is zero-emissions.

Reductions from COF Buildings
28% from reductions in total energy use. 60%
reduction in emissions from natural gas. 100%
renewable electricity.
Reductions from commercial sector
11% reduction in total energy use. 20% reduction
in emissions from natural gas. 69% of electricity is
zero-emissions.
Reductions from industrial sector
68% of electricity is zero-emissions.
Carbon dioxide removal
471,619 MTCO2e

Figure 2: Wedge graphic of carbon neutrality. This graph shows the emissions reductions and carbon
dioxide removal required to achieve net-zero emissions by 2030.

Page | 11

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

GETTING TO NET-ZERO: KEY SHIFTS TO REACH CARBON NEUTRALITY
Flagstaff needs to commit to substantive change in our community to reach carbon neutrality.
We will need to collectively and individually take big and bold actions on an aggressive timeline.
The table below describes some of the outcomes Flagstaff will need to reach.

Significant reductions
in the miles we travel
by passenger vehicles

- Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT). Hold internal VMT measured steady at
2019 levels, even amidst community growth. Internal VMT = trips that
start and end within the Flagstaff community.
- 30% of our internal VMT will be in electric vehicles (or have zero
tailpipe emissions).

Rapid solar energy
development

- 2,000 new home solar systems are installed by 2030
- 15 Megawatts (MW ) of new solar on commercial and industrial
buildings/lots

Extensive building
retrofits and
electrification

- Retrofit ~50% of existing homes (12,500 total residential retrofits) to
reduce energy use and electrify homes.
- 25% of all commercial buildings get a deep energy efficiency retrofit.
- 15% of commercial buildings fully electrify.

City of Flagstaff:
Renewable Energy +
Energy Use

- 100% renewable electricity for the municipality by 2025: 50MW solar
installation at Red Gap Ranch; 10MW solar installation at the landfill.
- Energy efficiency and fuel switching in municipal buildings.

Low-impact new
buildings

- By 2030, ensure new buildings use net-zero energy, meaning they
contribute to the creation of as much energy as they use.

Carbon Dioxide
Removal

Removing approximately 471,000 tons of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere per year by developing and supporting a portfolio of
carbon dioxide removal initiatives. Potential projects include
biomass, bioenergy or biochar initiatives on City land and Open Space.

What is a megawatt?
A megawatt is how we measure large amounts of power. One megawatt (MW) = 1,000,000 watts. For
reference an LED lightbulb uses about 8 watts.
A typical home rooftop solar system is about 5 kilowatt (kW) in size. One MW is equivalent to 200 typical
home systems. The solar array at the Flagstaff City Hall is 150 kW in size – so to get 15 MW we would need
about 100 additional systems of this size.

Page | 12

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

About this Plan
What this Plan does
re

This Plan will guide the City of Flagstaff as it works to achieve carbon neutrality
and respond to the climate emergency.
This Plan sets a vision, overarching goals, and specific strategies to reach
carbon neutrality and other elements of Flagstaff’s Climate Emergency
Declaration. This Plan will guide the City of Flagstaff’s decisions about policies,
funding, investments, and program development.
This Plan is also a communication tool, to help Flagstaff community members
understand the City’s goals, strategies, and potential actions. This Plan
identifies areas for action by individuals, opportunities for collaboration with
businesses, and how these issues are interconnected.

The science is clear

As the climate changes, Flagstaff will continue to experience warmer
temperatures, an increase in aridity or dryness, lower snowpack levels, and
increased wildfire risk.
These changes will have cascading impacts on Flagstaff’s natural environment,
residents, and community systems. Just a few of the impacts include:


The forests surrounding Flagstaff will become drier and more stressed,
increasing their vulnerability to severe wildfire and disease.



Visitation and tourism to Flagstaff will change. Snow in winter will
become less predictable, and the Phoenix metro area will see
increasingly extreme summer temperatures. This will have impacts on
Flagstaff’s economy, infrastructure, housing systems, and land use.



Flagstaff will experience more days with temperatures above 90
degrees, increased allergens, and more days with poor air quality due
to smoke, negatively impacting residents with health vulnerabilities.

All Flagstaff residents will need to adapt to these and other changes. Some
changes will bring opportunity and others will bring challenges, particularly for
vulnerable community members like older adults, families with low incomes, or
communities of color.
For more information on the anticipated changes to Flagstaff’s climate and
resulting impacts on its community: See Appendix A of this document, or find
even more detail in the Flagstaff Climate Profile, available through the City of
Flagstaff Climate website: www.flagstaff.az.gov/climate.

Page | 13

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Systemic change
versus individual
action

In conversations about climate action, there tends to be extensive conversation
around the value of systemic and individual change. This Plan utilizes both! As
a municipality, the City of Flagstaff works on systemic, structural changes to
decrease greenhouse gas emissions and improve quality of life. However, these
systemic changes help make individual action easier! Think about
transportation, for example. If you live in a walkable neighborhood, you’re
more likely to leave your car at home, since the system and infrastructure is set
up for you to make that choice more easily. Systemic change and individual
action are not mutually exclusive. Instead, they complement and support one
another.

How this document
relates to the 2018
Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan

The Flagstaff Carbon Neutrality Plan builds on the 2018 Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan – also known as the CAAP – and replaces the mitigation goals
and actions of the CAAP.
The 2018 CAAP was developed over a year and a half of community
conversations to create the first climate plan for Flagstaff. It was adopted
unanimously, and was the first community-wide climate plan in Arizona. It
established broad goals for reducing emissions, preparing for change, and
ensuring that we act equitably, prioritizing our most vulnerable community
members.
The 2018 CAAP aligned with the best available science that formed the
foundation for the Paris Climate Agreement. One month before the CAAP
adoption, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published a
report: Global Warming of 1.5° C, stating that urgent action was needed across
the globe to hold warming to 1.5° C, which is equal to 2.7° F. When the Flagstaff
City Council adopted the CAAP in late 2018, the CAAP acknowledged that this
was a first step and that community conversations around this IPCC report
were needed.
This Plan will replace the mitigation portion of the 2018 CAAP. While we
have a new mitigation goal – carbon neutrality by 2030 – we will continue to
reference the 2018 CAAP for the overarching adaptation and equity goals.
The Climate Emergency Declaration calls for more aggressive action on equity
and adaptation, too. After we adopt this Carbon Neutrality Plan, we will start
conversations with the community about bold action on adaptation and
equity, and will revise our plans to reflect the Climate Emergency Declaration’s
calls for greater resilience and a focus on climate equity.

Page | 14

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

How this document
relates to the
Flagstaff Regional
Plan 2030

The Flagstaff Carbon Neutrality Plan supports the vision, goals, objectives and
policies of the Flagstaff Regional Plan 2030. The Regional Plan sets forth a
vision for a Sustainable Flagstaff, connecting development decisions to
environmental impact and the need to plan for the future. It envisions active
stewardship and vitality for both the current population and future
generations – ideals that are supported by reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, resilience-building and support for vulnerable community
members.
This document builds upon the climate change and adaptation goals outlined
in the Flagstaff Regional Plan 2030 – Goal E&C.2. and Goal E&C.3.This
document also furthers many other goals of the Regional Plan, such as but not
limited to:


Goal E.1. Increase energy efficiency.



Goal E.2. Expand production and use of renewable energy.



Goal LU.1. Invest in existing neighborhoods and activity centers for the
purpose of developing complete connected places.



Goal LU.5. Encourage compact development principles to achieve
efficiencies and open space preservation.



Goal LU.6. Provide for a mix of land uses.



Goal NH.3. Make available a variety of housing types at different price
points, to provide housing opportunity for all economic sectors.



Goal T.5. Increase the availability and use of pedestrian infrastructure,
including FUTS, as a critical element of a safe and livable community.



Goal T.6. Provide for bicycling as a safe and efficient means of
transportation and recreation.



Goal T.7. Provide a high-quality, safe, convenient, accessible public
transportation systems, where feasible, to serve as an attractive
alternative to single-occupant vehicles.

The Flagstaff Carbon Neutrality Plan will also inform potential priority areas
for the next update to the regional plan.
While the Regional Plan and this document are supportive of each other, there
is an ‘ambition gap’ between the Regional Plan’s broad goal of reducing
greenhouse gasses and the commitment to carbon neutrality. This gap
reflects the strength of the international consensus on the need for immediate
and aggressive climate action, compared to 2014 when the Regional Plan was
passed and the growth in the urgency of climate action. In 2021, City staff are
proposing are major Regional Plan amendment to update the climate change
and adaptation pages, goals, and policies of the Flagstaff Regional Plan 2030.
This amendment will go through an extensive public review process, including
community open houses, presentations to City commissions, and
conversations with the Flagstaff City Council.

Page | 15

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

II. OUR APPROACH
This document is a framework for action; it outlines broad strategies for how to achieve carbon neutrality.
The principles below illustrate the approach the City will take as it works within the community to achieve
its carbon neutrality goals.

OUR WORK IS INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING PRINCIPLES:
Carbon neutrality is:


1. Community-driven



2. Motivated by urgency



3. Prescriptive



4. A commitment to accountability



5. An investment in our future



6. Supported by market leaders

Flagstaff will:


7. Be a leader



8. Embrace the Big Shift



9. Balance community tensions and create opportunities



10. Center equity and adaptation

Climate action in Flagstaff will:


11. Produce co-benefits



12. Rely on partnerships



13. Prioritize incentives



14. Iterate and adapt over time

Page | 16

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Carbon neutrality is …


Community-driven



Motivated by urgency



Prescriptive



A commitment to accountability



An investment in our future



Supported by market leaders

1. CARBON NEUTRAILTY IS COMMUNITY-DRIVEN
On September 20th, 2019, Flagstaff community members gathered on the City Hall lawn for the Global
Climate Strike. At the gathering, community activists and organizers gathered signatures for a citizen
petition, calling on Flagstaff City Council to declare a climate emergency. This Citizen Petition was
submitted to the City Council on September 24th, 2019. Hundreds of Flagstaff community members
organized into coalitions from farmers and doctors to students and grandparents. At the January 28th, 2020
City Council Meeting, they provided over three hours of public comment requesting a Climate Emergency
Declaration and urgent action. On June 23rd, 2020, the Flagstaff City Council unanimously adopted the
Climate Emergency Declaration.
Community organizers and residents led the creation of the Climate Emergency Declaration, and their
involvement has continued throughout the development process. This Plan was created based on
technical analysis, best practices from peer cities, and feedback from Flagstaff community members. A
Steering Committee of community members was formed to guide Plan development and incorporate
resident voices from the start.
Over the course of 10 months, more than 2,500 residents engaged and contributed to the
development of this Plan. Community members contributed to six surveys, attended 12 virtual open
house forums, and contributed videos for the Climate Emergency Open House website. City staff made 50
carbon neutrality presentations to City Commissions and community groups. Community partners played
an integral role in advising the Plan and inviting their networks to provide input.

Page | 17

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

2. CARBON NEUTRALITY IS DRIVEN BY URGENCY
The climate emergency is causing change in Flagstaff today and threatens to cause catastrophic events
across the world in the coming decades. Urgent and bold action is necessary to take advantage of a small
window of opportunity to avoid the worst effects of irreversible climate change. The IPCC’s Special Report:
Global Warming of 1.5°C states that limiting warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius (which equal to 2.7 degrees
Fahrenheit), compared to 2 degrees Celsius, will allow 10 million people to avoid the health impacts of sea
level rise, save the world approximately $30 trillion in damages, and avoid up to 2,000 heat-related deaths
annually.
The severe impacts of climate change and the need to keep global warming below 1.5°C was a vital driving
principle behind the June 2020 Climate Emergency Declaration, available on page 103.
Local governments are first responders to the climate emergency, like most other emergencies. Thus, local
governments across the world have a responsibility to prepare for this looming threat, to reduce the
potential harm, and to protect vulnerable communities.
Like other emergencies, action must be swift, decisive, collaborative, and effective, while being rooted in
community values and priorities.

3. CARBON NEUTRALITY IS PRESCRIPTIVE
To restore a safe climate for future generations, communities across the world must drastically reduce the
amount of fossil fuels used in buildings, transportation, and consumption. Within the United States, getting
to carbon neutrality looks similar across all cities undertaking this goal, and relies on several common
strategies:


Reducing the energy we use for buildings, transportation and consumption.



Creating energy from renewable and clean sources.



Switching buildings and vehicles to run on clean electricity or other renewable sources.

In this way, carbon neutrality is prescriptive: there is an agreed upon course of action to achieve the
emission reductions necessary. These actions may be re-packaged or reframed from city to city, but the
necessary high-level strategies are known. Flagstaff is no different – the necessary actions are predetermined by where our emissions come from. We still rely on national best practices to dramatically
reduce emissions from our buildings, transportation, and consumption.
Because there are only minor deviations from the standard pathway to achieve carbon neutrality,
Flagstaff’s actions will be similar to all other cities striving for carbon neutrality. There is still ample
opportunity for creativity and innovation in how Flagstaff achieves these goals: policies and programs will
be developed to meet Flagstaff’s unique characteristics, population, economic drivers and climate.

Page | 18

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

4. CARBON NEUTRALITY REQUIRES ACCOUNTABILITY
Carbon neutrality is a framework of accountability. To be carbon neutral, each year we will measure the
emissions produced by the Flagstaff community – those we were not able to avoid through emissions
reductions (mitigation). We must then remove an equal amount of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in
order to arrive at carbon neutrality, or net-zero emissions.
In this way, the carbon neutrality framework has a built-in accountability feature: regardless of the City’s
success at reducing emissions, the City can still meet the goal of carbon neutrality through carbon dioxide
removal (CDR). The City must use a combination of emissions reductions and carbon dioxide removal to
get to net-zero emissions, balancing both sides of the scale, as seen below in Figure 3. If we fail to meet our
emissions reduction goals, then our removal obligation will increase proportionately. Similarly, if we
exceed our emissions reduction goals, then our removal obligation will decrease. Read more about our
plans for CDR on page 97.

Figure 3. The two sides of the carbon neutrality scale: On the left side are the remaining emissions still
produced (after reductions). On the right side is carbon dioxide removal. The two sides of the scale must
balance out to achieve carbon neutrality. (Note: the mechanical tree illustration on right side of scale is
courtesy of the Arizona State University Center for Negative Carbon Emissions.)

Page | 19

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

5. CARBON NEUTRALITY IS AN INVESTMENT IN OUR FUTURE
Taking climate action and avoiding the worst impacts of climate change makes sense economically and
morally. Action is far less expensive and far more beneficial than inaction. Like forest health measures
taken to avoid catastrophic wildfire, climate action is an investment in our future.

In Flagstaff, forest protection provides a sobering example of the need for preparation: The 2010
Schultz wildfire and post-fire flooding had a total impact between $133 and $147 million. 1 By
comparison, the phase one of the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP) required a $10
million investment from Flagstaff residents. This down payment on forest health will help
Flagstaff avoid high-severity fires that could cause devastating flooding, and is projected to help
the Flagstaff area avoid between an estimated $573 million and $1.2 billion in damages. 2
Just as individuals prepare for retirement, climate action takes intentional preparation. It is said that the
best time to start investing for retirement is 15 years ago, and the next best time is now. Like retirement, it
may be helpful to approach the spending that will be required on climate action with an investment
mindset. Investments require spending, but they also produce returns and benefits. The earlier someone
starts investing, the easier and less expensive it will be for them to meet their retirement goals. The longer
someone delays investing, the more difficult and expensive it becomes.
Investments in climate action are no different, and these investments produce returns for ourselves and
future generations. The 2019 UN Gap Report shows that if governments worldwide had started 10 years
ago, we could have made relatively modest and gradual investments to achieve annual emissions
reductions of just 3.3%. Figures 4 and 5 show the reductions required based on different action timeframes.
Because of our collective delay, the necessary investments will need to be more significant and rapid to
achieve the annual global reductions of over 7.6% per year that are now required. 3 That trend only
continues with further delay. Indeed one recent study concluded that if the U.S. starts investing now in
efforts to reach net-zero emissions by 2050, the total spending required would be nearly half as much
compared to delaying our investments until 2030. 4 When it comes to making investments to achieve goals,
the amount of time remaining can be either the greatest asset or biggest liability. There may still be enough
time to meet our climate stabilization and adaptation goals, but only if we accelerate our ambition and
start making the necessary investment contributions.
It is said that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Part of the investment mindset is evaluating
both the cost of action as well as the cost of inaction. Choosing to avoid oil changes only appears to save a

1

Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire:

http://openknowledge.nau.edu/1282/1/Combrink_EtAl_2013_ERIWhitePaper_SchultzFullCostAccounting.pdf

The Cost of Inaction: Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Cost Avoidance Study:
https://arizonastatelawjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Fox_Final.pdf
3
https://www.unep.org/interactive/emissions-gap-report/2019/
4
https://energyinnovation.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Cost_of_Delay.pdf
2

Page | 20

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Figures 4 and 5: Depictions of the worldwide greenhouse gas reductions needed to achieve 1.5C (2.7F).
Graphs reproduced from 2019 UN Gap Report Interactive Dashboard
car owner money until their engine seizes. Likewise, avoiding investments in climate action only gives the
appearance of saving money until it clearly, irreversibly, and perhaps quite suddenly, doesn’t. While there
is a high level of uncertainty about what the exact cost of the required level of climate action will be on a
global scale, there is a high level of agreement that the risks and cost of inaction will be far greater. 5 This
consensus on the cost of inaction comes despite the fact that there are many externalities that economic
models often struggle to measure (See the Social Cost of Carbon section on page 41). The City’s Climate
Emergency Declaration recognizes that the time to invest in our future is now.

5

https://policyintegrity.org/files/publications/Economic_Consensus_on_Climate.pdf

Page | 21

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

6. CARBON NEUTRALITY IS SUPPORTED BY MARKET LEADERS
The market is moving towards climate action. Private companies and institutions across the world are
acting based on scientific data to protect their investments and ensure their own financial health into the
future. Climate action can represent a financial opportunity – from electric cars to solar systems, new
companies have already made a global impact and large profits from providing climate solutions.
Market conditions are changing quickly, and the cost of climate action is falling as investment ramps up.
Solar panel technology represents a telling example. Investments and advancements have caused the
price of solar to fall 82% from 2010 to 2018. 6 Just ten years ago, we could not have anticipated that solar
would now be the least expensive form of energy in history, according to the International Energy Agency. 7
Technology is rapidly advancing in electric vehicles, home electrification, and carbon dioxide removal, too.
The market will assist in climate action in these areas, bringing down the cost of beneficial technologies
that make climate-friendly investments the obvious choice, simply on short term return on investment
scenarios.
These market trends have three central implications for
this Plan:


Advances in technology will continue to bring
down costs for climate action, resulting in savings
for governments, businesses, and residents.



Developing cost estimates for strong climate
action has significant uncertainty, due to the
rapidly changing market conditions. Action may
not be as expensive as it looks today, and it will
certainly be less expensive than inaction.



This Plan must be flexible to adapt to the
changing market conditions and take advantage
of new technology.

The global move towards climate action in the private
sector will create opportunities for the City of Flagstaff
and its residents. The City of Flagstaff will be ready to
partner with local, regional and national businesses in
taking climate action.

https://www.pv-magazine.com/2018/01/13/8th-irena-assembly-report-finds-utility-scale-solar-lcoe-falls73-since-2010/
7
https://webstore.iea.org/world-energy-outlook-2020
6

Page | 22

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Flagstaff will…


Be a leader



Embrace the Big Shift



Balance community tensions and create opportunities



Center equity and adaptation

7. FLAGSTAFF WILL BE A LEADER
Although climate change is one of the more important challenges the world has ever faced, the
international community has not taken necessary action. Due to inaction, climate change will cause
coastline loss, crop failure, mass migration, and famine. The consequences for the world’s poor are dire.
Leadership is needed both worldwide and in Flagstaff. Flagstaff is a part of the global community of cities
and so Flagstaff’s actions, along with the actions of every other city, contribute to the global fight against
climate change.
Flagstaff will see both negative impacts and opportunity from climate change – the coming climate
changes and related impacts to our community are outlined starting on Page 104. We must make the
investments needed to avoid the worst scenarios of global temperature rise, while preparing for a future in
a changing climate.
Leadership in climate action will require courage, bold action, and investment to ensure a safe future.
Leaders are needed throughout the Flagstaff community: we need leaders in the business sector, within
regional public agencies, among developers, throughout our neighborhood organizations, and in our
schools.
As of spring 20201, examples of leadership can be found both near and far:


In April 2021, the federal government established a goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
2005 levels by 50% to 52% by 2030 – a goal that is strongly aligned with this Plan’s mitigation goal.
This goal reflects the need for urgent action and the benefits of acting on climate. It also provides
significant opportunity for local governments who are ready to partner with the federal
government to develop programs with local benefits.



Businesses are reading the same reports, coming to the same conclusions, urging governments to
set align their targets with the urgency that is needed this decade, and committing to climate
action and investment themselves.



The We Mean Business coalition, comprised of over 1,776 companies that “recognize the
transition to a zero-carbon economy is the only way to secure sustainable economic growth and
prosperity for all,” sent an open letter to the Biden administration supporting the 50 to 52%
reduction by 2030 goals, calling the target “ambitious and attainable.”



Over 1,300 businesses and investors joined 165 local and tribal governments, including Flagstaff, as
part of the America is All In campaign to support the same national targets.

Page | 23

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN



Arizona Public Service (APS), which is Flagstaff’s electric utility company, has committed to
transitioning to a 100% carbon-free electric grid by 2050. Salt River Project (SRP) recently
committed to doubling its renewable electricity capacity by 2050, driven by demand from business
customers.



Arizona Forward has membership from over 150 public and private organizations across the state
that recognize the need to “address the increasingly harmful climate impacts and shape Arizona’s
long-term future… This is why we focus on brining local businesses and municipalities together to
work toward actionable solutions – because inaction is not an option.”



Over 545 companies have become signatories to the Business Ambition for 1.5C commitment.



Numerous companies from all sectors of business are recognizing the need for innovation and
investment in solutions this decade, to bring down the costs and bring up the volume of necessary
strategies that are not yet mature. Many companies - from Stripe to Microsoft to Shopify and others
- are voluntarily putting their assets to work to accelerate the development of these necessary
technologies and approaches.



Cities across the world are moving forward. Tucson recently declared a climate emergency and set
a goal of carbon neutrality by 2030. Phoenix has a carbon neutrality goal of 2050. Over 80 U.S. cities
have committed to 100% renewable energy, from Moab, Utah and Orlando, FL to St. Louis, MO, and
Fayetteville, AR to Denver, CO and Norman, OK.

Flagstaff is well-positioned to lead in Arizona.
Flagstaff is on the forefront of climate action in Arizona. This leadership stance will require bold
action, risk, and even discomfort as we challenge the status quo and chart new paths for small
cities. Flagstaff’s leadership can help to move the needle, opening the way for other
communities to make strong commitments and taken aggressive action.

8. FLAGSTAFF WILL EMBRACE THE BIG SHIFT
The framework of carbon neutrality establishes the 'rules of the game' for our work. Going forward, our
community and our leadership will need to continuously evaluate and determine the 'gameplan.'
As we began developing this inaugural Carbon Neutrality Plan, we asked what level of emissions reductions
might be possible in Flagstaff, before relying on carbon dioxide removal initiatives. This question resulted
in an initial maximum reduction scenario that suggested that Flagstaff might be able to reduce local
emissions by as much as 80% if we committed to ambitious, transformative change, and if favorable
supporting actions and policies were quickly implemented at the utility, State and Federal levels.
Many of the actions in this initial maximum reduction scenario might be framed as being ‘technological
substitutions’ or ‘behind the scenes’ actions that are critical but not especially noticeable in terms of how
they might impact someone's daily life. For example, when someone turns on the faucet and feels warm
water, they cannot tell whether that water is heated by a fossil fuel like natural gas or by a clean energy
source like renewable electricity. Likewise, an electric car is still a car, and the way that car functions on a

Page | 24

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

daily basis is not very different whether it is an electric vehicle (EV) or a car fueled with gasoline. These
technological solutions don’t cause much disruption to daily life in Flagstaff.
Other actions and outcomes in the initial maximum reduction scenario would be more noticeable,
disruptive, and ultimately transformative. This sense of disruption can be especially heightened if thinking
about the outcome taking effect today, overlooking the years-long transition and the supporting actions
that have yet to be implemented. Many of the actions and outcomes related to the key strategy of
decreasing dependence on cars are likely to be some of the most noticeable. Imagine being able to
dramatically cut the total miles driven in Flagstaff while people are still able to socialize, shop, and
otherwise meet all daily needs. This outcome can only be realized if we fundamentally shift our approach
to neighborhood design and transportation. We would build our transportation corridors with various
forms of micro-mobility as primary goal, rather than supporting the continued growth of automobile travel.
We would build our neighborhoods so they are more connected and complete; people wouldn’t have to
travel across town as often because they can get most of what they need nearby. This would require
increasing the housing options, density, and businesses or services available in and around our
neighborhoods. These ‘noticeable’ actions that maximize local emissions reductions by changing aspects
of our community design and transportation systems are what we call the "Big Shift.”
This Plan involves elements of both technological substitution as well as the “Big Shift.” While the initial
maximum reduction scenario was deemed to be infeasible due to various constraints, this Plan envisions a
44% reduction in emissions before carbon dioxide removal. This Plan includes the goal of maintaining the
same level of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) that Flagstaff drivers traveled in 2019. Historically, VMT has
steadily increased over time, and given that the Flagstaff’s population is expected to continue growing,
flattening this metric over the next 9 years will be large undertaking that will require a new approach – The
“Big Shift.” For more information on VMT and detailed actions required to make the Big Shift, see the
Decreased Dependence on Cars target area on page 53.

9. FLAGSTAFF WILL BALANCE COMMUNITY TENSIONS AND CREATE
OPPORTUNITIES
Flagstaff, like other communities, faces a multitude of community challenges and competing priorities.
While there are strong benefits to carbon neutrality, there are also areas where climate action goals may
seem to conflict with other community priorities. To achieve carbon neutrality and create a stronger
community, Flagstaff must acknowledge the tensions between issues and seek to find common ground
and mutual benefit. Tensions can arise between seemingly innocuous issues – as the City searches for the
best fit for lighting that achieves both dark sky preservation and energy efficiency, or as residents grapple
with the need for more housing and less driving or changes to how our community looks.
The tensions between climate goals and other community priorities must be met with open dialogue,
innovative thinking, and good faith that we can find creative solutions that help Flagstaff move forward a
vision for a healthier, more inclusive community.
Flagstaff’s Housing Crisis is one example of the complexity of community challenges. Affordable and
additional housing in Flagstaff has been a documented need for more than 50 years and has reached a
crisis level in recent years. In December 2020, the City Council declared a Housing Emergency, and set in

Page | 25

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

motion the need to make housing a leading priority for the City organization and Flagstaff community,
similar to carbon neutrality. Balancing these priorities is achievable, when approached holistically. 8
Diving deeper into this discussion, is building electrification. Building electrification is gaining attention as
one of the most affordable and effective tools to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from homes and
buildings. While electrification has promising benefits for residents, it must be pursued equitably. It will
require intentional policymaking and a planned transition for Flagstaff residents to gain access to the
major benefits of electrification, including cleaner air, healthier homes, good jobs and empowered
workers, and greater access to affordable clean energy and energy efficiency to reduce monthly energy
bills.


Building electrification means eliminating use of fossil fuels for functions like heating and cooking
and replacing gas appliances with alternatives that use electricity. In Flagstaff, 50 percent of our
greenhouse gas emissions come from the buildings we live and work in. As our electric grid gets
steadily cleaner, building electrification can play a big role in fighting climate change.



Electrifying our homes also has major health benefits. Burning gas releases nitrogen oxides and
particulates, which can have serious health consequences.

Building electrification must focus first and primarily on the goal of improving the health and resilience of
the people rather than the goal of decarbonizing our building stock. To do so, programs that promote
electrification must integrate with energy and non-energy programs alike. An equitable transition will meet
people where they are. Instead of adding one more problem for families to solve, an equitable transition
will position electrification as a solution to existing household difficulties —one that lowers bills, improves
health, and makes homes more comfortable.
Renters Have Limited Control - Today, 55 percent of Flagstaff residents are renters. Even if they do not bear
the direct cost of electrification, low-income renters, especially low income renters, nevertheless face
barriers to electrification because they lack the property rights to make the decisions required to electrify
their homes, such as switching out water heaters, stoves, or other appliances and upgrading the building’s
electrical lines and panels. Even if these residents wish to live in healthier, cleaner homes, the decision to
electrify their building is out of their control and is up to the property owner.
Owners Have Few Incentives to Invest When Renters Pay the Utility Bill - Improvements to energy use, like
solar, energy efficiency, and building electrification, primarily produce benefits for the person paying the
bills even though the cost of improvement falls to the owner. This creates a split incentive which requires
countervailing incentives to correct. This effect is exacerbated by Flagstaff’s ongoing housing crisis, in
which the demand for housing outstrips the supply, giving landlords little incentive to make clean energy
investments. Renters rightly fear that an upgrade could cause their landlords to increase their rent, or
convert the property to a short-term rental that could be more lucrative for the property owner. Currently,
no regulatory or statutory protections ensure that Flagstaff renters who live in building that receive energy

https://greenlining.org/wpcontent/uploads/2019/10/Greenlining_EquitableElectrification_Report_2019_WEB.pdf

8

Page | 26

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

upgrades can remain in their homes with no increased rents after the upgrades are performed, or require
that rent for upgraded properties remain at a price affordable to low-income residents.

Electrification will be the most effective with a whole-systems building approach,
prioritizing energy efficiency, electrification then on-site renewable energy systems.

There are no quick fixes, addressing our housing and climate emergencies require on-going collaboration,
hard conversation, and collective action.

10. FLAGSTAFF WILL CENTER EQUITY AND ADAPTATION
Equity and adaptation are two of the three core goals of this Plan. The importance of these principles was
established in the 2018 Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan, and their importance is maintained in
our Carbon Neutrality work.
Adaptation and resilience
As we work to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, Flagstaff
Adaptation refers to actions that
must continue to prepare for climate change. Adaptation,
or adapting to the changing climate and preparing for its
increase the ability to withstand,
impacts, is critical for any forward-looking organization.
respond to, or cope with climate
While we work to avoid the severe temperature changes
change impacts.
that will cause irreversible damage to our ecosystem, we
must accept that climate changes are already occurring
and will continue to occur. Global action must be taken to reduce the amount the climate changes and
lessen the catastrophic consequences. At this point change cannot be avoided.
For local governments, adaptation must be part of its emergency planning and hazard mitigation, its
economic development forecasting, and its housing and land use planning.
For every mitigation action we take to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the City and its partners must
consider the adaptation impacts and opportunities. The City must not take actions that result in a reduced
ability to adapt in the future or make it more difficult to thrive among the temperature and aridity changes
that Flagstaff will see.
Adaptation is achieved by building resilience – strengthening community systems to create stronger
networks, more connected community members, and flexible systems that are prepared for change. This
Plan will work to advance community resilience by analyzing all actions through an adaptation lens,
to ensure that the action is helping to increase resilience and will help residents thrive amidst future
changes.
Specific strategies to advance adaptation are discussed in the Community Resilience target area - see page
46 for more information.

Page | 27

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Community Equity
The City of Flagstaff seeks to serve community members
equitably through all of its work in the Flagstaff community,
from ensuring children from low-income families can
access recreational programming to filling gaps in the
sidewalk network to serve more residents. Because climate
change will cause such disproportionate impacts to our
vulnerable community members, it is even more important
to act equitably.

Equity is defined as the just
distribution of the benefits of
climate protection and alleviation
of unequal burdens created by
climate change.

Climate change affects people differently. While all populations are at risk of being impacted by climate
change, certain groups are more vulnerable than others. Factors that influence climate vulnerability
include:


Age



Education level



Gender and sexual orientation



Health, ability, and disability



Immigration Status



Language abilities



Level of housing security



Neighborhood or physical location



Race and ethnicity



Social ties



Socioeconomic status and income



Technology and internet access



Working conditions, including exposure to the elements

Inequity in our society means that some individuals are better able to respond to change or stressors than
others. Today, different groups in Flagstaff have different levels of resilience, or ability to withstand
challenges like a power outage, school closure, or a medical emergency. One’s financial security, housing
security, social network, job flexibility, or access to internet might impact their ability to adjust to changes
in circumstances. Already, low-income residents, communities of color, and Indigenous individuals
disproportionately experience environmental harm and health impacts from pollution. Existing advantages
and disadvantages will be exacerbated by the stresses, hazards and long-term shifts that result from
climate change.
While Flagstaff takes action to reduce emissions and prepare for climate change, it must consider
vulnerable communities and pre-existing inequities. Flagstaff must ensure that those most at risk are
protected and avoid negative impacts that would increase inequities. Flagstaff must also ensure that the

Page | 28

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

benefits of climate action are equitably distributed across all groups, and that all groups can access climate
programs. The City will work to advance community equity by analyzing all actions through an equity lens.
Specific strategies to ensure equity are detailed in the Equitable Systems target area. See page 49 for more
information.
Relationships among the three goals
The three overarching goals of this Plan - mitigation, adaptation, and equity - are deeply interconnected.
Since the framework of carbon neutrality is specific and quantitative in nature, attention to the numeric
mitigation impacts has been spotlighted. However, the focus on mitigation to satisfy the quantitative
framework should not overshadow these other goals.
In many cases, actions that reduce emissions often have adaptation and equity co-benefits. This can be
particularly apparent when mitigation actions serve disadvantaged communities first while also increasing
individual, family, and community resilience. For example, a large-scale effort to retrofit homes of lowincome residents has the following benefits:


Reduced energy demand, leading to reduced emissions (mitigation),



Increased resilience of the homes, the community, and the energy infrastructure to withstand
shocks (adaptation), and



Improvements in affordability for the occupants, through greater comfort and lower monthly
operating expenses of the homes (equity).

Home retrofits offer obvious benefits for all three goals. However, some mitigation actions offer few
adaptation and equity co-benefits. These actions, with minimal benefits to adaptation and equity, should
be given less emphasis and fewer resources. For example, transitioning to electric vehicles (EV) is a piece of
the puzzle for lower emissions from transportation. However, too strong an emphasis on supporting EV
adoption by individuals can be a distraction from more impactful, equitable strategies that would be
accessible to the larger community and not only those who can afford a new electric car. Rather than
thinking about how to subsidize getting another car on the road, electric or not, the City's focus and
resources should prioritize transforming our community with infrastructure and policy to support biking,
walking, public transit, and other forms of micro-mobility. This guidance is reflected in the framing and
actions within this Plan’s Target Areas related to transportation: Decreased Dependence on Cars and
Electric Mobility.
The goals of equity and adaptation were used to evaluate all proposed mitigation strategies; actions with a
high level of co-benefits will receive greater emphasis and more resources in Plan implementation. Going
forward, this Plan will be reviewed by an Equity Advisory Committee, as will every subsequent annual
update.

Page | 29

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Climate action in flagstaff will:


Produce co-benefits



Rely on partnerships



Prioritize incentives



Be an iterative and adaptive process

11. CLIMATE ACTION IN FLAGSTAFF WILL PRODUCE CO-BENEFITS
In addition to reducing our emissions, carbon neutrality can lead to healthier air quality, more secure water
resources, more accessible and affordable transportation options, and a more diverse and robust
economy. A carbon neutral city is one where neighbors help neighbors, people have multiple options for
getting around town, and families have access to clean air and healthy homes.
Climate action has extensive co-benefits that can improve quality of life in Flagstaff and strengthen our
community. During Plan implementation, the City will prioritize actions that have multiple co-benefits,
from resilience and equity to return on investment and improvements in health.
The table below describes some potential benefits of climate action:

Mitigation action

Benefits

A new FUTS path

Low-emissions ways to get to work
Healthy ways to travel to the store or to see friends
New opportunities for socializing and meeting neighbors

Energy efficiency retrofit
in a local office building

Lower emissions from heating space and water
Reduced energy costs
Healthier indoor air quality

A new community garden

Lower emissions food
Access to healthy and delicious food
Mental, social and physical health improvement opportunities for
neighborhood residents

Reduced parking
requirements in a new
apartment building

Less space dedicated to parking, leading to decreased stormwater
impacts and increased walkability
Reduce vehicle miles traveled
Lower total cost of the apartment building construction, leading to
lower cost of housing
De-coupling of rent and parking fees, so that renters who do not
need parking don’t have to pay for it

Page | 30

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

12. CLIMATE ACTION IN FLAGSTAFF WILL RELY ON PARTNERSHIPS
This Plan illustrates what the City of Flagstaff will do to reach carbon neutrality. However, the City will not
be able to achieve its goals without collaborating with residents, businesses, and organizations. The City
will create high-quality and high-impact support for businesses and residents as we move towards carbon
neutrality. Local, regional, federal, and state partnerships are necessary to move Flagstaff in the right
direction.


The City will engage residents and partner with community organizations to change behavior and
develop creative local projects, to complement work on systemic shifts and policy change.



While this Plan’s strategies focus on actions the City can take, it highlights areas where legislative
change is needed, and where community engagement can lead to positive climate and resilience
impacts. The City looks forward to working with the state legislature to capitalize on opportunities
for action, investment and benefits for all of Arizona.



The Federal Government will be an important partner in climate action. The U.S. Government has
set a goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030 and to achieve 100% renewable
energy by 2035. 9 Due to this Plan and its carbon neutrality goal, the City will be well-positioned to
take advantage of federal programming and opportunities for investment.



Regulatory organizations will also play a key role in shifting energy sources from natural resources
(e.g., coal, oil, natural gas) to renewable and more sustainable options (e.g., solar, wind,
hydroelectric, electric).



Local businesses will be perhaps the City’s most important partners when transforming our
systems. Climate action creates jobs, and local companies can assist with taking rapid action.
Examples of projects already creating jobs in Flagstaff include home weatherization, appliance
electrification, rooftop solar installations and native landscaping projects. Larger opportunities
might include infrastructure improvements to prepare for increased flooding, innovations in forest
products, new bike trails and pedestrian crossings, and net zero building construction.

Climate Action Among Flagstaff Businesses
Economic health is an important aspect of climate action, and so collaboration with local businesses will
be vital in implementing this Plan. City staff will provide support to businesses in decreasing their
greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to expected climate changes, as well as creating a Business and
Climate Working Group to improve communication between local businesses and the Sustainability
Section, to ensure that the Section is appropriately providing support for local businesses.

https://www.reuters.com/business/sustainable-business/exclusive-white-house-pushing-80-clean-uspower-grid-by-2030-2021-04-26/
9

Page | 31

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Businesses across Flagstaff are taking climate action, and seeing results both in operational savings,
community support and revenue. A few examples:


Flagstaff is home to operations and retail locations of several national corporations that have goals
to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Purina has corporate goals to achieve net-zero
greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. REI and Walmart are part of the We Mean Business coalition
working to reach net zero emissions by 2050, referenced on page 23.



Rooftop Solar and Prometheus Solar, local Flagstaff companies, were selected by the Northern
Arizona Solar Co-op to install solar for more than 80 households across Flagstaff, Sedona, and
Coconino County. In partnership with the City, the Northern Arizona Coop was organized through
Solar United Neighbors, a non-profit organization that seeks to increase the access and
affordability of solar energy.



Hotels across Flagstaff are taking climate action. The Flagstaff Drury Inn & Suites is the first LEEDcertified hotel in Arizona. The DoubleTree by Hilton Flagstaff has already seen significant energy,
water and waste savings from its environmental initiatives; Hilton , the global hospitality company,
has committed to cutting its environmental impact in half by 2030, including a 60% reduction in
emissions by 2030.



W.L. Gore & Associates, a large Flagstaff employer, has set a corporate goal to reduce their
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from manufacturing sites and offices by 60% 2030, and work
towards carbon neutrality by 2050.

These are just a few examples of the many Flagstaff businesses working to reduce their impact and create
climate solutions.
The City will work to partner with local businesses to learn about barriers and opportunities, and help them
to ramp up their climate action efforts. The City will encourage businesses, institutions and even individual
households to set their own carbon neutrality goals and create plans for how to get to net zero GHG
emissions. The City can lend support, share resources, create connections to help share lessons learned
opportunities, and highlight success stories. A carbon neutral Flagstaff will be a community effort, buoyed
by the efforts of residents, businesses and organizations all working on their own carbon neutral journeys.

13. CLIMATE ACTION IN FLAGSTAFF WILL PRIORITIZE EDUCATION AND
INCENTIVES
The City of Flagstaff will not be able to reach carbon neutrality alone – as discussed elsewhere in this
document, many actors are needed to reach our climate goals. The City will seek to encourage behavior
change like it works to shape behaviors in many different areas, from water conservation to courteous
driving to recycling and shoveling snow off sidewalks. The City supports community oriented behavior
through multiple approaches – from, encouragement campaigns on social media, educational events, to
incentives and mandated codes.
The City will fist provide educational resources, incentives, and behavior change programs to encourage
community members to take climate action. In some instances, it may make sense to set minimum

Page | 32

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

standards that provide wide community benefits, through City codes or ordinances. The City’s pursuit of
carbon neutrality will use education and incentives as a first step towards behavior change whenever
possible.
Residential energy use provides an instructive example. Today, the City works to reduce emissions and
expenses from residential energy use through a multi-pronged approach:


Encouragement via social media and public events.



Education through tips and resources on the City’s energy web site.



Support through the free Home Energy Efficiency workshop series, which is offered both live and atyour own pace, and in both English and Spanish, and provides attendees with a free bag of supplies
to make small changes in their own homes.



Incentives for energy efficient appliance upgrades via the Home Energy Retrofit Rebate Program.



Minimum energy efficiency standards through building codes for new buildings.

The City will use this multi-pronged model to develop programs that help residents and businesses reduce
their emissions, relying first on education, engagement, and incentives to facilitate action and behavior
change. When larger scale changes are needed that provide significant benefits to health, safety and
welfare and build a stronger Flagstaff, the City will look to code changes and ordinances.

14. CLIMATE ACTION IN FLAGSTAFF WILL BE AN ITERATIVE AND ADAPTIVE
PROCESS
The climate emergency is an evolving state, with the possibility for new challenges and opportunities. The
pace of change is accelerating, and technologies are rapidly advancing. The coming years will see
improved batteries and new approaches to carbon sequestration. Changes in federal and state policies can
be expected, as well as shifts in markets and significant cost reductions. Conditions on the ground are
changing as well: Flagstaff's monsoons are more variable, wildfire patterns are shifting, and our
community is adjusting as housing, employment opportunities and tourism evolve.
Accordingly, the Carbon Neutrality Plan must be a living document – grounded in core principles but
flexible in its approach. To reflect changing conditions and an expanding knowledge base, the Plan is a
framework for action, not a detailed list of exact actions that the City of Flagstaff will take. This framework
provides the broad strategies the City will undertake to achieve carbon neutrality: the strategies of
decreasing dependence on cars and using clean electricity, for instance, illustrate the general direction
that Flagstaff must go.
Achieving the target of climate stabilization has often been compared to the Moonshot target of the 1960s,
though with considerably higher stakes. Similar to this effort, there was less than a decade to act and when
President Kennedy declared in 1962 that “we choose to go to the moon this decade and do the other
things…” Similar to this effort, when Kennedy made his speech it was acknowledged that “To be sure, we
are behind, and will be behind for some time in manned flight. But we do not intend to stay behind, and in

Page | 33

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

this decade, we shall make up and move ahead.” Nobody at the time could say exactly how the goal would
be achieved – it was known that we would need to learn things that were at the time unknown, that a
preliminary plan would be developed but that the plan would need to constantly evolve. And while it may
not have been known exactly how we would get there, setting and committing to the goal spurred the
action, innovation and investment that was necessary to make it happen.
How will this living document work?


The City will continuously work with the community during Plan implementation. There will be a
continuous loop for feedback, development, refinement, and adjustment. City staff will regularly
communicate with the City Council, the Flagstaff community, and local organizations to provide
updates on our work and solicit feedback.



This Plan will be available in an online format for easy review of its strategies and actions.



This Plan will be updated on an annual basis to allow for shifts in tactics, capitalizing on new
technologies, opportunities and creative partnerships to meet the City’s goals. This annual process
will provide for increased transparency so the public is informed of how the City’s actions are
evolving and can provide feedback to influence the City’s work.

Carbon neutrality is a goal that will involve creativity, learning, and leadership, in addition to continual
adjustment to adapt to new obstacles and opportunities. The City will keep the community involved in this
iterative process, through regular communications, community conversations to assess priorities and
address tensions, and annual reporting.

Page | 34

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

III. IMPLEMENTATION
IN THIS CHAPTER:
1.

Flagstaff’s mobilization will be guided by the Climate Emergency Declaration

2.

Priority action steps: years one through three

3.

City of flagstaff actions needed

4.

Advancing state policy

5.

Community actions

6.

Community engagement and education

7.

Accountability

8.

Funding

FLAGSTAFF’S MOBILIZATION IS GUIDED BY THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY
DECLARATION
The Climate Emergency Declaration outlines the following priorities for the mobilization of resources.
These priorities will guide the implementation of this Plan.
The City of Flagstaff will:


Dramatically increase its ambition to combat climate change through bold action.



Ensure this mobilization effort is City-wide, spanning all sectors of the Flagstaff economy and
community.



Prioritize appropriate funding for the implementation of climate goals and action.



Engage and educate our residents about the current climate emergency and inspiring action,
especially Flagstaff's youth.



Strive for full community participation and leadership by residents of Flagstaff, community
organizations and other allies.



Keep the concerns of vulnerable and historically underserved communities central to all
climate emergency mobilization efforts and facilitate their active participation in this work.



Develop and reinforce respectful collaborations with surrounding Tribal nations, traditional
agricultural communities, regional governments, the State of Arizona, and the U.S.
Government.



Prioritize adaptation and mitigation in all City decision-making processes.



Prioritize the creation of high-quality, good-paying jobs with comprehensive benefits for
those who will be impacted by this transition.

Page | 35

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

PRIORITY ACTION STEPS: YEARS ONE THROUGH THREE
Below are initial action steps to implement this Plan.
Items that are bolded have received funding. Items with an asterisk (*) are items that have been applied for
funding. The implementation of other actions will depend on funding and policy decisions in the next year.
Target Area

Initial action steps

Community
Resilience

Expand the Flagstaff HEPA Purifier Program
Expand the Resilient Neighborhoods Network
Incorporate of adaptation elements into the CNP
Support community-led resilience project through the Neighborhood
Sustainability Microgrant Program

Equitable Systems

Launch a wood stove rebate program*
Launch youth Advisory Committee
Launch Equity Advisory Committee
City leadership racial equity trainings

Decreased
Adopt and implement the Active Transportation Master Plan
Dependence on Cars Launch the protected bike lane pilot
Improve City of Flagstaff codes and regulations to allow for more infill housing
and greater density
Analyze and update City of Flagstaff street engineering standards to consider
how street design affects travel choices and contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions
Analyze and update the City of Flagstaff traffic impact analysis process to
incorporate consideration of GHG emissions and transportation demand
management analysis
Policy changes to remove barriers and incentivize accessory dwelling units
(ADUs)
Analyze and reduce or remove parking requirements
Adopt and implement the 2021-2031 Flagstaff Housing Plan
Adopt an air quality protection ordinance for idling and loading zones
Electric Mobility

Facilitate an E-bike collective purchasing cooperative
Launch new micro-mobility share program
Provide 14 new EV charging stations at City of Flagstaff facilities
Adopt a City of Flagstaff electric vehicle procurement policy
Complete an audit of City of Flagstaff policies

Page | 36

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Clean Electricity

Facilitate a solar panel purchasing co-op for businesses and residents
Install solar and battery back-up power microgrids for Flagstaff fire stations*
Develop and install a solar project at Red Gap Ranch

Fuel switching

Develop a building electrification information hub website
Provide electrification incentives for homes and businesses
Highlight businesses and residents successfully electrifying buildings

Reduced Building
Energy Use

Launch a residential energy efficiency retrofit incentives*
Refine and expand the residential energy rebate program
Provide small business energy efficiency building retrofit incentives
Launch a Building Code Advisory Group
Complete an energy audit of City of Flagstaff buildings
Implement energy retrofits and conservation projects identified by the energy
audit
Update the Sustainable Building Resolution for City of Flagstaff buildings
Implement a City of Flagstaff electricity rate optimization program

Sustainable
Launch the pay as you throw recycling and trash collection pilot
Consumption and
Launch Community compost drop-off pilot
Waste Management
Expand the Neighborhood Sustainability Grant program
Transition the Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) to a transfer station
Carbon Dioxide
Removal

Carbon dioxide removal feasibility analysis

Partnerships

Launch a Business Sector Advisory Committee

Develop or support a pilot carbon dioxide removal project in Northern Arizona

Finalize the new NAU Climate Action Plan
Design and deliver business support tools to assist with advancing climate
action
Recognize local businesses showing climate leadership
Internal City of
Flagstaff actions

Develop and encourage a City of Flagstaff Remote Work Policy
Develop a long-term investment plan for carbon neutrality goals and avoided
cost for City Council consideration
Consider developing a climate bond for voter approval

Page | 37

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF ACTION NEEDED
Flagstaff City Council
The success of this Plan is contingent on the Flagstaff City Council continuing to demonstrate leadership on
climate action. Plan implementation also relies on continued public support for climate action.
The Flagstaff City Council will have oversight responsibility for this Plan. They will receive annual updates
on Plan progress and make policy decisions, budgetary appropriations, and workplan approvals that will
facilitate implementation.
Actions specific to the Flagstaff City Council include:


Identify goals for the upcoming City Council term that will support Plan implementation.



Identify City Council budget priorities to support Plan implementation.



Identify state and federal legislative priorities that support the goals of the Plan and enable
implementation of Plan strategies and actions.



Create policies that reflect the ambition, urgency and need for transformative change required by
Flagstaff’s Climate Emergency Declaration and its carbon neutrality goal.



Provide leadership in community conversations around the tensions among competing priorities.
See the discussion of balancing tensions on Page 25.

City Leadership
For a city to achieve carbon neutrality, it is critical that every part of the municipal organization is involved
in implementation. Leaders at the City of Flagstaff—from the City Manager’s Office to division directors and
individual supervisors—must proactively consider climate action when conducting City operations.
The City Manager’s Office will actively support the Council’s climate commitment by requiring the
involvement of all City divisions in Plan implementation. Opportunities to incorporate climate action into
internal decision-making processes include:


The budget process



Procurement decisions



Division strategic planning



Facility management

Page | 38

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

ADVANCING STATE POLICY
The Biden administration has committed to a historically ambitious climate agenda. This will likely result
in a profound shift in U.S. federal climate policy. This is critical, as it is not possible to address the climate
challenge without federal leadership, and time is running out to avert catastrophic levels of global
warming.
At the same time, state-level climate action will remain essential. History has shown that even an engaged
U.S. federal government faces obstacle to progressive regulatory and legislative action. In the face of
federal gridlock and inaction, state and local governments have played a crucial role in advancing climate
action, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and supporting the continued maturation of key low-carbon
technologies.
Greater collaboration across Arizona is needed in order to advance local and federal climate commitments.
The City will continue its work with Arizona cities and tribes to develop state-wide climate policies that
ensure equitable access to resources, clean energy, climate related quality jobs, healthier air quality, more
secure water resources, affordable transportation options, and a more diverse and robust economy.

COMMUNITY ACTION, ENGAGEMENT AND EDUCATION
Community organizing, leadership, activism and enthusiasm led to the Climate Emergency Declaration.
Sustained community energy and action will be needed to achieve carbon neutrality in an equitable
manner to build a stronger Flagstaff.
This Plan outlines actions that the City of Flagstaff will take to reach carbon neutrality. However, carbon
neutrality will require transformational change across our community, and City actions alone will not be
sufficient. Action by residents across the community will also be needed. To reach more people, the City
will encourage and provide resources for those who are working in their own businesses, schools, and
neighborhoods to take climate action as our community works to reach carbon neutrality. The City of
Flagstaff will work with many different parties to encourage, support, and activate all segments of the
Flagstaff community to take individual, daily actions that contribute to the goals of reducing community
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and increasing community resilience and equity.
The City will work with community partners to build capacity and encourage climate action in the
community on a daily basis, through social media platforms, events, community conversations,
volunteer opportunities, and training. Distinctive opportunities for action include:


Highlights of Climate Leaders: The City will raise up local businesses, schools, and organizations
that are taking climate action and developing their own plans to reach carbon neutrality. The City
will support those who want to take climate action by providing resources and areas of action.



Ideas for Action: The City will provide information to residents on the best ways to get involved in
carbon neutrality. The City will provide extensive information on actions such as: electrifying home
appliances, taking trips without personal vehicles, completing energy efficiency retrofits, and
decreasing the amount of trash sent to the landfill.

Page | 39

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN



Climate Education: The City will continue designing and providing climate change curriculum for
teachers to encourage youth participation in climate action. Additionally, the City will continue to
provide and enhance climate-oriented educational programs, building off of the existing Home
Energy Efficiency 1010 workshop, the Flagstaff Climate Ambassadors training, and the
Sustainability Leaders program.

ACCOUNTABILITY
Accountability will be ensured through consistent and transparent reporting to the community and the
Sustainability Commission, which will monitor implementation progress.
A living document
This section presents a structure for ongoing monitoring, evaluation and reporting on Plan progress.
Investing in data collection and consistent reporting increases transparency and is a key aspect of
implementation. City staff will regularly track and report on Plan indicators, greenhouse gas emissions and
notable progress on implementing strategies.
Reporting
The City of Flagstaff has been annually monitoring and reporting both municipal and community
greenhouse gas emissions since 2008. These inventories provide insight into Flagstaff’s progress and trends
in emissions. The City will continue to update the municipal and community greenhouse gas inventories on
an annual basis.
Regular reporting will ensure transparency and continued progress. City staff will measure progress on key
performance indicators and report to the community regularly. On an annual basis, the City Manager will
request that City staff produce a Plan progress report that includes:


Progress of each Plan strategy.



Key performance indicator updates, including an annual greenhouse gas inventory.

Evaluation
The Flagstaff City Council and the Sustainability Commission will evaluate the progress of Plan
implementation on an annual basis through review of the annual Carbon Neutrality Plan progress report.
Informal progress reports will be provided by City Staff at regular Sustainability Commission meetings.

Page | 40

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

The Social Cost of Carbon
As discussed within the Climate Change in Flagstaff section (page 104), the recent acceleration
of climate change is largely attributed to burning fossils fuels and the subsequent release of
greenhouse gases into Earth’s atmosphere. Climate change poses severe adverse long-term
consequences for all sectors of society, including but not limited to disruption of the food
supply, higher societal expense for human health, and broad environmental degradation. The
damages caused by emitting greenhouse gases are not reflected in the price of fossil fuels or the
products powered by them, thus creating externalities, or impacts that are external to any
accounting within the economic system.
Climate change is a market failure that burdens society with the costs associated with
greenhouse gas emissions while the benefits are accrued by those burning fossils fuels,
including the City of Flagstaff. In order to address and correct this market failure, the social
cost of carbon (SCC) can be utilized by the City. The social cost of carbon is an estimate, in
dollars, of the damages that would result from emitting one additional ton of greenhouse gases
into the atmosphere. The SCC puts the effects of climate change into economic terms to help
policymakers and other decision-makers understand the economic impacts of decisions that
would increase or decrease emissions. Emissions-related damages are expected to occur many
decades into the future. However, those damages must be represented using present-day dollar
values. The SCC therefore represents the present value of future harm, and the estimated dollar
value must be discounted through a specific discount rate.
The City of Flagstaff can incorporate the SCC into its practices to better account for
environmental and social concerns when making financial decisions. The prevailing trend for
cities and states that move to consider and account for their greenhouse gas emissions is to
incorporate a proxy carbon price into their decision making. A proxy carbon price includes the
SCC as a hypothetical cost within large, highly-carbon intensive financial decisions. This shadow
price will help the City identify and prioritize low carbon production methods, which ideally will
become more cost-effective over time. If greenhouse gas emissions were priced to reflect their
total cost to society, economic efficiency could be reached through the profit-maximizing
behaviors of emitters and consumers. The proxy carbon price would also help the City of
Flagstaff ensure that long-lived projects and procurements would become increasingly “futureproof” when it comes to potential future carbon legislation. By considering the social cost of
carbon through a proxy carbon price, the City can future-proof their investments against future
carbon prices, save money across the lifecycle, avoid locking in long-term emissions, alleviate
the burdens of greenhouse gases placed unfairly onto society, and send a clear signal that the
City takes efficiency and GHG emissions seriously.

Page | 41

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FUNDING
Financial investments are necessary for Flagstaff to reach carbon neutrality. Investing in climate action
throughout Flagstaff has many benefits, financial and otherwise. The benefits of adaptation include the
costs we avoid by reducing or averting the negative local impacts of climate change, while mitigation helps
us avoid damage from larger changes in the climate. Climate action can also be used to strengthen local
businesses, support vulnerable community members, and improve quality of life.
Funding for the implementation of Plan strategies will need to come from within the City budget, agency
grants, and new revenue sources. Some actions in the Plan require capital investment in City
infrastructure. Others will require increases in annual operating budgets. Some actions are potential
candidates for state, federal, or foundation funding.
Funding options include:


Increase existing City fees on certain activities, such as increasing the Environmental Management
Fee.



Propose a new sales tax that would have to be approved by voters, similar to how Cities pay for
road projects, municipal buildings, and other large city investments.



Issue bonds, a mechanism for the City to pay for large infrastructure projects.



Apply for grants from the federal government and private organizations or foundations.



Allocate City resources to climate-focused initiatives.



Establish a local emissions reduction fund, to allow individual donations to fund emissionsreducing projects.

Page | 42

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

IV. THE PATH TO CARBON NEUTRALITY
Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence
on Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Clean
our energy
sources

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy
Use

Clean
Electricity

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

Carbon
Dioxide
Removal

consumption
and waste
management

To achieve carbon neutrality, we will work through nine target areas of action:
Focus One: Our Neighborhoods
 Community Resilience


Equitable Systems



Decreased Dependence on Cars

Focus Two: Our Energy Sources
 Clean Electricity


Building Fuel Switching



Electric Mobility

Focus Three: Our Consumption
 Reduced Building Energy Use


Sustainable Consumption and Waste
Management

Focus Four: Our Commitment
Carbon Dioxide Removal



Page | 43

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
ABOUT OUR TARGET AREAS
This Plan defines nine target areas of action to reach carbon neutrality. The first two target areas –
Community Resilience and Equitable Systems - reflect overall goals that need to be incorporated into all
actions outlined in this plan.
The following six target areas focus on reducing emissions through prevention: Decreased Dependence on
Cars, Clean Electricity, Building Fuel Switching, Electric Mobility, Reduced Building Energy Use, and
Sustainable Consumption and Waste Management.
The last target area, Carbon Dioxide Removal, aims to balance community emissions by extracting and
storing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
These target areas are deeply interconnected, with some even being required to unlock the power of
others. We will examine these connections further in the sections that follow

Target Area Structure
Each of the nine Target Areas follow the same structure:


A “Flagstaff will” statement, describing our vision for action in this area.



What it means



How we’ll get there



Equity and Adaptation Considerations



Goals



Strategies



Opportunities for action: these provide examples of how the City may achieve this strategy and
contribute to the target area’s goals. These are provided as EXAMPLES only, to illustrate what
actions to active this strategy would look like.



Legislative change: these areas provide information about legislative policy changes needed at the
state or Federal level to support the achievement of the target area goals.



Connections to the 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan.

Page | 44

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FOCUS ONE: OUR NEIGHBORHOODS

Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence on
Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy Use

Carbon
Dioxide
Removal

Clean
our energy
sources
Clean
Electricity

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

consumption
and waste
management

We will strengthen our neighborhoods through:


Community resilience



Equitable systems



Decreased dependence on cars

Page | 45

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Community Resilience
Flagstaff will increase our ability to anticipate, accommodate, and positively adapt to
and thrive amidst changing climate conditions or hazard events while enhancing
quality of life, reliable systems, economic vitality, and conservation of resources.

WHAT IT MEANS
Resilience is a community’s ability to thrive amidst change. It involves a community’s anticipation of and
preparation for changing conditions, whether that is short term stressors like a wildfire or severe weather,
or longer-term changes like declines in forest health or shifts in the Flagstaff housing market. Resilience
requires that communities analyze their vulnerabilities against expected or possible changes, and then
proactively adapt to these changing conditions or hazards in a way that actually enhances quality of life
and builds reliable systems and economic vitality, social cohesion, and resource conservation. Resilience is
often grouped with a similar concept, adaptation.
Resilience is reflected in this Plan’s overarching adaptation goal:
Goal 2:

Prepare the City's communities, systems, and resources to be more resilient to
climate change impacts.
This preparation will help the City and its residents to be better equipped and prepared to
handle both short-term shocks (such as flooding or a wildfire) and long-term change
(such as rising housing prices or reduced snowfall). A resilient community is one that can
bounce forward after a challenge, not only recovering but improving on the status quo.

HOW WE’LL GET THERE
Building community resilience is a long-term process that requires assessment, investment, and
relationships building within communities. The City will work in the following areas to build adaptive
capacity:


A vulnerability analysis will help the City better understand the extent to which climate changes
will affect Flagstaff and different populations within our community. The City will build off of the
vulnerability assessment and Climate profile completed for the 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation
Plan.



Resilience planning will work across broad stakeholder groups to address the vulnerabilities
identified in the vulnerability analysis. This will involve work across City divisions and existing
Plans.



Education about the impacts of climate change is a vital aspect of community resilience. The
Climate Emergency Declaration calls for education of all Flagstaff residents as well as a focus on

Page | 46

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
youth education around the impacts of climate change and the actions we can take as a
community.


Community workshops with residents and businesses can help community members to better
understand Flagstaff’s vulnerabilities and risks, and how they can help strengthen their homes,
businesses, and neighborhoods.



Partnerships strengthen our community cohesion and capacity for response. There are a variety of
opportunities for partnership on resilience initiatives. Other City of Flagstaff departments, like the
Fire Department and Water Conservation, will be important partners in building community
resilience. Additionally, community organizations and neighborhood groups provide interaction
between residents that helps foster the sense of community needed in building resilience.

The activities above will help Flagstaff build capacity, sense risks, respond to disruption, learn and
transform – all elements of a resilience engineering approach proposed by Erik Hollnagel – see Figure 6
below. Flagstaff will undertake resilience-building as an ongoing project, continually adjusting as
conditions change and our knowledge grows.

Figure 6: The feedback loops involved in resilience building. Image Credit: Erik Hollnagel

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity is interdependent with adaptation and resilience: an equitable community must be adaptable and
resilient, in order to ensure well-being for residents through stressors and change. A resilient community
must be equitable, because if some residents are disproportionately vulnerable or unable to thrive
amongst change, the overall community suffers.

Page | 47

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
As the City works to increase resilience and prepare for change, the City must look to include residents
from all groups. Vulnerable communities often have less ability to adapt to sudden changes or stressors –
low-income families may have little disposable income to use if evacuation is needed for wildfires, or a
person whose disability prevents them from driving may have difficulty navigating the streets during
severe storms. The City should analyze community vulnerabilities and how they relate to resilience and
preparedness, and consider vulnerable communities first for programs that improve our ability to thrive.

STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE COMMUNITY RESILIENCE
CR-1: Ensure all mitigation actions improve Flagstaff’s ability to adapt to the future.
Opportunities for action:
1.

Analyze each climate action that the City takes through an adaptation lens, to ensure that mitigation
actions do not decrease Flagstaff’s ability to respond to stressors and thrive in the future.

CR-2: Strengthen existing community systems to create resilience to both short-term
shocks and long-term change.
Opportunities for action:
1.

Host community adaptation forums to discuss expected climate change impacts and how to
prepare.

2.

Implement and increase involvement in the Resilient Neighborhoods Network to encourage and
reward neighborhood-level resilience building.

3.

Expand the Flagstaff HEPA Purifier Program to increase resilience to smoke and low air quality,
especially for the most vulnerable.

4.

Incorporate adaptation-oriented actions from the 2018 Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan
into this Carbon Neutrality Plan.

5.

Incorporate climate change adaptation principles into various other City plans, like the Flagstaff
Regional Plan and the Utilities Integrated Master Plan.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Overarching goal 2: Prepare the city’s neighborhoods, systems, and resources to be
more resilient to climate change impacts.

Page | 48

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Equitable Systems
Flagstaff will ensure the fair and just distribution of the benefits of climate action and
strive to reduce the unequal burdens created by climate change.

WHAT IT MEANS
Equity is defined as the just distribution of the benefits of climate protection and alleviation of unequal
burdens created by climate change. This plan defines vulnerable communities in Flagstaff within the
Approach chapter of this Plan on page 28.
Acting equitably requires identifying vulnerable communities, analyzing impacts on these communities,
and proactively working to protect them from negative impacts of climate change. These communities
contribute the least to greenhouse gas emissions but suffer the greatest effects of climate change and its
turbulent impacts. Historical and political systems play a significant role in creating this disparity and will
not be easily dismantled.
Equity is an overarching principle that must be integrated into the implementation of this Plan. These
principles are located in the Our Neighborhoods action umbrella because the necessary changes are not
limited to one sector. They must be community-wide, integrated throughout our neighborhoods and the
way we do business.
Equity is reflected in the third overarching goal of this plan:
Goal 3:

Address climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most impacted and
ensures the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are equitably
distributed.
Climate change disproportionally impacts communities of color and low-income
neighborhoods. These communities contribute the least to greenhouse gas emissions but
suffer the greatest effects of climate change and its turbulent impacts.

HOW WE’LL GET THERE
Considering equity when implementing carbon neutrality goes beyond merely distributing resources
equally. Providing equitable access requires meeting community needs in the context of existing
vulnerabilities and inequalities. Equity is a guiding principle throughout the Plan implementation process
through the following practices:


Design policies and programs that serve disadvantaged communities first. Target policies and
programs at communities experiencing high pollution burdens, low-income, poverty, health issues,
and exposure to climate hazards.



Engage with the community. Proactively engage community leaders on an ongoing basis.

Page | 49

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN


Use the “operationalizing equity checklist” of the 2018 Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan
when implementing actions.

Ensuring that participation in climate action is accessible to the entire Flagstaff community will require
considering equity in policy, outreach, and infrastructure development. City staff will work to involve
diverse community voices from the start of any new initiative and will track progress towards advancing
equity.
The most effective climate initiatives achieve greenhouse gas emissions reductions, reduce vulnerabilities,
and serve disadvantaged communities. Taking climate action can create opportunities for underserved
communities and accelerate the development of market-based solutions. For example, some cities have
begun selling used electric fleet vehicles to members of their communities to ensure lower-cost electric
vehicles are available to a wider spectrum of the community.
It is also possible that climate action strategies may lead to adverse, unintended impacts. For example,
improving bike lanes and adding open space could increase the speed of gentrification and displacement,
while additional City fees could add new burdens for low-income communities. The potential for
unforeseen impacts to the community will be considered during Plan implementation, and efforts will be
made to anticipate and address any such impacts or burdens as they arise.
The City will rely on the concept of targeted universalism – defined as “setting universal goals pursued by
targeted processes to achieve those goals. Within a targeted universalism framework, universal goals are
established for all groups concerned. The strategies developed to achieve those goals are targeted, based
upon how different groups are situated within structures, culture, and across geographies to obtain the
universal goal. Targeted universalism is goal oriented, and the processes are directed in service of the
explicit, universal goal.” 10 Target universalism involves supporting the needs of specific groups, in order to
achieve our overall goals. Flagstaff will use a targeted universalism approach to ensure that ALL groups can
benefit from climate action, from the most underserved populations to the general population.
To further the goals of the Climate Emergency Declaration, the City will dive deep into equity and resilience
over the next year. We will host conversations with the community about these elements of climate action,
and how we can create systems of accountability as we implement our carbon neutrality goals.

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Adaptation is incredibly important to building equitable systems. Adapting to and preparing for climate
change will make Flagstaff more equitable by decreasing the negative impacts of climate change for all
residents, and especially for the most vulnerable. If equity is advanced without consideration for future
changes and setting the foundations for resilience, the gains in community equity could be lost during a
short-term event or over time as the community faces widespread change.

10

https://belonging.berkeley.edu/targeteduniversalism

Page | 50

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE EQUITABLE SYSTEMS
ES-1: Incorporate equity as a foundational element of every climate action the City
develops and implements.
Opportunities for action:
1.

Analyze each climate action through an equity lens, to ensure that mitigation actions (1) do not
have detrimental effects on Flagstaff’s vulnerable populations; (2) are targeted to serve vulnerable
community members, and therefore are accessible to the larger community; and (3) distribute the
benefits of climate action equitable.

2.

Provide equity training opportunities for City staff and leadership.

ES-2: Proactively engage community members on an ongoing basis.
Opportunities for action:
1.

Launch an equity advisory committee to provide feedback on the City’s climate action
programming and engagement strategies.

2.

Host community conversations to identify and begin to address community vulnerabilities and
how different groups are at risk as a result of climate change.

ES-3: Design targeted climate policies and programs to serve vulnerable
communities first.
Opportunities for action:
1.

For each climate action, identify vulnerable communities that the programming is targeted to
serve, as well as any barriers to accessing both City programs and the benefits of the action.

ES-4: Actively seek to recognize past harms, repair trust, and build deeper
relationships with community members.
Opportunities for action:
1.

Build relationships with organizations and community leaders serving vulnerable communities.

2.

Identify areas where vulnerable groups have already been affected by climate change, and where
gaps in trust might exacerbate existing disparities in the community.

Page | 51

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

The Lived Black Experience in Flagstaff
In 2020, the Lived Black Experience CommUnity Coalition hosted a series of community dialogues to
highlight the experiences of black residents of Flagstaff and create and to build a strategic framework
for truth, justice, and racial reconciliation.
The Lived Black Experience Strategic Plan highlights the need for greater engagement and work to
address the needs and concerns of Flagstaff’s Black community. The Plan begins by recognizing past
and current narratives:
“Where does the story of Black Flagstaff begin? The answer to this seemingly simple question is
complicated by decades of lost or forgotten history, conflicting narratives, and a marked lack of
engagement with the stories of Black Flagstaffians whose legacies speak of the enduring
capacity for hope, the richest pursuits of positive change and cultural unity among the poorest
citizenry and oft-forgotten neighborhoods.” 11
This statement reflects the need for engagement with Flagstaff’s underserved community members
and community leaders. Community outreach and relationship building is a necessary part of climate
action and achieving our goals. The City will work to incorporate the recommendations of the Lived
Black Experience Strategic Plan into the implementation of this Carbon Neutrality Plan.
The City will look to build relationships with other underserved community groups and access similar
resources to shape its policies and programming.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Overarching goal 1: address climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most
impacted and ensures the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are
equitably distributed.
Overarching goal 1: Address climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most impacted and ensures
that the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are equitably distributed.

Access the Flagstaff’s Lived Black Experience Strategic Plan at
https://www.southsideflagstaff.com/black-lived-experience-town-halls

11

Page | 52

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Decreased Dependence on Cars
Flagstaff will transform our transportation and land use systems so that we depend far
less on cars, reducing vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and shifting trips to walking, biking,
and the bus.

Reductions from maintaining 2019 internal VMT (avoiding the
projected growth in VMT)
zero emissions vehicles used for 30% of VMT

Figure 7: Projected emissions reductions from electric mobility and decreasing dependence on cars,
compared to the emissions in the business as usual scenario..

WHAT IT MEANS
Reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the transportation sector will require enhancing
community mobility and decreasing community-wide vehicle miles traveled (VMT) – or the miles Flagstaff
residents travel in cars every day. This reduction in VMT must be simultaneously accomplished with a
transition to clean, low- and zero-emission vehicles (see Electric Mobility Target Area on page 66). Because
emissions from transportation account for around 30% of Flagstaff's community GHG emissions, reducing
commuting miles and increasing equitable access to goods and services are essential to effective action.

Page | 53

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

How do we account for transportation by visitors? Or for through-traffic?
There are multiple types of car travel in Flagstaff: some trips are made by residents, going from
home to a local store. Other trips are made through Flagstaff without stopping at all. The City
accounts for these trips differently.
Starting with the 2019 Greenhouse Gas Inventory the City starting using the “internal vehicle
miles traveled (VMT)” metric when quantifying emissions from vehicle travel in our community.
This is different from the “total VMT” metric, which considers all vehicle miles travelled on our
roads, including “through trips” – i.e. vehicles on I-40 that pass by Flagstaff on their way to
other destinations. The “internal VMT” metric considers only trips that both start and end
within the community boundary. Both the internal and total VMT metrics are determined each
year by Metroplan Flagstaff.
The decision to use the “internal VMT” metric was based on considerations relating to the City’s
sphere of influence – the actions we can take to make our community more connected and less
dependent on cars while in town will have little to no effect on the traffic simply passing
through. Our community also has a unique form of “through trip” transportation in the 100+
BNSF trains passing through town daily. Finally, as a community with an economy that is
largely based on tourism we want to welcome people to our City – and once here, tourists, like
locals, will be able take advantage and utilize the systems put in place to make our town less
dependent on cars for getting around during their stay.

HOW WE'LL GET THERE
Vehicle emissions are a result of a combination of factors: vehicle fuel efficiency, the carbon content of the
fuel, and vehicle miles traveled (VMT). Gains in the first two areas may be potentially offset by losses in the
third (VMT). Transitioning to electric vehicles (EVs) does not reduce transportation sector emissions enough
in the near-term. Therefore, it is important that while Flagstaff adopts EVs, action is taken to
simultaneously reduce VMT through climate-conscious land use planning and encouraging switching trips
from single-occupancy to transit, walking, and biking.
Transportation costs are a significant expense for households. Car ownership can often be a burden for
low-income families: AAA calculates that in 2020 car ownership cost $9,561 per year. 12 Promoting the
adoption of personal single-occupancy electric vehicles does nothing to address these existing inequities.
Land use decisions can also increase both transportation and housing costs. Transportation costs tend to
be lower for those living in neighborhoods where it is safe and accessible to walk, bike, or take transit.
Parking requirements add to the cost of housing, and single-family neighborhoods have an exclusionary
history that in many ways continues today. Promoting these modes of transportation and reducing VMT
both reduces emissions and is more equitable.

12

https://magazine.northeast.aaa.com/daily/life/aaa/costs-more-than-ever-to-own-a-car/

Page | 54

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

The City can reduce dependence on cars on multiple fronts: prioritizing pedestrian and bicycle
infrastructure development and enhancements can help make walking and biking an easy choice for many
trips. This will happen through alignment with and implementation of the forthcoming Active
Transportation Master Plan. The City of Flagstaff will collaborate with Mountain Line, Flagstaff's transit
agency, to maintain and enhance multi-modal transit services and related facilities, including better access
to and from transit.
There are several transportation projects that are already considered in Flagstaff's transportation future,
which will likely increase VMT. Road expansion projects and greenfield development, like the John Wesley
Powell Boulevard extension, align with the goals of the most recent Regional Transportation Plan (2017),
which projects VMT more than doubling over the next 70 years. Mutliple new neighborhoods are planend
on the edges of Flagstaff that are suburban in nature and will increase Flagstaff’s VMT. These alreadyplanned projects will increase the difficulty of holding VMT to 2019 levels. Flagstaff will need to balance
these baked-in projects with its climate goals to envision a transportation and land use agenda for the
coming decades. Two upcoming Plan processes, the Flagstaff 2040 Regional Transportation Plan and the
Flagstaff 2040 Regional Plan will present opportunities for Flagstaff to weigh its carbon neutrality goals
with other community priorities.

What would it take?
As part of the development of this Plan, we surveyed over 800 community members about what
factors would convince them to choose biking, walking, or transit in favor of their single
occupancy vehicle when they visit friends or go to work. There were common themes in these
responses: shorter distances to travel, more robust and connected bicycle and pedestrian
infrastructure, increased transit frequency, and increased feelings of comfort and safety when
using the existing infrastructure. Some responses were from people who already bike, walk, and
take the bus to do these things! Even those responses included improvements in infrastructure
and shorter distances to get to daily needs.
These responses shaped the Decreased Dependence on Cars section; we know that more people
will choose to leave their cars at home as infrastructure continues to improve and multi-modal
transportation becomes more of a priority throughout Flagstaff. Most of these changes will
require a big shift, especially in our infrastructure. To create more connected and robust bike
and pedestrian infrastructure, lanes will need to be taken away from cars. To decrease the
distance needed to travel for daily needs, we will need to increase density and mixed use
development. These actions will require a shift in priorities, and they are possible.

Page | 55

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
The Big Shift: Rethinking mobility
Flagstaff must commit to a fundamental shift in the way we think about our road systems and how we
move around our community. This is necessary to both achieve our climate goals and to improve quality of
life, health, and affordable living in Flagstaff.
The emphasis of our transportation planning must pivot from congestion mitigation to mobility
improvement to improve the way community members move around town, outside of their cars. As
Flagstaff grows, we have a choice: we can invest in building more roads and more lanes to attempt to
reduce traffic, knowing that adding more vehicle lanes rarely improves traffic flow. Alternatively, we can
manage demand, decreasing the demand for car trips and car infrastructure - thus helping people to
choose active, healthy, enjoyable transportation while reducing the number of cars on the road. We must
reimagine how our transportation can work, and shift our approach in the City's policies, processes, and
plans, from the Regional Plan and the Regional Transportation Plan to our policies that currently
encourage driving and parking.
At the same time, our community must better utilize our limited space by accepting and celebrating
appropriate density in our neighborhoods and activity centers. In order to maintain the 2019 vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) levels observed while our community grows, it is expected that actions will need to be taken
to increase residential density by at least 20%. 13 Density reduces emissions from building energy use and
transportation, while also contributing to more lively, welcoming, and diverse neighborhoods. Land use
solutions are complementary to our transportation actions and impact our ability to achieve our
transportation and emissions goals. Increases in density must be accompanied by efforts to make our
neighborhoods more complete, reductions in the distance to transit stops, increases the frequency of
transit buses, and the development of protected bike
infrastructure and complete sidewalk networks.
Flagstaff is Growing
Flagstaff is growing and will continue to do so. To welcome
new neighbors to Flagstaff, we need to create homes for
those who live here. To add more homes in our limited land
area, we must increase the number of homes in our existing
and new neighborhoods – from allowing backyard cottages
to welcoming small and mid-sized apartment buildings and
tall buildings where appropriate.
Flagstaff can learn from some of the most successful cities in
the world, who are focusing on converting car space into
more effective streets and public spaces that accommodate
people outside of their cars walking, biking, gathering,
recreating, or shopping. Flagstaff's peer cities are also
recognizing the high cost of parking, both in its
contributions to housing costs as well as the way that it

Flagstaff is projected to grow
significantly in the coming
decades. We must prepare for
greater than expected growth as
the population center of Phoenix
– now exceeding five million
people – continues to grow, and
as summers in central Arizona
become hotter. We can expect
visitation and migration to
Flagstaff to increase, with domino
effects on Flagstaff’s housing
market and land use.

https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/202006/Impacts_of_Residential_Density_on_Passenger_Vehicle_Use_and_Greenhouse_Gas_Emissions_Policy
_Brief.pdf

13

Page | 56

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
shapes our neighborhoods around cars. Cities across the country are allowing buildings to be built without
parking or charging more for parking on the street and within buildings, making a trade-off between ample
parking and a walkable and affordable community. Flagstaff can reduce the amount of space dedicated to
parking and car storage in our community in order to improve affordability, better utilize limited space,
and reduce automobile subsidies.
Flagstaff residents deserve what are called 15-minute neighborhoods: places to live where you can meet
most of your daily needs with a simple walk. Some of our neighborhoods already function this way:
someone living in the Townsite neighborhood can reach office buildings, a grocery store, the post office,
ten restaurants and even a park within a 15-minute walk. Sunnyside and Southside similarly have access to
jobs, small neighborhood stores, dining, and community centers within their neighborhoods. Townsite,
Southside and Downtown Flagstaff all were built before car dependence – meaning that they were built for
a people to meet their needs without use of a personal automobile. While Sunnyside is a comparatively
newer neighborhood, its street grid, flexible zoning and moderate density all contribute to walkability,
vibrancy and a variety of businesses and retail establishments. Flagstaff can choose to allow our
neighborhoods to evolve in ways that could mimic these traditional neighborhood designs, providing for a
higher quality of life for Flagstaff residents.

The Big Shift to Decrease Dependence on Cars will require Flagstaff to change its policies to:


Reduce or eliminate parking requirements across all building types.



Increase density in residential neighborhoods by 20%.



Increase the amount of accessory dwelling units in neighborhoods.



Integrate density into residential neighborhoods through more flexible zoning codes that allow
more housing options including duplexes, triplexes and potentially even small retail stores or
apartment buildings.



Convert some car lanes into micro-mobility zones.



Allow neighborhoods to reclaim their streets through slow ‘safe and social’ zones that allow for play
areas, socializing space, areas for businesses to operate, and safe travel for all modes.



Prioritize transit over car movements in transportation operations and planning.



Shift City transportation policies to actively manage transportation demand and reduce vehicle
miles traveled.

These changes will require significant revisions to Flagstaff’s zoning codes, transportation engineering
standards, and other policies. The City must invest in analysis and staffing to undertake this big shift.
Through these changes, we will be better equipped to achieve deep reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions from our transportation sector while improving livability, health, and community resilience in
Flagstaff.

Page | 57

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: Working to decrease our dependence on cars can help improve community equity. Owning a car is
expensive. By offering robust, diverse transportation options at lower costs, low and middle-income
residents will have more affordable mobility options.
The City will also consider how transportation policies will affect other groups: Due to disability, age, or
other factors, some community members may be unable to walk, bike or take the bus; others are unable to
drive. These factors will be considered when designing and implementing policies.
Adaptation: Density and robust, diverse transportation systems inherently increase community resilience
by providing multiple transportation options, as opposed to designing around one mode – cars. By building
densly in areas that are less prone to flooding and fire, Flagstaff can be better prepared for an increase in
these events.

GOALS
Goal

Year

Hold vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in the community to 2019 levels.
This is a 17% reduction from our business as usual projections in VMT
growth.

2030

54% of all trips will be taken by biking, walking, or taking the bus.

2030

34% of all work commute trips will be taken by biking, walking, or
taking the bus.

2030

Reduce vulnerability of new developments to fire and flooding, by
encouraging development to locate in areas of lower vulnerability.

2030

Page | 58

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE DECREASED DEPENDENCE ON CARS
DD-1: Encourage vibrancy, appropriate density, and attainability in existing
neighborhoods, so that more residents live within walking distance of their daily
needs.
Opportunities for action:
1.

2.

3.
4.

Incorporate more flexibility and appropriate density into residential neighborhoods, such as
accessory dwelling units, duplexes, triplexes, small apartment buildings and other housing
options to provide more diverse and attainable housing opportunities, create vibrant
neighborhoods, and decrease travel distances.
Lower or eliminate parking minimums for new developments to decrease housing costs, promote
decoupling rent from parking costs, reduce impervious surfaces, and create more walkable
neighborhoods.
Change City policies to increase transit-supportive density, redevelopment, infill development,
mixed housing types, multiple story buildings, and mixed-use transit nodes throughout Flagstaff.
Encourage the rapid development of carbon-neutral Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) to increase
the housing stock.

DD-2: Create inclusive networks for walking and biking that are continuous, attractive,
safe, comprehensive, and convenient for people of all ages.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.

3.

4.

Adopt, fund, and implement the Active Transportation Master Plan (ATMP).
Fully fund bike and pedestrian infrastructure capital improvements to create complete and
comfortable bike and pedestrian networks, safe routes to school improvements, and a complete
and comfortable system of pedestrian crossings and sidewalks.
Convert appropriate streets to multi-modal and complete streets through road diets or creating
multi-modal lanes. When right-of-way is limited, redistribute the available space to accommodate
more users and better reflect climate priorities.
Create an integrated system of protected lands, the Flagstaff Urban Trail System, and trail
corridors that support mode shift, public health, and affordable living.

Page | 59

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

DD-3: Encourage Flagstaff residents and visitors to walk, bike, roll and take the bus.
Opportunities for action:
1.

2.

3.

Significantly increase funding for programming to increase biking and walking, improve micromobility options, provide encouragement programming and infrastructure improvements in
school zones, and increase transportation demand management (TDM) programming.
The City will improve support to incentivize City employees to commute by walking, biking, and
transit, such as employee showers at work, benefits to employees for walking, biking and taking
transit, or support for carpool coordination.
Reconsider how and where we allow pedestrian crossings to create safe and convenient crossings
based on land use, activity centers, transit stops, and trails.

Investing in walking and biking
A one-time investment of $90 million is needed to build comprehensive walking and biking
networks. These networks are necessary to get people to walk, bike and take the bus. We cannot
ask people to change their behavior if those behaviors are not easy, safe, comfortable and even
fun. To further support these choices, the City will need to provide $600,000 to $1,000,000 per
year for programming.
While these investments seem large, from an infrastructure perspective creating these networks
will cost similarly to a large roadway project. The recently approved Lone Tree Bridge over the
railroad tracks will cost a projected $72 million, and simply designing a highway interchange
can cost $3 million. We must invest in biking, walking and transit with the same level that we
invest in supporting infrastructure for cars.

What is electric micro-mobility?
Micro-mobility technology is a rapidly-evolving category of light-weight individual transportation
devices. Examples include electric bikes (e-bikes), electric scooters, Segways, electric skateboards, and
hoverboards.
Electric micro-mobility provide easy and affordable transportation for many. These devices are a
necessary part of our work to reduce VMT: people can easily substitute many short car trips with a trip
on scooter or an e-bike. The City can encourage folks to use these devices to travel: benefits go beyond
just the individual user’s cost savings and health benefits, since these devices reduce the need for car
parking, reduce air pollution, and reduce traffic on our roads. See the Electric Mobility Target Area on
page 66 for more information.

Page | 60

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

DD-4 Transform transportation policies and planning to incorporate greenhouse gas
emissions analysis and reduce dependence on driving.
Opportunities for action:
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

Incorporate transportation demand management (TDM) philosophy and policies into
transportation and development engineering and planning processes, by changing internal
policies and potentially hiring a TDM manager.
Evaluate the greenhouse gas emissions and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) of transportation capital
infrastructure projects, transportation system operations, and new development planning, and
update the Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) process to incorporate greenhouse gas emissions impacts
into the decision-making process.
Actively work to lower emissions and VMT created by new developments, shifting to mobility
enhancement strategies rather than congestion reduction.
Require large new buildings and new neighborhood developments to submit carbon neutrality
alignment statements, to increase collaboration between developers and the City and to
communicate how developments contribute to the City's carbon neutrality goals and how the
property will work to manage transportation demand.
Involve more stakeholders in City capital and infrastructure project planning by bringing projects
to citizen commissions and interdepartmental staff review, enabling review through the lens of
other community objectives including public health, sustainability, and economic vitality.
When working with developers on large new developments, analyze and balance community
priorities when making requests for infrastructure improvements.

How Could We Account for Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Transportation
Planning?
Municipalities across the country are beginning to incorporate greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions into transportation planning projects. Fully accounting for GHG emissions
allows us to understand the true impact of transportation projects, which often lead
to more driving.
Fortunately, accounting for GHG emissions can be simple – most transportation
analyses include a consideration of vehicle miles traveled or how a project will
increase car trips. These measures are proportionally related to greenhouse gas
emissions – incorporating greenhouse gas emission analysis into a traffic impact
analysis (TIA), for instance, can be as simple as applying a greenhouse gas co-efficient
to the number of new trips we anticipate.
The City will work with transportation and development stakeholders to identify the
best way to include greenhouse gas emissions in transportation planning and
engineering processes and decisions.

Page | 61

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

What is Transportation Demand Management (TDM)?
Transportation demand management, often called TDM, is a well-established concept defined as a
transportation policy approach that reduces demand for single-occupant vehicle use, while
simultaneously encouraging use of more sustainable travel modes, including walking, biking, and transit.
TDM is described in the Flagstaff Regional Transportation Plan Blueprint 2040 as follows: “TDM enhances
the utilization of roads by reducing overall demand through mode shift from single occupant vehicles to
other means of transportation that can equally or better meet their needs... With TDM serving as an
organizing principle, physical transportation infrastructure and land use will be designed so that
alternative transportation is naturally encouraged and the maximum efficiency of the transportation
network is realized.”
Why is TDM important? An efficient and equitable transportation system offers individuals multiple
feasible options for moving around their community whether it be by biking, walking, public transit,
driving, or another mode. Unfortunately, most U.S. transportation systems have been built centered
around one mode of transportation above all others: single-occupancy vehicles. Many policies and landuse decisions often favor single-occupancy vehicles and deprioritize all other modes of transport. This is
problematic as increases in use of single-occupancy vehicles are often associated with increases in
roadway congestion, air pollution, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and annual vehicle-related costs.
TDM can maximize traveler options. What if instead of continuing to build infrastructure that
encourages the use of vehicles, our transportation planning focused instead on making alternate modes
of transportation more desirable and feasible options? This is exactly what TDM strategies seek to do.
Another way to think about TDM is maximizing traveler options or systematic mobility management. TDM
helps to make our transportation systems function more efficiently in a way that is cost-effective and
impactful in the long-term. More than a specific set of solutions, TDM is a philosophical approach that
can be incorporated into decisions made related to city zoning, land-use, development, and much more.
TDM at work. TDM strategies can be numerous and diverse allowing every city the opportunity to focus
on options that work best for their unique setting. Some examples of TDM include: increasing the amount
and accessibility of information on local alternate modes of transport, creating successful rideshare and
carpooling programs, disincentivizing driving by increasing parking costs, providing incentives for using
transit or other alternate modes, or restricting the number of parking spaces new developments can
build. Like most cities, Flagstaff is already implementing multiple actions that can be considered
components of TDM; examples include the use of parking pricing downtown, provision of online maps
and resources for the FUTS and other urban bike routes, and the ecoPASS program which offers annual
bus passes at reduced rates. TDM actions become even more effective when centralized under a
comprehensive TDM program with a designated workforce. Successful TDM programs already exist in
many states and an increasing number of cities (such as the City of Tempe) are working to develop
comprehensive programs of their own.
Potential for local implementation. One example of a highly effective TDM strategy that has potential
for implementation in Flagstaff is unbundled parking. Oftentimes at residential rental properties, costs of
parking are automatically added into tenant rental costs. An alternate option would be to “unbundle”
parking and rental costs allowing tenants to choose exactly how many parking spaces they want to pay
for. Having parking costs as a separate fee allows tenants to better conceptualize the costs associated
with having a car or multiple cars. This strategy also disincentivizes developers from building an excess
amount of parking, the cost of which would ultimately be placed on tenants. Unbundled parking is
already being utilized in Arlington County, Virginia and has been highly successful at promoting alternate
transportation options as reported in a 2018 Mobility Lab study. San Francisco, Berkeley, and Seattle are
examples of other cities that have also made the move to unbundle parking costs from rent.

Page | 62

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

DD-5: Invest in comprehensive and equitable transit.
Opportunities for action:
1.

2.

3.

Implement the transit-supportive recommendations of the Northern Arizona Intergovernmental
Public Transportation Authority (NAIPTA) Five-Year Transit Plan for the Mountain Line to increase
ridership and transit frequency on the permanent transit network.
Prioritize transit trips over car trips and the movement of buses over cars to improve bus
operations on Flagstaff's road network, through mechanisms such as signal prioritization, bus slip
lanes, and dedicated bus lanes.
Improve how the City incorporates transit needs and requests into the transportation analysis
performed for large new developments.

DD-6: Proactively invest to protect Flagstaff’s clean air status.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Create a local ordinance to protect air quality and prevent National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) non-attainment status and to support and fund mobility enhancement.
Incorporate greenhouse gas impact analysis, based on greenhouse gas emissions estimates, into
Flagstaff area transportation strategic planning and routine analysis.
Create anti-idling loading zones to reduce congestion, maintain access to parking and allow public
safety access.

What is NAAQS Non-attainment?
The State of Arizona monitors air quality for pollutants above the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS), as outlined in the Clean Air Act. NAAQS non-attainment classification occurs
when pollutants exceed the NAAQS standards. 14 Once a county receives reaches non-attainment
classification, communities must make investments to reduce and control pollutants.
Coconino County is currently in attainment of the NAAQS. However, the Arizona Department of
Transportation has noted that the expected growth of Coconino County could threaten
Coconino’s current attainment status. 15 Flagstaff can invest in keeping its air quality clean now,
to avoid future regulation and mandates.

Learn more about Arizona Departhttp://azdeq.gov/nonattainment_areas
Air Quality Sustainability Program in Coconino County:
https://www.flagstaff.az.gov/ArchiveCenter/ViewFile/Item/1501

14
15

Page | 63

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Transportation and Land Use Strategy 1: Advance land use planning that minimizes the
distance people have to travel by car and that increases community resiliency.
Transportation and Land Use Strategy 2: Prioritize, incentivize, and promote
transportation by biking, walking, and transit.
Transportation and Land Use Strategy 5: Manage transportation demand and reduce the
frequency with which people drive alone.

Improvements in transit infrastructure, operations, and encouragement
Mountain Line provides transit service to the City of Flagstaff. Mountain Line and the City must
partner to adequately fund improved transit infrastructure and operations in order to move
more trips onto transit.
High-priority transit improvements include:
• Identify funding to double service on Mountain Line routes to create high-frequency bus
lines that are more usable and attractive for riders. This would require $5 million in
additional funding annually.
• Partner with Coconino County to increase transit service coverage and frequency in the
greater Flagstaff area. Consider enhancing buses, vanpooling, and shuttle services for
outlying communities such as Kachina Village and Bellemont.
• Develop transit services for visitors to Flagstaff, including to popular destinations such as
Snowbowl, Twin Arrows, the Grand Canyon, and between Phoenix and Flagstaff.
• Focus on improving access to transit stations by helping riders to complete their ‘first
mile’ and ‘last mile’ trips to get to stations.
•
Consider eliminating bus ridership fees, encouraging organizations and businesses to
purchase transit passes for their employees or provide in-house incentives for employees
who switch from driving to public transit.

Page | 64

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FOCUS TWO: OUR ENERGY SOURCES

Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence on
Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy Use

Carbon Dioxide
Removal

Clean
our energy
sources
Clean
Electricity

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

consumption
and waste
management

We will clean our energy sources through:


Electric mobility



Clean electricity



Building fuel switching

Page | 65

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Electric Mobility
Flagstaff will embrace the electrification of mobility options, shifting to vehiclereplacing e-bikes and bike share, electrifying our buses and taking advantage of the
rapidly evolving electric vehicle market.

Figure 8: Projected emissions reductions from electric mobility and decreasing dependence on cars,
compared to the emissions in the business as usual scenario.

WHAT IT MEANS
Reductions in GHG emissions from the transportation sector will require a transition to clean, low-/zeroemission vehicles while simultaneously enhancing community mobility through increased access to
bicycle, pedestrian and public transit modes of transportation to decrease community-wide vehicle miles
traveled (VMT). Transportation related emissions account for approximately 30% of Flagstaff's communitywide GHG emissions. In addition to reducing VMT, making progress toward more efficient and lowercarbon vehicles is critical.

Page | 66

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
HOW WE'LL GET THERE
The future of mobility is electric, mainly due to advances in technology and momentum from the market.
Flagstaff can welcome this future by helping increase the speed of the electric mobility transition in
Flagstaff. As Flagstaff works to reduce vehicle miles traveled and help folks take non-car modes of travel,
electric mobility can play a part in making transit and active transportation more affordability, easier to
use, and cleaner.
Electric buses: As we work to increase transit use across Flagstaff, we want to transition our bus fleets
from gas or diesel fuels to electric power. Electrification of the bus fleet will require a significant investment
from bus fleet operators, including but not limited to Mountain Line, Northern Arizona University and
Flagstaff Unified School District. Electrification involves planning for electric charging locations and
capacity, operational changes, and coordinating charging schedules, in addition to the acquisition of an
entirely new and operationally appropriate bus fleet. The City will work to assist these organizations in
their planning for the transition to electric buses, from grant-writing support to charging infrastructure
planning.
Mountain Line, Flagstaff’s transit provider, has begun planning for a transition to zero emissions vehicles –
they recently published a Zero Emissions Bus Transition Plan, and determined to move forward with a
battery electric bus transition. 16 Implementation will occur “project by project, bus by bus as funding and
interest allows.”
Electric micro-mobility: Adding electric power to simple, small transportation devices – such as bikes – is
a relatively simple change that transforms the device into a much more accessible and practical
transportation option. Electric bike use is rapidly accelerating across the globe, as batteries become
smaller and less expensive, and as more people realize the incredible benefits of electrification.

What is electric micro-mobility?
Micro-mobility technology is a rapidly-evolving category of light-weight individual
transportation devices. Examples include electric bikes (e-bikes), electric scooters, Segways,
electric skateboards, and hoverboards.
While these devices represent very new ways of travel, they are already present in our
community, obtainable at local and national retailers, and are already providing accessible,
affordable, low-carbon transportation options.
See page 60 for a discussion of how micro-mobility can reduce vehicle miles traveled.
Electric micro-mobility devices are popular for a multitude of reasons: they move people around more
quickly than a traditional bicycle or scooter and with significantly less effort – now a five mile commute
with hills can be done with far less effort and sweat, making e-bike commutes much more attractive. These
devices use very little fuel, or electricity, especially when compared to the gas used to move around a one-

16

https://mountainline.az.gov/about-us/reports-plans/zero-emissions-bus-zeb-transition-plan/

Page | 67

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
ton vehicle. This saves money on gas, as well as vehicle wear and tear and maintenance. These devices
remove traffic from the road and have a very small footprint, reducing congestion and parking demand –
after all, a small scooter is a much more appropriate, efficient and proportional tool to move one person
than a car or an SUV. And finally, these devices are popular because they are fun to ride.
The City of Flagstaff can work to welcome these devices in our community and to encourage their use.
While these devices represent change in the way we travel, they have numerous personal and community
benefits, including that they are a very low-emissions transportation option. Many of these devices can
already be found on our neighborhood streets today, whether a senior is taking an e-bike to see their
grandchildren, a 10-year-old is using a hoverboard to go to a neighbor’s house, or a student is taking an
electric scooter to get to class. The City will need to work to incorporate these devices into our
transportation planning efforts, so that people using micro-mobility devices have safe options for traveling
both within neighborhoods and across town.
Electric vehicles: The widespread transition to zero-emission vehicles is a long-term strategy. The City of
Flagstaff can support this transition by investing in and encouraging the necessary supporting
infrastructure. Investment and encouragement can occur through codes, partnerships, incentives and
other methods that improve the ability of residents to purchase and operate electric vehicles compared to
conventional gas-fueled vehicles. For example, charging stations help EV owners fuel their vehicles – the
City will encourage businesses and public buildings to install charging stations. In 2020, the City installed
four charging stations in City Hall for use by City fleet vehicles as well as the general public. The City can
also work through codes: the current Flagstaff building code, adopted in 2019, requires a 240 volt outlet to
be installed in new garages – a small, inexpensive and simple modification that ensures the home, which
will be around for at least 80 years, is ready for the rapidly approaching future of electric vehicles. This
upgrade means a homeowner will not need to perform a costly retrofit to charge their vehicle, saving
hundreds of dollars or more.
In addition, the City of Flagstaff will look to transition our own fleet while educating, encouraging and
helping facilitate partnerships so that other local fleets might also make the electrification transition over
time. We know that it matters which vehicles are electrified – by prioritizing the transition of fleet vehicles
and other high usage vehicles that drive a disproportionate number of miles, we can expect to see an
outsized impact. For example, if the top 20% of vehicles by mile are electric by 2030, the reduction in fuel
use will be considerably larger than 20%.
While the City of Flagstaff can support the transition to EVs by taking early action to establish
infrastructure, a considerable amount of the momentum for EV adoption will come from the private sector.
Many of these factors are currently unknown or exist only as projections at this time. Some of these factors
may include Federal incentives both for infrastructure development and for vehicle purchase. Some of
these factors will be market driven – Tesla for example has installed 12 SuperChargers in Flagstaff, and
according to ChargeHub there are an additional 50 level 2 and level 3 charging stations in the City that have
been installed by businesses and organizations on their own accord.

Page | 68

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: New EVs and electric micro-mobility options can be cost-prohibitive for many. This threatens to
leave some populations out of the electric mobility transition, and will likely mean that low-income
communities must cope with the higher operating costs and unhealthier air associated with internal
combustion engines for a longer period of time. To ensure widespread adoption and affordability for lowand middle-income households, the City will need to establish robust incentive programs.
Adaptation: As Flagstaff experiences the impacts of climate change, having diverse, clean, reliable mobility
options will be vital. By creating more good transportation options, Flagstaff can ensure that if one mode of
transportation becomes difficult, residents have other choices. Electric bikes are a great way to travel
around Flagstaff, even on hot or windy days. Market trends show that electric mobility is the way of the
future; by investing in infrastructure and incentives for these options, Flagstaff will be better prepared for
these transportation changes.

GOALS
Goal

YEAR

The City will provide 50 publicly available Level 2 electric vehicle
charging stations

2025

STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE ELECTRIC MOBILITY
EM-1: Advance the electrification of buses across Flagstaff.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Mountain Line will electrify its bus fleet according to its Zero Emissions Bus (ZEB) Transition Plan.
NAU will begin electrifying its bus fleet, to comply with its under-development carbon neutrality
plan.
Partner with the Flagstaff Unified School District to explore funding options for fleet electrification.

Page | 69

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EM-2: Welcome electric micro-mobility devices as legitimate, healthy, affordable and
low-carbon modes of transportation.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Establish an electric micro-mobility device share service.
Distribute electric micro-mobility rebates to community members through local businesses to
reduce barriers to residents acquiring these affordable transportation devices.
Launch a micro-mobility collective purchasing cooperative to increase access to efficient and
affordable modes of transportation.

EM-3: Support residents, businesses and institutions in the transition to electric
vehicles.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

Focus electrification engagement efforts on the vehicles that drive the most miles – for instance
heavily used fleet vehicles.
Install electric vehicle charging stations at City facilities to serve the City fleet, City staff vehicles,
and the public where appropriate.
Develop public and private partnerships for the installation of Level II and Level III DC fastcharging electric vehicle charging stations in publicly accessible parking areas along tourism
corridors, at workplaces, and in multi-family housing developments.
Adopt a policy requiring 100% of new City fleet sedans and SUVs to be electric vehicles starting in
2022, complemented by aggressive goals to test, evaluate, and, where feasible, acquire electric
vehicles for other light-duty, medium-duty and heavy-duty fleet vehicles and equipment
categories.
Encourage and incentivize existing multi-family housing to offer electric vehicle charging stations.

Zero Emission Vehicles beyond Electric Vehicles
While electric vehicles appear to have the inside track for capturing the market on passenger
and light-duty vehicles that produce zero tailpipe emissions, vehicles fueled with hydrogen
represent another emerging technology that may also play a role. The City will actively monitor
advances in technology, infrastructure and partnership opportunities to support wider-spread
adoption of hydrogen vehicles.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Transportation and Land Use Strategy 3: Support the use of clean, energy -efficient
vehicles

Page | 70

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Clean Electricity
Flagstaff will obtain as much of its electricity as possible from sources that do not
produce greenhouse gas emissions.

Figure 9: Projected emissions reductions from clean electricity and reducing building energy use,
compared to the emissions in the business as usual scenario.

WHAT IT MEANS
Significant reductions in GHG emissions from both the built environment and transportation sectors can be
unlocked with a rapid transition to clean, renewable electricity. With clean, renewable electricity available
as a resource, appliances, vehicles, and other tools that directly utilize fossil fuels can switch onto this
resource. (See Building Fuel Switching on page 77 and Electric Mobility on page 66).
Emissions from electricity currently constitute approximately 25% of all community emissions. This means
that even without making any other changes (see the Electric Mobility, Building Fuel Switching, and
Reduced Building Energy Use Target Areas, starting on pages 66, 77, and 85 respectively), a 100% clean
electricity grid could eliminate one quarter of Flagstaff's emissions. In combination with the various fuel
switching strategies, the impact of clean electricity could be even greater.

Page | 71

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Are there negative impacts of renewable energy?
When new technologies emerge, there are often legitimate concerns that one bad thing (i.e., air
pollution from coal) is just being replaced with another (i.e., waste from used solar
panels).There are negative externalities associated with all forms of energy production. While
we cannot avoid all negative impacts, we can choose the energy production methods that do
the least harm to our environment and our community. The negative impacts of wind and solar
are relatively modest, and are far outweighed by the positive impacts on air quality and reduced
greenhouse gas emissions.
Large renewable energy projects sometimes face concerns about where turbines go after their
useful life, or the amount of water used for large solar arrays. In fact, solar energy uses just 1%
or 2% of the water used to create an equal amount of energy from coal or natural gas. 17 The City
will continue to consider short- and long-term impacts to the environment and our community
when developing renewable energy projects.

HOW WE'LL GET THERE
APS is the investor-owned utility that provides grid electricity to the community of Flagstaff. As of January
2020, APS has made a 'carbon free' commitment by 2050, with an expectation of 65% carbon free grid
electricity by 2030. (See the APS Integrated Resource Plan. 18) This is a 30% improvement compared to the
local grid in 2020.
While APS makes the transition to renewable electricity,
Flagstaff can increase the prevalence of local renewable
Clean electricity is just one of the
energy projects such as rooftop or utility-sponsored
many areas where we need to be
community solar to achieve even greater near-term emissions
open to innovation. While solar
reductions (third-party-sponsored community solar, where
and wind are specifically called out
solar power projects generate electricity and benefits for
in this Plan, there are other
multiple users, would require a change in State laws). The
renewable energy options to
municipality can work with the utilities to develop large-scale
explore. Additional technologies,
renewable installations to power municipal operations with
like micro-hydroelectric power,
clean electricity. However, unless there are policy changes at
may be incorporated during Plan
the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) and/or APS, it is
implementation.
uncertain whether any additional electricity generated by
these municipally-supported installations may be able to be
directly acquired by, or attributed to, local residents or
businesses. Flagstaff will continue to monitor the evolving electricity policy landscape and consider
supporting actions that would unlock strategies for large scale renewable development for the community.

17
18

https://nicholas.duke.edu/news/replacing-coal-gas-or-renewables-saves-billions-gallons-water
https://www.aps.com/en/About/Our-Company/Doing-Business-with-Us/Resource-Planning

Page | 72

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
Until then, this Plan has been developed with only projected on-site residential and commercial
installations being able to improve upon the APS grid forecast.

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: Fossil fuels have historically inflicted severe harm to Black, Indigenous, and Hispanic communities
through the extraction and combustion of these fuels. By shifting to clean electricity, the current impact
these fossil fuels have on historically marginalized neighborhoods and communities can be decreased. To
avoid future harm to these communities, they must be consulted prior to and during the development of
solar arrays, wind farms, and other new, clean electricity infrastructure.
Adaptation: When developing the infrastructure for new electricity generation, both the City and APS will
need to consider how the new developments will respond to shocks and stressors from climate change. A
robust, interconnected electric grid with a multitude of battery backup options will be vital to building
resilience in the energy sector.

GOALS
Goals

YEAR

100% of municipal electricity use will be from renewables (%)

2025

68% of community electricity use from zero carbon energy (%)

2030

The Flagstaff City Council established a goal of 100% renewable electricity by 2050
through the 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan. Our carbon neutrality models
suggest that Flagstaff can achieve 68% clean electricity for the community by 2030.
While we will endeavor to reach 100% renewable electricity prior to 2050, the current
policy landscape suggests that 68% clean electricity is feasible for 2030.

Page | 73

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE CLEAN ELECTRICITY
CE-1: Produce 100% renewable electricity to cover all City of Flagstaff municipal
electricity needs.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Expand capacity of municipally owned property for on-site solar electric and solar thermal
generation.
Replace or repair the co-digestion system at Wildcat Hill Water Reclamation Plant and increase
clean energy production.
When landfill sections are completed and capped, install solar to support City energy usage and
eventually connect to the electric grid.
Update the City of Flagstaff Sustainable Building Resolution, requiring that newly constructed
municipal buildings be built to net zero energy standards.

Project in the Pipeline:
Utility-scale Solar Installation at Red Gap Ranch - The primary intention of this project is to first
satisfy the 100% renewable electricity for the municipality by 2025 goal.

CE-2: Increase renewable energy installations and usage in new buildings.
Opportunity for action:
1.

Implement progressively more aggressive building codes, requiring net zero energy buildings by
2030. Net zero energy buildings often incorporate renewable energy installations – primarily
rooftop solar- into the design and construction to offset onsite energy use.

Net zero energy buildings – Net zero energy buildings combine energy efficiency and renewable
energy to use net zero energy. They use a low amount of energy due to being air-tight, wellinsulated and energy efficient. They typically incorporate renewable energy generation on-site,
like solar panels. Due to this low energy use paired with energy production, these buildings
produce as much energy as they consume, which means that the occupants enjoy extremely low
utility bills and a zero-emissions building. 19

19

Learn more: https://zeroenergyproject.org/buy/zero-energy-homes

Page | 74

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

CE-3: Support solar installations on existing residential and commercial buildings.
Opportunity for action:
1.

The Solar United Neighbors program will assist residents in obtaining solar electricity for a lower
price.

Solar electricity is now the least expensive source of electricity in history.
As of 2020, the International Energy Agency found that high-quality solar photovoltaic (PV)
projects are the least expensive source of electricity in history. 20 Large solar plants with battery
storage have decreased in price, making them competitive with natural gas. These
developments will accelerate the rapid electrification of the electric grid. Market forces will help
to facilitate this transition, but there remains a role for government policy makers to remove
barriers to this transition, ensuring equity for communities that have been impacted by resource
extraction and those that could be negatively impacted by the transition to renewable
electricity.
Due to the low cost of solar, solar photovoltaic panels are a wonderful opportunity for Flagstaff
residents and businesses to produce their own energy on-site, with financial and resilience
benefits.

Project Highlight: Northern Arizona Solar Co-op with Solar United Neighbors
In partnership with the City, the Northern Arizona Coop was organized through Solar United
Neighbors, a non-profit organization that seeks to increase the access and affordability of solar
energy.
Rooftop Solar and Prometheus Solar, two local Flagstaff installation companies, were selected
by the Northern Arizona Solar Co-op to install solar for more than 80 households across
Flagstaff, Sedona, and Coconino County. These installations are projected to result in:
- 647 kW of Solar installed
- 11,608 Metric Tons of CO2 avoided lifetime
- $1,845,219 invested in local businesses, jobs, and clean electricity

20

https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2020/outlook-for-electricity

Page | 75

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Legislative change
There are policies and strategies being pursued around the country that are not
currently available to the City of Flagstaff because of State-level policies. Many of these
strategies have the potential to unlock collaborations, financing and other
opportunities that could positively contribute to the goal of achieving Carbon
Neutrality.
The City will keep an eye on the policy landscape and may choose to lobby or otherwise
advocate for some of these strategies including (but not limited to) Community Choice
Aggregation, PACE financing (C-PACE and R-PACE), non-utility Community Solar and
more. If any of these become available, this living document may be updated to
incorporate the newly available mechanism(s).
The City of Flagstaff should also encourage the ACC and DOE to renew and increase
renewable energy production incentives for residential and commercial solar and other
distributed generation and storage projects, without additional metering fees or other
disincentives.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Energy Strategy 2. Expand renewable energy generation and use.

Page | 76

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Building Fuel Switching
Flagstaff will shift our building fuel sources from fossil fuels to renewable sources and
electricity for applications including space and water heating, cooking, and perhaps
even industrial processes, thus taking advantage of the superior efficiency of electric
appliances as well as the rapidly decreasing emissions of the electric grid.

Figure 10: Projected emissions reductions from building fuel switching, compared to the emissions in the
business as usual scenario.

WHAT IT MEANS
Fuel switching in buildings involves transitioning buildings from using appliances, processes and
generators that directly combust fossil fuels on-site to ones that utilize decarbonized electricity (see the
Clean Electricity Target Area on page 71) as well as solar thermal, biomass and other renewable sources of
heat and energy. These on-site fossil fuels include natural gas, propane, and diesel. While switching fuel
sources, it will also be necessary to ensure that the buildings are well sealed and energy efficient (see
Reduced Building Energy Use Target Area on page 85) to manage fuel costs and electrical demand (when
applicable).

Page | 77

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
When building fuel switching is accomplished by transitioning from the combustion of on-site fossil fuels
to using electricity, the term “building electrification” is often used to be more specific. Like electric
vehicles, building electrification can accomplish significant emissions reductions, but only if the source
electricity is sufficiently clean. According to RMI, Arizona has already passed the tipping point in the
decarbonization of the electricity grid, so that switching from a natural gas furnace to a grid-based electric
heat pump for space and water heating will have an immediate emissions reduction benefit. Additionally,
compared to a gas furnace, a heat pump installed in Arizona in 2020 and using grid-based electricity is
expected to result in a net reduction in emissions of over 50% for the lifetime of the appliance.

HOW WE'LL GET THERE
"In every city we analyzed, a new all-electric, single-family home is less expensive than a
new mixed-fuel home that relies on gas for cooking, space heating, and water heating.”
– RMI, All Electric New Homes, a Win for the Climate and the Economy 21
Approximately 45% of Flagstaff's building emissions, including approximately 56% of residential emissions,
come from the on-site combustion of natural gas. Due to the relatively long lifetimes of buildings and
appliances, actions now will be crucial for ensuring deep, rapid and long-term emission reductions. These
actions include introducing education and incentives to ensure that when existing major appliances
require replacement, electric and other renewable alternatives are adopted.
This Plan envisions the electrification of 12,500 major residential appliances as they require replacement as
well as significant fuel switching in the commercial sector. Additional efforts can be made to encourage
and incentivize electric-only new construction, which has been shown to offer net savings over the lifetime
of the building.

21

https://rmi.org/all-electric-new-homes-a-win-for-the-climate-and-the-economy/

Page | 78

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Fossil fuels for low grade heat – like using a chainsaw to cut through butter
Imagine passing someone a stick of butter and asking them to cut it for you. When they leave the table to
“get a tool” for the job, you’d probably expect them to grab a butter knife from the kitchen drawer. But
instead they return with a chainsaw. Could the chainsaw accomplish the task of cutting butter? Sure. Is a
chainsaw the right tool for the task? Certainly not. For the task of cutting butter, a chainsaw uses far
more power than is necessary and is clearly wasteful. Similarly, for the task of low-grade space and water
heating, on-site fossil fuel combustion uses far more power than is necessary and is wasteful - like using
a chainsaw when a butter knife is available.
Even though gas furnaces have become more efficient in the past decades, they will never be able to
compare to the performance of an electric heat-pump. This is because furnaces use energy to generate
heat – while heat pumps primarily use energy to transfer heat from place to place, much like a
refrigerator or air-conditioner. Indeed, heat pumps are basically air conditioners that can be reversed,
meaning they provide both heating and cooling in a single appliance! Transferring heat requires far less
energy than generating it, meaning that heat pumps can deliver the same amount of useable heat while
using 2-5x less energy than even the most efficient furnaces. For the task of delivering useable heat,
compared to a heat pump, even the most efficient furnace is a chainsaw.
To illustrate, consider that a 95% efficient EnergyStar furnace might be able to generate and deliver 950
BTUs/Hr of useable heat for every 1000 BTUs/Hr of gas energy input. BTUs are a unit of energy, and stand
for British Thermal Units. Meanwhile, a heat pump is capable of transferring and delivering as much as
4000 BTUs/Hr or more of useable heat for every 1000 BTUs/Hr of electrical energy input. This is because
the majority of the thermal energy delivered by a heat pump comes from the environment, not from the
input source.

Based on information and image at: https://www.adams-air.com/houston/what-is-COP.php
In addition to being the right tool for the job of delivering low grade heat for space and water heating
due to their superior efficiency, heat pumps and other electric appliances can also be powered by
renewable sources. This combination means the lifetime energy use and emissions from the use of
electric appliances can be far less than appliances combusting fossil fuels on site.

Page | 79

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: Affordability is a significant concern for Flagstaff community members. When working to promote
fuel switching, Flagstaff must carefully weigh the balance between climate action and affordability, with
the understanding that both are critical to ensure true sustainability. We do not want a result of climate
action to be higher cost of utilities for Flagstaff residents, many of whom already struggle to afford to live in
Flagstaff.
When working to electrify homes, the City of Flagstaff will balance affordability and climate priorities.
Fortunately, advancements in electric heating technologies, particularly through the use of heat pumps,
mean that electrification does not necessarily result in higher costs. The Rocky Mountain Institute has
found that electrification of space and water heating can reduce costs over the lifetime of the appliances,
for both new buildings and some retrofits. 22
The City will prioritize incentives in collaboration with local partners to make the cost of fuel switching
competitive and even beneficial compared to remaining on fossil fuels. The City will work its partners to
help residents utilize the latest technology, analyze policies for their impact of affordability, and ensure
that electrification does not have detrimental effects, particularly for Flagstaff’s low-income families. See
the extended conversation about tensions on page 25 for more on electrification and equity.
Electrified homes and buildings may have more price stability, too. Currently, fossil fuels are subsidized
and are associated with large externalities, mainly from the negative effects of their greenhouse gas
emissions. Should a carbon price come into effect in the next decade, the artificial affordability of using onsite fossil fuels could be dramatically reduced or eliminated (see the Social Cost of Carbon section on page
41).
Adaptation: Surveys conducted throughout the Plan development process have demonstrated that
electric grid reliability is a concern for many community members. This is valid, and electric utilities have
much work to do in the next decade to bolster the grid for the renewable energy future. The City can
support this transition and support grid reliability by implementing initiatives to reduce and manage
energy demand - see the Reduced Building Energy Use Target Area on page 85).

22

https://rmi.org/insight/the-economics-of-electrifying-buildings/

Page | 80

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
GOALS
Goal

Year

Reduction in Natural Gas usage by Sector:

2030

Industrial:
0% reduction
Commercial: 20% reduction
Residential: 62% reduction
12,500 residential properties (~50% of residential properties currently
connected to natural gas) will have conducted a deep energy
efficiency retrofit including the electrification of at least one major
appliance.

2030

25% of commercial properties (not including NAU or municipal
accounts) will have conducted a deep energy efficiency retrofit
including the electrification of at least one major appliance. 15% of
commercial properties fully electrify.

2030

Why don’t we model natural gas reductions in the industrial sector?
While the low-grade heat used in residential and most commercial applications can be electrified or
switched to other renewable sources relatively easily, many industrial processes require high heat or
even use natural gas or other fossil fuels as a feedstock. Generally speaking, these are ‘harder’ problems
from a decarbonization standpoint, and as an organization the City is less familiar with how fossil fuels
are being used for industrial processes in Flagstaff, and is less well positioned to support Flagstaff
industry in making these transitions. The City is prepared to develop education and incentive programs
to support residential and commercial entities. While we are optimistic that industrial users will reduce
their reliance on fossil fuels, including natural gas, due to our limited information and ability to directly
support industrial users, we are not currently modeling any reductions from the industrial sector. Going
forward we will look to learn more about the industrial users in our community and their use of fossil
fuels, and will look for opportunities to support reductions.

Page | 81

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE FUEL SWITCHING
FS-1: Reduce or remove natural gas usage in municipal buildings.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Develop and implement a Municipal Building Electrification Plan, to achieve net zero energy in
occupied City facilities.
Obtain funding to build 100% electric buildings on new City of Flagstaff affordable housing sites, to
support affordable living.
Electrify appliances during upgrades at existing City of Flagstaff affordable housing sites whenever
feasible.

FS-2: Encourage new buildings to rely on the electric grid as their main energy
source.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.

Provide monetary incentives to builders that construct or retrofit to achieve net zero energy prior
to 2030.
Provide incentives to builders to forego natural gas infrastructure in new sub-developments and
new buildings.

FS-3: Support fuel switching in existing residential and commercial buildings.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Page | 82

Establish a revolving loan fund for major appliance electrification upgrades and solar thermal hot
water upgrades for residential and commercial properties.
Increase the pace of home and commercial electrification by funding home energy electrification
rebates and completing home energy electrification via the Home Energy Retrofit Program.
Establish an Electrification Permit Fund to pay for the permits for existing households and
businesses to electrify their appliances.
Develop incentives to promote the mass installation of solar thermal water heating within the
community.

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FS-4: Provide training and education on fuel switching.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Fund and implement a contractor training program for solar thermal, electric water heaters,
electric heat-pump space heaters, and conversions from gas to electric appliances.
Develop a program to offer technical assistance, help schedule contractors for fuel switching
upgrades, and offer incentives above and beyond what is offered by the utility.
Create a Residential Energy Efficiency and Fuel Switching Information Hub for exchanging
information about net-zero renovations, electrification, and at-home climate mitigation
strategies.

Not Your Grandfather’s Heat Pump
According to the Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI) “Heat pump technology has improved significantly in
recent years, flipping a commonly accepted narrative that it is not an efficient or dependable heating
source. Even accounting for reduced efficiency in extreme cold weather, our analysis finds that modern
air source heat pumps are more than twice as efficient as gas furnaces.” 23 Modern heat pumps are
providing efficient heating in cold weather climates from Denver to Minneapolis to Fargo.
In addition to being able to pair modern heat pumps with smart and programmable thermostats, the
main technological updates compared to heat pumps from even a decade ago are the inclusion of:
- Variable speed compressor technology
- Improved expansion valve technology
- Fans with electronically commutated motor (ECM) technology
Each of these technology improvements allow the unit to run at an optimized pressure/openness/speed
to best meet the heating (and cooling) needs. Previous heat pumps without these features could
typically had to be ‘all on or all off,’ which reduced performance.

Legislative change
Lobby at the Arizona Corporation Commission for more energy efficiency and electrification programs
for all sectors.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Energy Strategy 2. Expand renewable energy generation and use.

23

https://rmi.org/its-time-to-incentivize-residential-heat-pumps

Page | 83

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FOCUS THREE: OUR CONSUMPTION

Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence on
Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy Use

Carbon
Dioxide
Removal

Clean
our energy
sources

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

consumption
and waste
management

We will manage our consumption through:

Page | 84

Clean
Electricity



Reduced building energy use



Sustainable consumption and waste management

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Reduced Building Energy Use
Flagstaff will significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from heating, cooling and
powering buildings.

Figure 11: Projected emissions reductions from clean electricity and reducing building energy use,
compared to the emissions in the business as usual scenario.

WHAT IT MEANS
Reducing energy demand is one of the quickest and most affordable methods to reduce emissions from
buildings.
Whether for new construction or for retrofitting existing buildings, energy efficiency solutions are well
understood. Weatherization improves the building envelope and insulation, while other solutions utilize
technology (i.e. smart thermostats, energy efficient appliances, distributed energy storage) to optimize
energy use. The payback on retrofits, depending on the building, is five to seven years on average. 24
Reductions in building energy demand will provide immediate emissions reductions from the use of both
electricity and natural gas, while also making our homes and businesses more comfortable to live in and
more affordable to operate. While APS is making the transition to 100% carbon free electricity (see Clean
Electricity Target Area on page 71), reducing building energy demand will also improve the ability of the

24

https://drawdown.org/solutions/building-retrofitting

Page | 85

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
Utility to meet demand with cleaner fuel mixes. Reducing building energy demand is especially critical
given the various fuel switching strategies in this Plan (see Building Fuel Switching and Electric Mobility
Target Areas on page 77 and page 66, respectively). Fuel switching without energy efficiency measures will
increase electrical demand significantly. Fuel switching combined with energy efficiency can temper or
even reduce electrical demand, thus making it easier and less expensive to bring online the magnitude of
clean electricity infrastructure required to meet our future needs.
What about water?
Producing the water that arrives at our taps and then treating it after its use utilizes energy at
every stage of our water production and treatment processes. In Flagstaff, water is particularly
energy intensive, as many of the wells we use to obtain drinking water are as deep as 1,000 feet or
more. Water operations comprise most of the City of Flagstaff’s energy use.
Energy use is carefully monitored by the City of Flagstaff’s Water Services staff, who work to
increase the energy efficiency of Flagstaff’s water management processes. Staff also work to
manage Flagstaff’s water supply, plan for the future, and reduce water use through conservation –
more on those efforts can be found at www.Flagstaff.AZ.gov/water.
This Plan, and the City’s building energy use reduction efforts, consider water use to fall under the
umbrella of building energy use. As water used in a home or a business represents energy use,
water efficiency and conservation contribute to reduced community energy use. City staff will
work across divisions to coordinate water and energy conservation initiatives.

HOW WE'LL GET THERE
Emissions from buildings currently constitute approximately 44% of all community emissions. To reduce
energy demand Flagstaff must set aggressive reduction targets for both new and existing building stock.
Due to their long lifetimes and the rate of growth in Flagstaff, it will be important to integrate more energyefficiency technologies and infrastructure into new construction in the near-term through policies,
incentives and economics. The 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan forecast a goal of a net-zero
construction code for all new residential and commercial buildings by 2040. This goal will be accelerated to
2030 with an intermediary glidepath to net-zero building code in 2025. While it is important for new
buildings to be energy efficient, today's existing building stock is expected to make up over 90% of the
community buildings in 2030. Therefore, it will be critical that a significant number of these buildings,
especially the older and lower performing ones, undergo building retrofits to both reduce their energy
demand and improve their comfort and utility for their occupants. This Plan envisions and supports
performing home energy and electrification retrofits on 12,500 homes (~50% of the existing housing stock)
in addition to a significant number of building retrofits in the commercial sector. Performing retrofits at
this scale will be an enormous opportunity for jobs and partner collaboration.

Page | 86

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: Three in ten households in the US face challenges in meeting their energy needs. 25 Low-income
households face disproportionately higher energy burden – or the portion of gross household income
spent on energy costs. According to the Department of Energy, low-income households spend 8.6% of their
income on energy, compared to 3% for other households. 26 In Flagstaff, low-income households spend
13% of their income on energy each year; higher-income households spend between 1% and 3%. 27 This is a
large energy burden that leads to a high cost of living, limited disposable income and financial insecurity
for Flagstaff’s low-income families.
Purchasing new, energy efficient technology or appliances often requires a significant up-front financial
investment. While all households can benefit from the return on investment provided by energy efficiency,
high up-front costs meant that not all households can access this investment opportunity that helps save
money over the long term. This inequity can persist in incentives, where only those who have access to
upfront funds to purchase the appliance are able to access the financial incentive.
Climate action in this target area will work to reduce the energy burden for low-income families, and work
to provide emissions and cost-saving benefits equitably throughout the community.
Adaptation: More efficient buildings can help Flagstaff residents be more prepared for more extreme
weather, like extreme heat, large winter storms, or extreme cold. By reducing the energy used in homes
and other buildings, energy efficiency investments can lead to lower heating and cooling energy use, which
leads to lower energy bills and lower reliance on outside fuels, which can be helpful during extreme
weather.
Heat pumps are a climate mitigation tool that help residents heat their homes using electricity instead of
fossil fuels. Heat pumps can also be used as air conditioners, which can help people with health conditions
get through Flagstaff’s hottest summer days, but also use a lot of energy. Currently, most homes in
Flagstaff do not have air conditioning. As more homes in Flagstaff install heat pumps, more residents will
have access to air conditioning, creating the possibility for increased energy use in the summer months.
Energy-efficient building practices and demand management will be needed to ensure that Flagstaff’s
buildings are well-insulated and require lower amounts of both heating and cooling.

https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=37072
https://www.energy.gov/eere/slsc/low-income-community-energy-solutions
27
https://www.energy.gov/eere/slsc/maps/lead-tool
25
26

Page | 87

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
GOALS
Goal

YEAR

Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from heating, cooling and
powering buildings by 34% from BAU.

2030

Reduce electricity usage by building sector:

2030

Industrial:
Commercial:
Residential:

0% reduction
0% reduction
4% reduction

Reduce natural gas usage by building sector:
Industrial:
Commercial:
Residential:

Page | 88

0% reduction
20% reduction
62% reduction

2030

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE REDUCED BUILDING ENERGY USE
BE-1: Achieve net zero energy City of Flagstaff facilities.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Perform a full-scale energy audit and implement recommended energy retrofits for all City of
Flagstaff facilities from this audit.
Design and obtain funding for new City of Flagstaff Affordable housing sites to be net zero energy.
When retrofits at existing City of Flagstaff Affordable housing sites are made, implement efficiency
upgrades to move the sites towards net zero energy.

BE-2: By 2030, require new homes in Flagstaff to be net zero energy homes.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Implement progressively more aggressive building codes, requiring net zero energy buildings.
City staff should ensure the City's building code is reflective of rapidly changing technology related
to energy efficiency, renewable energy, energy or battery storage, and electrification.
Provide incentives to builders to construct net zero energy buildings, prior to a net zero energy
code requirement. Use these buildings to showcase the feasibility, benefits and innovation.
Require large new buildings and new neighborhood developments to submit carbon neutrality
alignment statements, to increase collaboration between developers and the City and to
communicate how developments contribute to the City's carbon neutrality goals.

BE-3: Reduce energy use in existing buildings.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

Incentivize and subsidize home energy efficiency retrofits on a sliding scale based on income.
Establish a revolving loan fund for energy efficiency upgrades to make affordable financing
available to both commercial and residential properties.
Work with real estate energy partners to obtain energy efficiency information during real estate
transactions, such as requiring home energy efficiency scores when homes are sold or ownership
is transferred.
Catalyze energy efficiency and more affordable living in rental housing, increasing energy
efficiency in rental homes through incentives and potential minimum standards.
Expand energy efficiency outreach, including energy efficiency workshops, education on energy
price signals, and how to navigate time-of-use pricing.

Page | 89

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Why net zero energy homes?
Net zero energy homes are tied to the electric grid, and use a low amount of energy due to being
air-tight, well-insulated and energy efficient. They typically incorporate some sort of renewable
energy generation on-site, like solar panels. Due to this low energy use paired with energy
production, these homes produce as much renewable energy as they consume over the course of a
year, leaving the occupants with a net zero energy bill, and a carbon-free home. 28 Homes can be
built as net zero ready, meaning they can become net zero with the installation of solar panels.
Net zero energy ready homes are already being built in Flagstaff – the Crestview neighborhood, by
the developer Capstone, is comprised of all net zero energy ready homes – including the homes
participating in the City of Flagstaff Community Land Trust Program.
The Department of Energy (DOE) has a Zero Energy Ready Home Program, to recognize ZERH
homes and ensure “outstanding levels of energy savings, comfort, health, and durability.” 29
The DOE promotes the following benefits from zero energy ready homes:
- Improved home experience and lower ownership costs,
- Benefits to home builders, including customer satisfaction and lower liability,
- Support of a more resilient electric grid with lower peak demand, and
- Approximately $150 billion of utility savings and signification jobs benefits. 30

Legislative change
This strategy would benefit from enabling legislation to allow:
1). Energy use disclosure and benchmarking for all buildings, and
2). An Arizona PACE program to encourage property owners to make energy-related
investments and upgrades to buildings using a special property assessment, for both
residential and commercial properties.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Energy Focus Area Strategy 1. Improve energy efficiency in all sectors.

Learn more: https://zeroenergyproject.org/buy/zero-energy-homes
https://www.energy.gov/eere/buildings/zero-energy-ready-homes
30
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/08/f77/Zero%20Energy%20Ready%20Homes%20Why%2C%20What%2C%20and%20How.pdf
28
29

Page | 90

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Sustainable Consumption and Waste Management
Flagstaff will move towards sustainable consumption, divert more materials from the
landfill through reuse and recycling, and then reduce emissions from the landfill.

Figure 12: Projected emissions reductions from solid waste management, compared to the emissions in
the business as usual scenario.

WHAT IT MEANS
Given our current sector-based inventory methods (see page 106), community emissions related to solid
waste come almost entirely from landfill gas, a natural byproduct of the decomposition of organic
material. Landfill gas tends to be 40-60% methane, with the rest being carbon dioxide and other non-

Page | 91

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
methane organic compounds. Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that is 28-36 times more effective than
carbon dioxide at trapping heat in the atmosphere over a 100-year period. 31

HOW WE'LL GET THERE
While reported emissions related to solid waste account for approximately 16% of Flagstaff's current
emissions profile, the impact of waste and consumption is likely to be significantly underestimated due to
the fact that Flagstaff currently conducts a sector-based rather than a consumption-based inventory (see
the Sector-Based Greenhouse Gas Inventory section on page 107). Therefore, many of the prevention
actions in this Target Area are expected to have unmeasured beneficial impacts beyond even what can be
captured using our current methods of measurement. Additionally, many of the actions in this Target Area
offer environmental, economic, and social co-benefits. For example, actions such as rescuing edible food
from the landfill and redistributing to food donation programs not only reduces methane emissions, it also
helps to address hunger in local communities.
The main strategy in this Plan for managing landfill emissions
calls for installing gas collection systems at the Cinder Lake
The City of Flagstaff ReThink Waste
Landfill. This should include pre-installation of a horizontal
Challenge is a program that joins
gas collection system during the construction of the next
innovation, equity, and waste
landfill cell, which is expected to get underway in the next 5-7
minimization. By providing
years. This next landfill cell will also be lined, which will help
funding to innovative projects
maximize the efficacy of the pre-installed gas collection
focused on decreasing waste,
system. Retroactive installation of a gas collection system
entrepreneurs are better able to
within the currently open and unlined cells, which are
implement strategies to decrease
expected to be closed and capped between 2026-2029, may
waste in the Flagstaff community.
not achieve optimal collection efficiency, but this voluntary
action would be supported by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality. Analysis will need to be conducted to determine the gas collection efficiencies that
can be achieved for these unlined cells, and the emissions and reductions projected can be updated as
more data becomes available. Flaring was chosen over other potential options (i.e. gas to energy) for the
currently open cells after assessing the expected returns and determining that they did not justify the
increased price. Flaring has been shown to have a 98% methane destruction efficiency, meaning that it
destroys 98% of the gas collected.
Finally, it should be noted that the ReThink Waste Plan was adopted by resolution in 2018, the same year as
the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan (CAAP). These two plans were largely aligned in terms of goals and
timelines. Given that the Climate Emergency Declaration has advanced the goals and timelines of the
CAAP, the ReThink Waste Plan should also be updated. Indeed, the actions in this target area should be
considered a starting point and sneak peek for some of the updates to come in the ReThink Waste Plan.

31

https://www.epa.gov/lmop/basic-information-about-landfill-gas

Page | 92

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: Programs to incentivize decreasing waste and overall consumption can be financially beneficial to
low and middle income households that produce little waste. The Pay as You Throw pilot program is an
example of this, where those who produce little waste will pay less than those who create more. However,
some low- and middle-income households inherently produce more waste due to factors such as family
size, age, or disability. These factors must therefore be considered when creating and implementing waste
reduction programs in order to create effective policies that decrease waste in an equitable manner.
Adaptation: Ideas behind decreasing waste and consumption sometimes rely on purchasing reusable
items, under the assumption that all people can afford to buy these items. However, we can learn from the
most sustainable among us - those who have decreased waste out of necessity; reusing jars and containers
instead of purchasing a new Hydro Flask bottle or package of Tupperware actually does more to decrease
consumption. Flagstaff can learn from the ingrained resilience and wisdom of our elders that exists within
our community.

GOALS
Goal

YEAR

Reduce methane emissions from the landfill by up to 98%

2030

Ensure equal access to recycling services across Flagstaff.

2030

80% community waste prevented and diverted from landfill

2030

Page | 93

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND WASTE
MANAGEMENT
MM-1: Manage emissions from the Cinder Lake Landfill.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.

Establish gas capture and flare systems at the Cinder Lake Landfill.
Explore the feasibility of a large-scale digestion or other composting mechanisms.

MM-2: Encourage sustainable consumption.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.

Expand educational programming to encourage sustainable consumption by residents and
businesses.
Collaborate with local and regional partners to reduce construction and demolition waste.
Encourage low-carbon food consumption.

MM-3: Divert more waste from the landfill.
Opportunities for action:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Page | 94

Convert the materials recovery facility (MRF) to a transfer station to expand allowable recyclable
materials and increase diversion from landfill.
Utilize MRF space for a Center for Hard to Recycle Materials (CHARM). Host regular community
events and drop off days at this facility and partner with businesses to divert the material.
Incorporate residential "Pay as you Throw" volumetric pricing to divert more waste from the
landfill.
Complete waste characterization study to identify recoverable materials that create economic
development opportunities.

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

MM-4: Reduce organic waste going to the landfill and feed hungry people.
Opportunities for action:
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

Expand composting services to reduce food waste and yard waste going to the landfill, starting
with a drop off composting service for residential customers and eventually offering curbside
collection service.
Offer a composting service to commercial customers.
Expand educational programming to prevent wasted food in households and businesses.
Work with local partners and provide municipal support and resources to maximize food rescue
and redirect that food to help address food insecurity in our community
Incentivize or mandate the use of locally produced compost to increase demand.

The importance of developing a market for compost material
A composting operation large enough to accept Flagstaff's organic waste will be a major financial
investment. In order for the operation to be successful, there needs to be a robust market to sell finished
compost and drive greater organic waste diversion. If there is too little demand for compost material, the
price of the material will be too low to justify the investment. Thankfully, there are great examples of
jurisdictions across the county that we can look to for examples of how to boost demand for compost
material. States such as Washington, Oregon, and others require its use in highway development and
stormwater infrastructure, while other communities encourage the use of compost as part of new
housing developing. Not only does this help sustain composting programs but it also improves soil
quality and sequesters carbon.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Waste and Consumption Strategies:
Strategy 1. Increase waste diversion
Strategy 2. Support sustainable and accessible production and consumption.
Strategy 3. Optimize collection and disposal systems to minimize greenhouse gas
emissions.
Strategy 4. Improve data collection on consumption, waste, and diversion.

Page | 95

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

FOCUS FOUR: OUR COMMITMENT

Equitable
Systems

Strengthen
our
neighborhoods

Community
Resilience

Decreased
Dependence on
Cars

Uphold our
commitment

Building
Fuel
Switching

Electric
Mobility

Reduced
Building
Energy Use

Carbon
Dioxide
Removal

Page | 96

Carbon dioxide removal

Clean
Electricity

Manage our
consumption

Sustainable

consumption
and waste
management

We will uphold our commitment through:


Clean
our energy
sources

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Carbon Dioxide Removal
Flagstaff will achieve carbon neutrality by first measuring the remaining emissions
produced by our community each year, and then balancing with an equivalent amount
of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) through local and regional initiatives. If local and
regional initiatives are unable to fully satisfy the community’s CDR obligation, Flagstaff
will explore options for obtaining carbon dioxide removal certificates (CORCs) or other
high-quality offsets.

WHAT IT MEANS
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) refers to the process of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
Removed carbon dioxide can be stored in terrestrial, geological, and oceanic reservoirs and can be stored
in products. Removed carbon dioxide may also be utilized, but if this utilization returns the carbon dioxide
to the atmosphere, the removal would no longer qualify as a negative emissions initiative – though the net
impact may well contribute to reducing community emissions, which is also a productive outcome when
striving toward carbon neutrality. There are numerous established and emerging approaches for
accomplishing CDR, each associated with a different deployment maturity, permanence of storage, and
drawdown potential, as well as considerations of costs, location, co-benefits, risks, and uncertainties.

HOW WE’LL GET THERE
Since emissions will still be produced in Flagstaff by the year 2030, carbon dioxide removal (CDR) will be
necessary to achieve carbon neutrality. The magnitude of CDR required will ultimately depend on, and be
equivalent to, the amount of emissions still produced each year. If all other local reduction strategies
outlined in this Plan meet projections, then it is expected that there will be over 471,000 MTCO2e still
produced locally in 2030.

Figure 13: The two sides of the carbon neutrality scale: On the left side are the remaining emissions still
produced (after reductions). On the right side is carbon dioxide removal. The two sides of the scale must
balance out to achieve carbon neutrality.

Page | 97

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
Assuming that local reductions continue each year beyond 2030, then the annual CDR obligation required
to achieve carbon neutrality will likewise decrease over time. It should always be kept in mind, reductions
need to be prioritized and that (using the framework of the graphic above) the smaller that we can make
the left side of the scale in 2030, or any other year, the smaller our CDR obligation.
As a City and community, we will first investigate the feasibilities of standing up and supporting local
carbon dioxide removal (CDR) initiatives. Potential CDR projects may include nature-based initiatives on
City lands and Open Spaces that remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store it in biomass and
soils. These could include urban forestry projects in areas of town that lack canopy and are vulnerable to
the impacts of heat, or regenerative practices on riparian or degraded lands. We may also explore CDR
initiatives that support the removal of waste and liability biomass from our surrounding forests – such as
bioenergy or biochar. In addition to performing CDR, many of these initiatives would also reduce the risk of
catastrophic forest fire as well as protecting, restoring, or otherwise supporting numerous ecosystems,
allowing them to better provide all their many ecosystem services more effectively. We may even consider
being an early adopter and making investments in the deployment of technology supported CDR initiatives
including projects that provide long-term storage in materials or geologic formations. In developing the
portfolio of initiatives that will be needed, the City may look to take the lead on some CDR projects, while
other efforts may result from collaborations and perhaps even requests for proposals (RFPs). We also
expect that the market will play a role and that some businesses will find opportunity in the CDR space.
If we are unable to meet our full CDR obligation with the portfolio of local initiatives that we develop, we
will also have to consider obtaining carbon dioxide removal certificates (CORCs) or other high-quality
offsets from third party vendors to satisfy the remaining obligation. The markets for CORCs are in early
development and the price forecast is highly uncertain. Offsets have had a checkered history in terms of
verification, additionality and permanence and are generally regarded as being insufficient to the problem.
In order to address these limitations, Flagstaff will evaluate potential offsets using the Oxford Offsetting
Principles 32 in order to ensure that they are high quality.

THE OXFORD OFFSETTING PRINCIPLES

32



Cut emissions, use high quality offsets, and regularly revise offsetting strategy as bast practice
evolves.



Shirt to carbon removal offsetting.



Shift to long-lived storage.



Support the development of net zero aligned offsetting.

https://www.smithschool.ox.ac.uk/publications/reports/Oxford-Offsetting-Principles-2020.pdf

Page | 98

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

EQUITY AND ADAPTATION CONSIDERATIONS
Equity: According to the EPA, “A growing body of research points to “intra-urban” heat islands, or areas
within a city that are hotter than others due to the uneven distribution of heat-absorbing buildings and
pavements, and cooler spaces with trees and greenery. These differences can result from disparities in the
way communities are planned, developed, and maintained. There are often correlations between hotter
neighborhoods and demographic characteristics of residents, with factors such as race and income often
playing a role in who bears the brunt of extreme heat.”
Initiatives that increase urban and residential canopy cover and decrease the “heat island effect” are just
one example of projects that can have both equity and carbon dioxide removal benefits. Biochar and
compost initiatives could also be designed to improve food security for vulnerable residents while also
capturing carbon in soils.
Adaptation: There are numerous nature-based CDR approaches that can contribute to improved forest
and soil health. Healthy forests provide numerous ecosystem services that will help our community be
more prepared and resilient to a changing climate, including protecting water resources. Contributing to
local forest health also decreases the risk of catastrophic wildfire, which presents risks to both property
and human health.

What about our trees?
The City of Flagstaff has numerous natural landscapes that act as carbon sinks, removing and storing
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In addition to the ponderosa pine forests within City limits, Flagstaff
has 3,300 acres of legally designated open spaces, as well as the Rio de Flag corridor and associated
wetlands. At this time, we don’t yet measure any CDR taking place within these natural landscapes. Over
the next two years we will collaborate with partners and organizations (including NAU, the Forest Service,
ICLEI) that are working on protocols for determining what (and how much) existing nature-based CDR is
appropriate for inclusion in our inventory. It will probably be appropriate to consider and quantify CDR
taking place on City owned Open Space, since we manage those areas and their continued protection will
allow the CDR these spaces perform to be preserved - in addition to allowing them to perform their many
other ecosystem services. It will not likely be appropriate to simply claim ‘dibs’ on the CDR happening in
nearby forests that we aren’t involved in managing or protecting. Once we have protocols in place, we
expect to find that some of the projected 471,000 MTCO2e CDR obligation may already “be on the
scale.” However even if the entire area of Flagstaff were covered in forest, this would not satisfy our
expected CDR obligation – our carbon footprint is greater than our geographical footprint.

Page | 99

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
GOALS
Goal

YEAR

Remove an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere as is produced by the community. If all reduction goals
are met, this obligation projects to be approximately 471,000 MTCO2e
in 2030. This number can be reduced annually as greater local
reductions continue to be achieved.

2030

STRATEGY
CD-1: Develop a portfolio of local and regional carbon dioxide removal initiatives to
meet Flagstaff's commitment to carbon neutrality.
Opportunities for action:
1.

The City's 8000 acre Red Gap Ranch property east of Flagstaff on the I-40 corridor is a possible site
for an innovative high desert carbon dioxide removal and sequestration project.

2.

Explore the feasibility of smaller-scale regenerative agriculture, meadows, and forests as
sequestration sinks in Flagstaff's high desert environment.

3.

Collaborate with Northern Arizona University and other governmental organizations and nonprofits in Northern Arizona and on the Colorado Plateau to explore opportunities for regional
initiatives that achieve carbon dioxide removal and sequestration.

CD-2: If local carbon dioxide removal projects are insufficient, obtain high-quality
carbon offsets and CO2 Removal Certificates (CORCs).
Opportunities for action:
1.

Evaluate potential certificates and offsets using the Oxford Offsetting Principles.

2.

Purchase certificates and offsets that align with Flagstaff’s priorities and the Oxford Offsetting
Principles.

Connections to the Flagstaff 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan:
Natural Environment Strategy 1. Protect existing forests, resources, and meaningful
open spaces.

Page | 100

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

CDR First Steps
At this time, this Plan does not offer a prescriptive vision for the exact carbon dioxide removal
portfolio that Flagstaff will develop and support over the next nine years. That work will require
developing regional partnerships, identifying opportunities for collaboration as well as funding.
At this time, we have a sense of how much CDR is likely to be necessary to achieve carbon
neutrality, based on the emissions reductions anticipated. And so now we need to start doing the
groundwork to stand-up and support local CDR projects to meet this obligation. We expect that
part of this development will likely involve conducting feasibility studies on various project
proposals. We also know that we will need to start deploying initiatives in the next few years to
give them time to develop and scale. One thing we do know – it pays to be proactive. Time and
again we see that it is the communities that have done the groundwork that are able to take
advantage of opportunities – for funding, collaboration, or otherwise. By adopting the Climate
Emergency Declaration and thus kicking off the discussion about carbon dioxide removal in our
community, we have made our interests clear to potential collaborators, and we are positioning
ourselves to be uniquely prepared to take advantage of opportunities as they arise.

Page | 101

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

V. BACKGROUND
This background section provides information on climate change impacts in Flagstaff and how Flagstaff
contributes to climate change via greenhouse gas emissions. This information provides a foundation for
our actions. More details on both topics are available on the City of Flagstaff climate action website, at
www.flagstaff.az.gov/climate.
In this chapter:


The Climate Emergency Declaration



Climate change in Flagstaff



Flagstaff’s greenhouse gas emissions

Page | 102

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY DECLARATION
The Flagstaff City Council adopted the Climate Emergency Declaration on June 23, 2020. The declaration
establishes eight resolutions:
Section 1. The City of Flagstaff declares that a climate emergency threatens our City, region, state, nation,
civilization, humanity and the natural world, and recognizes the need for a dramatic increase in its
ambition to combat climate change, so that it meets or exceeds the current recommendations of the
foremost climate scientists working around the world.
Section 2. The City of Flagstaff commits to its own City-wide transition and climate emergency mobilization
effort, utilizing Flagstaff's Climate Action and Adaptation Plan as the foundational framework in
recognition of accelerating climate changes and prioritizing appropriate funding for its implementation.
Section 3. The City of Flagstaff commits to educating residents and especially Flagstaff's youth about the
current climate emergency and inspiring action.
Section 4. The City of Flagstaff underscores the need for full community participation, and recognizes that
the residents of Flagstaff, and community organizations and other such allies will be integral to and in the
leadership of the mobilization effort.
Section 5. The City of Flagstaff commits to keeping the concerns of vulnerable communities, minorities,
and those experiencing poverty central to all transition and climate emergency mobilization efforts and to
facilitate the active participation of such communities.
Section 6. The City of Flagstaff joins a nationwide call for an emergency mobilization collaborative effort, in
full partnership with surrounding Tribal nations and traditional agricultural communities, at all levels of
government to prioritize adaptation and mitigation in relation to climate change while making all
government decisions.
Section 7. The City of Flagstaff will take steps to revise the goals outlined in the Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan to be in alignment with the United Nations' November 2019 Emissions Gap Report, while
maintaining equal emphasis on adaptation, mitigation, and equity, by advancing the Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan's goals to achieve carbon neutrality by 2030.
Section 8. The City of Flagstaff calls on the State of Arizona, the United States of America, and all
governments and peoples worldwide to initiate a transition and climate emergency mobilization effort to
mitigate global warming and create high-quality, good-paying jobs with comprehensive benefits for those
who will be impacted by this transition.

Page | 103

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Climate change in Flagstaff
The climate is changing, due largely to human-caused greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. These emissions
come from a variety of sources: the cars we drive, the energy we use, the things we use, and even the food we
eat. These emissions, once released, stay in the atmosphere, leading to abnormal weather patterns and severe
weather events.
Flagstaff emits greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere, therefore contributing to global climate
change. Emissions in Flagstaff come from three main sources: our energy and electricity sources, how we get
around and build our town, and the things we buy and throw away. The chart below shows the portion of our
emissions that come from each of these sources (pie chart below).
We get this information about Flagstaff’s greenhouse gas emissions from our yearly greenhouse gas inventory.
This is a common practice where municipalities itemize and track their annual greenhouse gas emissions. This
information tells us where our mitigation efforts are successful, and which areas need more work.

ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES
Coconino County is already experiencing increased temperatures, and can expect further increases in the
future. Flagstaff can also expect to see:
 Increased wildfire risk


Increased drought



More flooding



More insects in the forest and the city



Damage to our water supply and quality



Less snow and more rain

For more information on climate change in Flagstaff, view Flagstaff’s Climate Profile available at
www.Flagstaff.az.gov/climate. 33
23F

https://www.flagstaff.az.gov/DocumentCenter/View/57498/ClimateProfile?bidId=#:~:text=Since%201950%2C%20Flagstaff%20has%20experienced,risen%20above%2090%C2
%B0%20F.&text=In%201974%20and%201990%20temperatures,the%2090%C2%B0%20F%20threshold.

33

Page | 104

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Figure 14. Average annual temperatures for Coconino County from 1895–2017. Orange lines indicate years
where the average annual temperature was above average. Blue lines indicate years in which the average
annual temperature was below average.

SOCIAL SYSTEMS CHANGES
We can also expect to see a variety of changes to our social systems, including:


Increased allergens and longer allergy seasons



Increased susceptibility to insect-borne illness



Decrease visitation for snowplay



Heat-related illnesses



Regional growth that stresses Flagstaff’s housing

To learn more about Flagstaff’s vulnerabilities, review the Climate Profile at
www.Flagstaff.AZ.gov/climate .

Page | 105

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

Flagstaff’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
HOW WE MEASURE OUR CONTRIBUTION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
To reach carbon neutrality, we must understand how Flagstaff contributes to climate change through
greenhouse gas emissions. Each year the Flagstaff Sustainability Office completes a community-scale
greenhouse gas emissions inventory. This inventory calculates the emissions produced by the activities
taking place in our community. Activities we can measure include the release of greenhouse gas emissions
when fossil fuels are burned for transportation and energy, when solid waste breaks down, and when water
and wastewater are produced and treated.

2019 Flagstaff Community Emissions

Figure 15. Greenhouse gas emissions from activities across the Flagstaff community in 2019.

Our greenhouse gas emissions fall into four main categories:
1.

2.
3.

Page | 106

Building Energy contributes to approximately 50% of our emissions. This category represents
emissions coming from the use of electricity and natural gas in our homes, and commercial and
industrial buildings. Most of these emissions are split between commercial and residential
buildings.
Transportation contributes to approximately 30% of our emissions. This primarily represents
emissions from the fuels we use to get around town in vehicles.
Solid waste contributes to 16%of Flagstaff’s emissions, primarily due to emissions from
Flagstaff’s Cinder Lake Landfill.

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
4.

Other emissions are produced from water and wastewater treatment (2%), upstream impacts of
activities (1%), and process and fugitive emissions (0.7%). ‘Upstream impacts of activities’ include
emissions that occur prior to the consumption of fossil fuels, from the point of resource extraction,
through processing and transportation. ‘Process and fugitive emissions’ result from the direct
release to the atmosphere of GHG compounds from various types of equipment and processes,
such as refrigeration and industrial processes. While smaller relative to other sectors, these
categories are all important to measure and manage to achieve our emissions reduction goals.

A SECTOR-BASED GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY
Currently our inventory methods do not allow us to account for the imported or embedded emissions in
the products that we consume. For example, an apple grown in Washington state and consumed in
Flagstaff will have embedded emissions associated with the growing, picking, packaging, and
transportation to Flagstaff that are not captured using our inventory method. For this reason, it is
reasonable to assume that the results of our sector-based inventory represent the minimum emissions
attributable to our community activities.

BASELINE: COMMUNITY EMISSIONS BEFORE CLIMATE ACTION
The City of Flagstaff has been tracking community greenhouse gas emissions since 2006. Since then, the
way we track emissions has evolved. Today, the City uses the U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and
Reporting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. This global standard for community-level greenhouse gas
inventories creates a reliable methodology that enables Flagstaff to compare its emissions to other
communities. Methods and protocols will continue to evolve and improve over time, as will data collection
and availability.

Figure 16. Greenhouse gas emissions by sector for 2016, 2018 and 2019.

Page | 107

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
The apparent jump observed in 2019 should be considered with the following factors in mind. In 2019:


Contractual natural gas was accounted for the first time, increasing the emissions of the industrial
and commercial sectors.



The treatment of daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT) was updated, resulting in a net reduction in
transportation emissions.



The protocol for the waste sector was updated from an in-jurisdiction protocol to a methanecommitment protocol, increasing the annual emissions accounted and creating a framework with
greater impact potential for waste diversion efforts.



2019 was the first year that Upstream Impacts of Activities were included in the Flagstaff inventory.

Each year, the annual greenhouse gas inventory methodology will be updated to utilize the best available
practices. When possible and prudent, Flagstaff will also work to retroactively and transparently apply
updates and improvements to relevant projections-based models so that their baselines and forecasts
might better reflect current methods and data. Indeed, to be more consistent with the 2019 data and
methods for buildings and transportation, the 2016 baseline used for the carbon neutrality modeling was
amended to 759,000 MTCO2e. This is a lower baseline than was reported in the 2018 Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan. (See the conversation about the projected 44% reduction in emissions on page 10.)

For more information on our greenhouse gas inventory and how our methodology and
results have changed over time, see: www.flagstaff.az.gov/climate.

The first Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan was adopted in November 2018. While the 2019
inventory reflects emissions after adoption of the CAAP, it will take a few years for the impacts on our
emissions to be observed. For instance, in 2019, City Council adopted a building code that will ensure new
buildings use significantly less energy. However, this code was not mandatory until January 2020, and its
emissions reductions will only be truly apparent after buildings built in 2020 and beyond become a greater
portion of Flagstaff's building stock. 34

HOW DO WE MEASURE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS?
On average, Flagstaff contributes to the production of 759,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalents (MTCO2e).
In order to try to imagine what 759,000 MTCO2e might look like, one might first start by imagining a
piece of coal burning, smoking, and releasing CO2 emissions into the atmosphere. Now, if for some
reason we wanted to have a single-day bonfire that would emit the entirety of our annual emissions
- 759,000 MTCO2e - we would need to gather a lot of coal. Because we are in Flagstaff, we might
choose to use our local train tracks to help us bring in all the coal we need for this bonfire.
If we were to fill every railcar with coal, we would require an impossibly long train made up of 4,168
railcars’
worth of coal. This would stretch over 41 miles. If you were to get caught behind the gates
34
EPA’s greenhouse gas equivalencies calculator: https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gaswhen this train came by, even if it could travel at the full legal in-town speed limit, you would be
equivalencies-calculator
waiting at the gates for nearly an hour.34

Page | 108

THE FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

THANK YOU
Climate Emergency Steering Committee
- Rick Barrett, Engineering, City of Flagstaff
- Greg Clifton, City Manager, City of Flagstaff
- Justin Emerick, Water Services, City of
Flagstaff
- Dan Folke, Community Development, City
of Flagstaff
- Joe Galli, Chamber of Commerce
- Geoffrey Gross, Coconino County
- Todd Hanson, Public Works, City of
Flagstaff
- Gail Jackson, Economic Collaborative of
Northern Arizona (ECONA)

- Natalie Jacobs, Citizens' Climate Lobby
- Megan Kelly, Grand Canyon Trust
- Dara Marks Marino, Climate Activist
- Dave McCain, City of Flagstaff
Sustainability Commission
- Dave McIntire, Economic Vitality, City of
Flagstaff
- Kate Morley, Mountain Line
- Matt Muchna, Northern Arizona University
- Amanda Ormond, Ormond Group, LLC
- Judson Tillinghast, APS
- Jed Westover, Loven Contracting

Flagstaff Sustainability Office - Staff and Interns
- Ramón DC Alatorre, Climate & Energy Coordinator
- Nicole Antonopoulos, Sustainability Director
- Jillian Goulet, Climate Engagement Coordinator
- Dylan Lenzen, Sustainability Specialist
- Marissa Molloy, Administrative Assistant
- Jenny Niemann, Climate & Energy Specialist
- Stephanie Arcusa, GHG Emissions Intern
- Lee Bryant, Climate Engagement Coordinator
- Deirdre Conroy, Community Resilience VISTA
- Anona Miller, Transportation & Climate Intern
- Marie Nabors, Carbon Sequestration Intern
- Isabelle Wilhelm, Transportation & Climate Intern
Note: both current and former staff and interns are listed.

Technical emissions consulting provided by the Cascadia Consulting Group

Page | 109

FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

APPENDIX A
The information in this Appendix is intended to give more detailed insights into some of the actions and
ambition (i.e. number of retrofits) that were used to arrive at our carbon neutrality calculations.
Path to Carbon Neutrality – outcomes modeled
On-road transportation:
Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) set to be held at 2019
levels [1.59M/day (internal)]

30% Remaining miles electric (or zero tailpipe)

2000 home solar systems installed (5kW each) for
10MW distributed residential

Example City Supporting Actions in the Model
*20% increase in residential density
*25% decrease in distance to transit
*ATMP fully funded and implemented, including
portions that have yet to identify dedicated
funding sources; Assumes the Primary Bikeways
Network is fully in place
*All new sedans and SUV City of Flagstaff (COF)
fleet vehicles till be electric vehicles (EV) or zero
emissions vehicles starting in 2022
*50 EV charging stations provided by COF for
community.
*Additional EV charging stations as needed for fleet
operations.
**Impact Gap! Some of this will have to happen
without COF support. The 30% goal was
modeled, either the market needs to fill the gap or
COF will need to add additional support. OR BOTH.
*Facilitate a twice annual Northern Solar Co-op
with SUN
*New home building codes

Commercial sector brings on 10MW solar by 2030
Industrial sector brings on 5MW solar by 2030
Includes a 50MW solar installation at RGR + 10MW
solar at the Cinder Lakes Landfill
Assumes 25MW goes to make all COF electricity
renewable
Assumes COF works with APS to allow half of the
remaining solar to be acquired/attributed to the
commercial/residential sectors at 7.5MW/10MW
split.
Note: This does include some policy optimism that APS and ACC will allow.

Page | 110

*COF works with APS to get utility scale solar at
RGR

FLAGSTAFF CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN

COF 100% renewable electricity by 2025 (likely to
require 25-30MW); + energy efficiency and fuel
switching upgrades across the municipality by
2030

12,500 total residential retrofits ~50% of existing
homes.

*See utility scale solar above
*Complete COF municipal energy audit and ESCO
*Relaunch and retool the ARRA era residential
retrofit program: Design program for 4000 retrofits.
*Revolving loans funds
*Rebate programs

Note: This plan includes actions whereby the City
directly supports between 4000 – 5500 of these
retrofits.

**Impact Gap! Some of these have to happen
without COF support. The 12500 goal was
modeled. Either the utilities/State/Fed/market
needs to fill the gap or COF will need to add
additional support. OR BOTH.
*Revolving loan funds
*Rebate programs

25% of all commercial accounts (NOT COF or NAU)
get a deep energy efficiency retrofit

**Impact Gap! Some of these have to happen
without COF support. The 25% goal was
modeled. Either the utilities/State/Fed/market
needs to fill the gap or COF will need to add
additional support. OR BOTH.
*Revolving loan funds
*Rebate programs

15% of commercial accounts/establishments fully
electrify (not including COF or NAU)

**Impact Gap! Some of these have to happen
without COF support. The 15% goal was
modeled. Either the utilities/State/Fed/market
needs to fill the gap or COF will need to add
additional support. OR BOTH.
*COF installs system when current sequences are
capped.

Landfill gas collection and flaring is operational

Page | 111

