NOV CITY OF FLAGSTAFF
2018 CLIMATE ACTION & ADAPTATION PLAN

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

A Letter From The Mayor

A LETTER FROM THE MAYOR
To the Flagstaff community,
Thank you to all our community members that helped to develop Flagstaff’s first
community-wide Climate Action and Adaptation Plan. Climate change is one of the
greatest challenges we will face in the next century, and I am proud of Flagstaff for taking
initiative to prepare for that change.
We know the climate is changing. In future years, we will see warmer winters and
increasing threats to the Ponderosa pine ecosystem. We’ve heard stories from community
members about the changes they see in their own lives, from warmer summer days, to
more mosquitos and javelina sightings, to increases in housing demand pressures and
costs to keep ballfields green.
Flagstaff is an incredible place to live. This Plan recognizes the value of our community,
our thriving economy, our neighborhoods, and our people. To protect what we love about
this town, we need to ensure that we are prepared for change. The benefits of planning
ahead are innumerable: we see that value through forest treatments that help us avoid
catastrophic wildfire and flooding, as well as through investments in services that keep
our vulnerable community members safe.
This Plan was made by and for the Flagstaff community. Hundreds of residents
contributed through open houses, online surveys, and Coffee and Climate conversations.
The members of the Steering Committee represented a broad spectrum of viewpoints
and areas of expertise. Thank you for helping to make sure that this Plan reflects Flagstaff
and protects what we love, while preparing for climate change.
Now the work truly begins! I look forward to your involvement as we work to implement
this Plan, collaborate with partners to tackle climate challenges, and celebrate action by
individuals, businesses, neighborhoods, and the municipal organization. Flagstaff can be
both a climate leader and a wonderful place to live.

Sincerely,

Mayor Coral J. Evans

2 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The goals, strategies, and indicators presented in this plan were
developed through collaboration with residents of Flagstaff, City of
Flagstaff staff, and City Council members.
City Council Members
Coral Evans 		Mayor
Jamie Whelan		 Vice-Mayor
Celia Barotz 		Council member
Jim McCarthy		 Council member
Council member
Charlie Odegaard		
Scott Overton		
Council member
Eva Putzova 		Council member

CAAP Steering Committee Members
Amanda Acheson		
Sustainable Building Program, Coconino County
Nicole Antonopoulos
Sustainability Section, City of Flagstaff
Jeff Bousson 		American Conservation Experience
Jeff Hall			Lowell Observatory
Deb Harris			
Southside Community Association
Brad Hill			 Water Services Division, City of Flagstaff
George Koch 		Center for Ecosystem Science and Society,
				Northern Arizona University
Dave McIntire		 Community Investment Division, City of Flagstaff
Flagstaff Fire Department, City of Flagstaff
Matthew Millar		
Rick Moore 		Grand Canyon Trust
Northern Arizona Intergovernmental
Kate Morley			
				Public Transportation Authority (NAIPTA)
Amanda Ormond
The Ormond Group, LLC
Brian Petersen		 Geography, Planning, and Recreation, Northern 		
				Arizona University; City of Flagstaff Sustainability 		
				Commission
Ethnic Studies and Applied Indigenous Studies,
Daisy Purdy			
				Northern Arizona University
Brian Wallace 		
Arizona Public Service Electric Company (APS)
Jed Westover 		Loven Contracting

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 3

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Sincere
gratitude
to the
Flagstaff
community
for their
time and
dedication
to this
process.

City of Flagstaff Staff
Technical Committee
Tiffany Antol			
Planning and Development Services
Nicole Antonopoulos
Sustainability Section
Public Works Division
Andy Bertelsen		
Larrea Cottingham		
Sustainability Section
Sara Dechter			
Comprehensive Planning Program
Betsy Emery			Sustainability Section
Daniel Folke			
Community Development Division
Todd Hanson			
Solid Waste Section
Brad Hill			
Water Services Division
Jim Huchel			
Water Reclamation Section
Martin Ince			
Flagstaff Metropolitan Planning Organization
Carlton Johnson		
Comprehensive Planning Program
McKenzie Jones		
Sustainability Section
Tamara Lawless
Water Conservation Program
Dylan Lenzen			Sustainability Section
Gino Leoni			Parks Section
David McIntire		
Economic Community Investment Division
Jennifer Mikelson
Housing Section
Matthew Millar		
Flagstaff Fire Department
Shawn Mullaney		
Parks Section
Jenny Niemann
Sustainability Section
Amy Palmer			
Building Safety Program
Alaxandra Pucciarelli
Current Planning Program
Amanda Richardson
Stormwater Section
Sam Salgado			Sustaintability Section
Rebecca Sayers		
Parks and Recreation
Kevin Treadway		
City Manager’s Office
Climate Intern, Sustainability Section
Ryan Turley			
Robert Wallace		
Sustainability Section
Rebecca Wagner		
Sustainability Section
David Wessel 		
Flagstaff Metropolitan Planning Organization
Erin Young			
Water Resources Section

Prepared for the Flagstaff Community by
Cascadia Consulting Group
Andrea Martin		
Senior Associate
Nora Nickum			Director
Olivia Ashmoore 		
Project Assistant

4 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS
41
Implementation Strategy
The Implementation Strategy section details steps the
City and community will take to ensure successful plan
implementation.

7
Executive Summary
The Executive Summary provides a high level
overview of the Climate Action and Adaptation
Plan.

13

Kickstarting Implementation			42
Leadership					43
Expanding Community Capacity			
48
Operationalizing Equity				50
Accountability and Reporting			
52
Funding					54
Community Outreach				57
Community Action Guide			
59
Information Sources				61

63

Introduction

Strategies and Actions

The Introduction explains why and how the Climate
Action and Adaptation Plan was developed and provides
foundational information that informed the plan’s goals,
strategies, and actions.

The Strategies and Actions section presents the
near- and long-term actions for meeting plan goals,
organized by focus area.

Climate Change and Flagstaff			
14
Climate and Equity			
19
Flagstaff’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
20
The Benefits of a Climate Action			
25
and Adaptation Plan
Plan Overview					26
Overarching Vision				30
Overarching Goals and Targets			
31
Projected Emissions Reduction			
39

Natural Environment				64
Water Resources				75
Energy					83
Transportation and Land Use			
92
Waste and Consumption 			
105
Public Health, Services, Facilities and Safety
114
Economic Prosperity and Recreation		
122
Implementation Summary and Schedule		
131

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 5

The climate is changing.

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Acknowledgements

Climate change will affect
all facets of the Flagstaff
community. Anticipated
impacts in Flagstaff
include:

Less
snowpack

Longer
and hotter
summers

Greater risk
of wildfires
in our local
forests

Increased risk of
heat-related and
mosquito-borne
illnesses

More severe
drought
conditions

What is Flagstaﬀ going to do about it?
This Climate Action and Adaptation Plan will guide the Flagstaﬀ community in
preparing for climate risks, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and protecting
the wellbeing of residents for decades to come.

OUR GOALS

Reduce greenhouse
gas emissions
by

Make sure that our

neighborhoods,
resources
and economy
are more resilient

80%

by 2050, compared to
the 2016 emissions baseline.

WATER

6 |

ENERGY

TRANSPORTATION
& LAND USE

CITYPUBLIC
OF FLAGSTAFF
HEALTH
PROSPERITY &

WASTE &
CONSUMPTION

& SAFETY

prioritizes those
most impacted.

to climate change impacts.

To meet these goals, we are
taking action across sectors:

NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT

Address climate change
impacts in a manner that

RECREATION

9

equity
considerations

will guide the Plan
and ensure it is accessible
to the entire Flagstaﬀ
community.

The Climate Action and
Adaptation Plan will be

updated every

5
years

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
WHY DO WE NEED A PLAN?
Climate change is bringing changes in temperature, snowpack, water
availability, and wildfire risk to Flagstaff. These changes threaten
Flagstaff’s natural resources, economy, infrastructure, and quality of life.
This Climate Action and Adaptation Plan (Plan) is a strategic roadmap
to guide the Flagstaff community in preparing for climate risks,
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and protecting the wellbeing of
residents for decades to come.
CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS
Anticipated climate change impacts in Flagstaff include the following:

Hotter temperatures
•
•
•

Longer and hotter summers
Difficulty for sensitive populations and those without air conditioning
Increased risk of disease or illness from mosquitoes and other pests

Less snowpack
•
•
•

More rainfall instead of snowfall
Increased flooding of infrastructure and buildings from more intense
rainstorms
Increased risk of post-wildfire floods

Less healthy forests
•
•

Increased wildfire risk for local forests
Increased damage from forest pests due to hotter temperatures and
drought-stressed trees

Drier conditions
•
•

More severe drought conditions as temperatures rise
Lower water quality of reservoirs

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 7

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

FLAGSTAFF’S CONTRIBUTION TO CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
Transportation and building energy consumption combined make up nearly 90% of Flagstaff’s greenhouse
gas emissions. Residential-owned vehicles account for most of the transportation emissions. The
consumption of electricity and use of natural gas in homes, businesses, and industrial buildings account
for most of the energy emissions. Solid waste disposal, water and wastewater treatment, and fugitive
emissions (e.g., from leaks) make up relatively smaller portions of Flagstaff’s emissions.
Forecasts estimate that Flagstaff’s overall emissions will increase 34% by 2050 compared to a 2016 baseline
in the absence of climate action. This Climate Action and Adaptation Plan is designed to move us towards a
more sustainable future with lower emissions.

DEVELOPMENT OF THIS PLAN
This Plan was written with the community, for the community, through an extensive year-long community
and stakeholder engagement process that included:
»» Six public open houses attended by over 300 community members.
»» Three online surveys taken by over 250 community members.
»» Meetings with local organizations and neighborhood groups and collaborations with Coconino County representatives.
»» A 15-member citizen steering committee that provided input and feedback throughout the planning
process.
»» Workshops and meetings with technical experts, including 30 City staff across divisions, to vet and
evaluate plan targets, strategies, and actions.

8 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

VISION FOR 2050
Our vision for the future is that the Flagstaff community proactively
preserves the natural environment, works towards carbon neutrality,
and enhances the quality of life for all residents while ensuring equity,
self-sufficiency, and climate resiliency.
OVERARCHING GOALS
This Plan is designed to achieve the following climate goals:
»» Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050, compared to the 2016 emissions
baseline. We have interim targets of a 15% reduction by 2025 and a 30% reduction
by 2030.
»» Prepare the city’s neighborhoods, systems, and resources to be more resilient to
climate change impacts
»» Address climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most impacted and ensures that the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are equitably
distributed.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 9

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

STRATEGIES
This Plan recommends the following strategies to achieve City of Flagstaff’s overarching climate goals.

Natural Environment
STRATEGY 1. Protect existing forests, resources, and meaningful open spaces.
STRATEGY 2. Improve forest management through collaboration with regional partners.
STRATEGY 3. Educate the public on forest health risk and fire prevention.
STRATEGY 4. Encourage diverse native plant ecosystems in the built environment.
STRATEGY 5. Proactively manage for expected ecosystem transitions, including the potential
threats to ponderosa pine forests.

Water Resources
STRATEGY 1. Improve water infrastructure and expand water reuse.
STRATEGY 2. Improve ecosystem management for protection of water resources.
STRATEGY 3. Continue to support water conservation efforts across the Flagstaff community.
STRATEGY 4. Maximize passive and active community rainwater infiltration.

Energy
STRATEGY 1. Improve energy efficiency in all sectors.
STRATEGY 2. Expand renewable energy generation and use.
STRATEGY 3. Manage energy demand and consumption in residential, commercial, and
industrial sectors, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Transportation and Land Use
STRATEGY 1. Advance land use planning that minimizes the distance people have to travel by
car and that increases community resiliency.
STRATEGY 2. Prioritize, incentivize, and promote transportation by biking, walking, and
transit.
STRATEGY 3. Support the use of clean, energy-efficient vehicles.
STRATEGY 4. Encourage efficient driving practices.
STRATEGY 5. Manage transportation demand and reduce the frequency with which people
drive alone.
STRATEGY 6. Increase the supply of housing that is affordable to Flagstaff residents and
located in areas that support biking, walking, and transit access to goods and
services.

10 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

Waste and Consumption
STRATEGY 1. Increase waste diversion.
STRATEGY 2. Support sustainable and accessible production and consumption.
STRATEGY 3. Optimize collection and disposal systems to minimize greenhouse gas
emissions.
STRATEGY 4. Improve data collection on consumption, waste, and diversion.
STRATEGY 5. Increase local food production through partnerships and policies.

Public Health, Services, Facilities and Safety
STRATEGY 1. Identify and target support for at-risk populations.
STRATEGY 2. Adequately fund services for disaster preparedness.
STRATEGY 3. Increase community awareness of climate change risks and impacts and
improve community capacity to respond to new or expanding risks to public
health.
STRATEGY 4. Improve the resiliency of public infrastructure.
STRATEGY 5. Prepare for changing risks to public health due to climate change.

Economic Prosperity and Recreation
STRATEGY 1. Accelerate the transformation to a low-carbon economy that minimizes
emissions and can effectively adapt as the climate changes.
STRATEGY 2. Protect natural areas and ecosystem services that are most vulnerable to the
impacts of increased visitation and climate change.
STRATEGY 3. Plan for changes to recreation and respond to the impacts of climate change
on current Parks and Recreation facilities and operations.

ANTICIPATED EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS
The suite of strategies, taken together, will result in a 60% reduction in community greenhouse gas
emissions. While this falls short of the 80% reduction goal, it represents significant progress and an
important first step for climate action and adaptation by the City of Flagstaff. The Plan represents an
ongoing and iterative process; it will be updated and adjusted in regular increments as the 80% goal and
target date nears.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 11

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Executive Summary

IMPLEMENTATION
The Flagstaff City Council will be responsible for oversight of the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan and
will make policy decisions to support implementation of the Plan. City staff will integrate Plan goals and
strategies into City operations and decision-making and report back on progress.
Achievement of our climate goals will require that staff throughout the City of Flagstaff, community
members, business leaders, as well as students and institutions all take action. City staff will work to
support community members in taking climate action and involve residents in implementation decisions.
Because climate change most negatively affects vulnerable communities, implementation of this Plan
will strive to advance equity while addressing climate change. Nine equity considerations will guide the
implementation of climate actions and ensure that participation in climate action is accessible to the
entire Flagstaff community. Staff will work to establish partnerships with underserved communities, build
capacity for climate leadership across the community, and involve diverse community voices from the start
of any program.

FUTURE UPDATES
The 2018 Climate Action and Adaptation Plan represents the beginning of an ongoing and iterative
conversation between the City of Flagstaff and the community it serves. The City will work with the
community, local partners, and technical experts to update the Plan every five years, so that we can
respond to changing circumstances and learn from implementation challenges and successes.

12 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

INTRODUCTION

W

ith clean air, a cooler
climate, and beautiful
natural areas, Flagstaff is
a great place to live and
visit. Residents and visitors enjoy
the many amenities Flagstaff has to
offer—from the Flagstaff Urban Trails
System (FUTS) of bike and pedestrian
paths to the Grand Canyon to the
unique biodiversity of surrounding
forests. Home to Northern Arizona
University and world-class research
centers, Flagstaff residents are
informed, passionate, and engaged in
issues concerning their community.
Global greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions are changing the climate in
ways that threaten Flagstaff’s unique
amenities and way of life. Projected
changes in temperature, snowpack,
water availability, and wildfire risk
exacerbate existing challenges
and introduce new challenges
to Flagstaff’s natural resources,
economy, infrastructure systems, and
quality of life. While we can work to
reduce Flagstaff’s contributions to
those climate changes, preparing for
inevitable impacts of these changes
in Flagstaff is necessary.

By taking action now to reduce the
community’s emissions and prepare
for climate risks, the City of Flagstaff
can better protect the wellbeing of
its residents for decades to come.
There are many community benefits
to climate action, while the cost of
inaction is incredibly high.
This Climate Action and Adaptation
Plan (Plan) creates a vision and
strategic roadmap for the Flagstaff
community to address these risks by
reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and adapting to a changing climate.
It was written by the community,
for the community—building on our
knowledge of projected local climate
changes, sources of greenhouse
gas emissions, and community
vulnerabilities, priorities, ideas and
concerns. It focuses on activities
that achieve the greatest emission
reductions or do the most to increase
our community preparedness and in
the most cost-effective and equitable
manner. The entire community—
Flagstaff businesses, residents,
and visitors—all have a role in both
implementing the Plan and enjoying
its benefits.

Adaptation
versus
Mitigation
Climate “mitigation”
refers to actions that
reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, which
contribute to climate
change.
Climate “adaptation”
refers to actions that
increase the ability to
withstand, respond to,
or cope with climate
change impacts.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 13

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Climate Change and Flagstaff
Climate change is a shift in the long-term, average weather pattern.

W

hen climate changes over thousands of
years, plants and animals often adapt.
When climate changes rapidly over
hundreds of years, drastic changes
including mass extinctions have occurred. Our
climate is changing rapidly. Decades of burning
fossil fuels and other human activities have released
dangerous levels of heat-trapping gases into the
atmosphere. These greenhouse gases—carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxides, and others—are
driving abrupt changes in our climate.

14 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

This section presents the context of climate change
in Flagstaff, including an overview of anticipated
climate changes and associated impacts and an
introduction to the sources of greenhouse gas
emissions produced by the Flagstaff community.
More information on anticipated climate changes
can be found in Appendix A. Climate Profile for the
CIty of Flagstaff.

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Climate Change Impacts
Climate change threatens to destabilize global weather patterns and ecosystems, impacting Flagstaff
and communities globally. Coconino County is already experiencing climate changes, and many of these
changes are projected to worsen in the future. Key changes include the following:

Less
snowpack

Hotter
temperatures
•
•

Longer and hotter summers
Difficulty for sensitive populations and
those without air conditioning
Increased risk of disease or illness from
mosquitoes and other pests

•

•
•
•

Drier
conditions

Less healthy
forests
•
•

Increased wildfire risk for local forests
Increased damage from forest pests
due to hotter temperatures and
drought-stressed trees

More rainfall instead of snowfall
Increased flooding of infrastructure and
buildings from more intense rainstorms
Increased risk of post-wildfire floods

•
•

More severe drought conditions as
temperatures rise
Lower water quality of reservoirs

Ponderosa Pines in Jeopardy
As climate change leads to drier conditions in Flagstaff, the iconic ponderosa pine forest
that surrounds the city will face several threats. Warmer temperatures will result in
unfavorable growing conditions that will decrease the ability of ponderosa pines to reestablish after large, stand-replacing fires.1 Drier conditions will increase tree susceptibility
to beetle infestation,2,3 while declines in forest health will contribute to increased wildfire
risks. These changes mean that ponderosa pines will have greater difficulty surviving
at Flagstaff’s elevation of 7,000 feet, beginning a transition to a shrubland or grassland
ecosystem, resembling the nearby, lower elevation landscapes of Northern Arizona. By
2100, widespread losses of pinyon and ponderosa pine forests are projected. 4
1 M. T. Rother and T.T. Veblen, “Limited conifer regeneration following wildfires in dry ponderosa pine forests of the
Colorado Front Range,” Ecosphere, vol. 7, no. 12, pp 1-17, 21 December 2016.
2 A. P. Williams, D. D. Allen, C. L. Millar, T. W. Swetnam, J. Michaelsen, C. J. Still and S. W. Leavitt, “Forest response to
increasing aridity and warmth in the southern United States,” PNAS, vol. 107, no. 50, pp 21289-21294, 14 December 2010.
3 J. A. Abatzoglou and A. P. Williams, “Impacts of anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across western US forests,”
PNAS, vol. 113, no. 42, pp 11770-11775, 18 October 2016.
4X Jiang, S. A. Raushcer, T. D. Ringler, D. M. Lawrence, A. P. Williams, C. D. Allen, A. L. Steiner, D. M. Cai and N. G. McDowell,
“Projected future changes in vegetation in western North America in the Twenty-First Century,” Journal of Climate, vol.
26, pp. 3671-3687, 2013.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 15

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Climate Change is Here
Temperatures have been increasing in Coconino County. The average temperature from 1895 to 2017 was
52.3 degrees Fahrenheit, as indicated on by the grey horizontal line in the graph below. Since the 1980s,
we have seen a fairly consistent increasing trend in annual temperatures in the County. While year-to year
changes in temperature are natural and expected, almost every year since 1985 has seen average annual
temperatures above the long-term average. These above-average years are represented by orange lines in
the graph below.

Climate change is not an abstract, future event. It is something
Coconino County is beginning to experience today.
Coconino County
Annual Average Temperature
1895 - 2017 annual average: 52.3° F

16 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Climate Vulnerability Assessment
To better understand the extent to which these climate changes
will affect Flagstaff, the Plan includes a Flagstaff-specific climate
vulnerability assessment. The assessment identified key climaterelated risks to Flagstaff’s resources, systems, and populations. This
section summarizes outcomes from the vulnerability assessment.
What is Climate Vulnerability?
Flagstaff’s vulnerability to climate change is a function of its exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive
capacity:

VULNERABILITY

EXPOSURE

SENSITIVITY

ADAPTIVE
CAPACITY

Whether a resource
is located in an area
experiencing climate
change hazards.

How a resource fares
when exposed to an
impact.

The ability of the
resource to adjust or
cope with impacts.

Flagstaff’s climate vulnerability assessment looked at how key resources and sectors could
be impacted by identified climate risks:
Flagstaff’s climate vulnerability assessment
looked at how these resources and sectors...

Public health,
safety, and
emergency
services

Land use,
infrastructure,
and affordable
housing

Water supply,
quality, and
infrastructure

...could be affected by these climate
risks and their associated impacts.

Forest
health and
wildfire
Wildfire

Hotter Temperatures

Drought

Flooding

Tourism
and recreation

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 17

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

What is at Risk?
Flagstaff’s climate vulnerability assessment ranked the relative climate vulnerability of several resources
and sectors. The table below summarizes the outcomes from that assessment. One-page summaries by
focus area are also detailed in the Strategies and Actions section of the Plan.

Within these resources and
sectors...

..the following populations and systems are at
varying risk levels in Flagstaff due to climate change:

LOW
Forest health and
wildfire

Water supply,
quality, and
infrastructure

- Wildfires
- Pests, invasive
species
- Declining
forest health

Water quality

- Water supply
- Water
infrastructure

Regional
growth

- Utilities, public
transportation,
buildings
- Cost of living
- Open space

Public health,
safety, and
emergency
services

People with:

People sensitive to:

- Allergies
- Mental health
issues
- Other diseases

- Poor air quality
- Heat- and coldrelated illness

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Summer
recreation
and tourism

HIGH

Damage
from postfire flooding

Land use,
infrastructure,
and affordable
housing

Tourism and
recreation

18 |

MEDIUM

Winter
recreation
and tourism

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Climate and Equity
Climate change impacts some groups more than others.

E

xisting advantages and disadvantages
will be exacerbated by climate change
stresses and hazards. Public health, housing
security, and socioeconomic conditions
may all be impacted by predicted changes in
weather and migration. Already, low-income
residents, communities of color, and tribal nations
disproportionately experience environmental
harm and health impacts of pollution. This plan
incorporates strategies to advance environmental
justice and social equity while addressing climate
change.
Considering social equity when addressing climate
adaptation involves looking at communities’
existing disadvantages and ensuring those most
at risk are protected. For example, communities

already facing housing insecurity may be
displaced by climate-induced migration. This
plan proposes proactively taking action to
protect communities at risk of displacement. To
address social equity when implementing climate
change mitigation strategies, it is necessary to
consider if the strategy inadvertently creates
new burdens to disadvantaged groups and
consider if all communities have opportunities to
reduce emissions. For example, when expanding
public transit, it is imperative to ensure public
transit is financially and physically accessible to
disadvantaged communities. The Implementation
Strategy section of this plan details steps the City
and community should take to ensure that these
equity considerations are integrated throughout the
Plan implementation process.

Who is More Vulnerable to the
Impacts of Climate Change?
While all populations are at risk of being impacted by climate
change, certain groups are more vulnerable. The very young
and very old, outdoor workers, those with pre-existing illnesses
or weak social ties, those living on the street, and low-income
communities may be especially sensitive to climate change
related health impacts. This Plan considers all these communities
when discussing vulnerable communities and equity.
Inequity in our society means that some individuals are better
able to respond to change—or stressors —than others. For
example, those with lower incomes may have to make difficult
choices between paying for heating or meeting other basic needs,
and may not have access to quality healthcare. In Flagstaff, lowincome communities are disproportionately communities of
color, specifically Hispanic and Native American households. The
elderly, undocumented migrants, or people from families with
mixed immigrant status are less likely to leave their homes to
seek aid. This Plan seeks to identify and support disadvantaged
communities that may have more trouble adapting to change.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 19

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Flagstaff’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Activities in Flagstaff release greenhouse gas emissions when fossil
fuels are burned for transportation and energy, when solid waste
breaks down, and when water and wastewater are produced and
treated.

T

o avoid the most dangerous impacts of climate change, the international
community came together to ratify the Paris Agreement, which recognizes the
need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to keep global temperature rise below 2
degrees Celsius.1

Flagstaff has committed to meeting the intentions of the Paris Agreement. This plan
sets an ambitious target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 80% below baseline
by 2050. To track progress on implementing climate and sustainability strategies,
Flagstaff has been tracking community-wide greenhouse gas emissions since 2009. In
2016, community-wide emissions were 787,315 metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent
(MTCO2e).

In October 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released a report
highlighting the need to contain global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius, and the
extraordinary measures needed to achieve this goal.
1 UNFCCC. “The Paris Agreement.” https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-parisagreement/the-paris-agreement

20 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

WHERE DO OUR EMISSIONS COME FROM?
In 2016, Flagstaff’s greenhouse gas emissions were primarily from
transportation and energy use, with solid waste, water and wastewater
treatment, and fugitive emissions (e.g., from leaks) making up small
portions of Flagstaff’s total inventory.

1% Process & Fugitive Emissions

17%
Residential Energy

6%
Industrial Energy

20%

40%

Commercial Energy
Energy consumption
accounts for almost half of
Flagstaff’s total greenhouse
gas emissions. These emissions come from residential,
commercial, and industrial
buildings consuming electricity and burning natural gas.

Transportation and Mobile Sources

5%

11%

Water and Wastewater

Solid Waste

The treatment and conveyance
of Flagstaff’s water supply and
wastewater also emit
considerable greenhouse gas
emissions, contributing 5% to
overall emissions.

The disposal of solid
waste contributed 11%
to Flagstaff’s 2016
greenhouse gas
emissions footprint.

Emissions from the transportation
sector made up 40% of Flagstaff’s
overall greenhouse gas emissions in
2016. Local, on-road transportation
of passengers in residential-owned
vehicles accounts for the majority
(98%) of these transportation
emissions in Flagstaff.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 21

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Not all emissions are currently reflected in Flagstaff’s inventory
While Flagstaff’s community inventory accounts for emissions released directly within the city or from
closely related community activities, consumption-based emissions convey the upstream greenhouse gas
impacts of consuming household products. Global economic trade results in the U.S. importing many of
the goods that homes consume. As a result, the U.S. has essentially exported greenhouse gas emissions
related to manufacturing. Consumption-based emissions inventories approximate upstream impacts
so individuals can understand how to reduce their personal carbon footprints, taking into account the
emissions associated with manufacturing and transporting the goods and services they consume. The
figure below represents an estimated profile of one household’s consumption-based emissions in Flagstaff.1
The components of the profile that are currently covered in Flagstaff’s greenhouse gas inventory are
shown in grey. City of Flagstaff will begin incorporating consumption-based emissions to reflect the other
components in future updates.

MTCO₂e per Flagstaff Household

14
12
10
8

CAR FUEL

ELECTRICITY

6
4
2
0

MEAT

CLOTHING

DAIRY

FURNITURE

NATURAL GAS

VEHICLE MFG

WATER

PRODUCE
CEREALS

AIR TRAVEL

CONSTRUCTION

OTHER FOOD

Transportation

Home

Food

OTHER GOODS

Goods

1 “Average Annual Household Carbon Footprint.” UC Berkeley CoolClimate Network. (2013).

22 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

SERVICES

Services

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

HOW WILL EMISSIONS CHANGE IN THE FUTURE?
A business-as-usual (BAU) forecast provides an estimate of potential future emissions, assuming that
Flagstaff takes no further action. It considers the influence of external factors on Flagstaff’s emissions, such
as population growth, changes in the regional electricity fuel mix, and energy demand.
The business-as-usual forecast for Flagstaff is presented below. Key assumptions for Flagstaff’s business-asusual forecast are as follows:

35% forecasted Flagstaff population
growth by 2050.1
Residential electricity demand expected
to grow by 60% by 2030.2
Commercial electricity demand expected
to grow 50% by 2030.3
Industrial electricity demand expected to
grow 1% by 2030.4
Electricity carbon intensity expected to
change at the same rate as national electricity
carbon intensity, declining 37% by 2050.5
50% growth in vehicle miles traveled by
2040.6
1 “Population Projections.” Arizona Office of Economic Opportunity https://population.az.gov/population-projections
2 “2017 Integrated Resources Plan.” APS. April 2017.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 “Annual Energy Outlook 2018. U.S. Energy Information Association. 2018.
6 “Blueprint 2040: Regional Transportation Plan.” Flagstaff Metropolitan Planning Organization. May 2017.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 23

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Business-as-Usual Emissions:
34% above 2016 baseline by 2050
The forecast estimates that Flagstaff’s overall
emissions will increase 34% by 2050 compared to a
2016 baseline—equivalent to a 2% per capita increase
over that time period.

Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Metric Tons

1,200,000

1,000,000

800,000

2016 Baseline
600,000

This scenario conveys the need for
ambitious climate action to meet
the City’s short- and long-term
emission reduction goals.

400,000

200,000

2016

24 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

2021

2026

2031

2036

2041

2046

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Benefits of a Climate Action and Adaptation Plan
Implementation of the Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan will
realize many benefits beyond addressing climate change.

I

n addition to the societal benefits from equitable
and inclusive climate action, many actions in
the Flagstaff Climate Action and Adaptation Plan
will enhance quality of life for Flagstaff residents.
For example, the introduction of energy-saving
equipment and behaviors not only addresses
climate goals but can also lower energy costs. This
plan prioritizes these “win-win” solutions that
benefit both the climate and other facets of the
Flagstaff community. Some co-benefits include the
following:
Support for low-income and disadvantaged
communities. When implemented carefully and
correctly, actions such as local green job training
and subsidy programs for energy efficiency
upgrades can be especially helpful for low-income
and disadvantaged communities.
Public health. Some actions that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions also promote healthier
lifestyles, such as supporting more people walking
and biking and eating less carbon-intensive foods.

Quality of life and well-being. Many climate
actions can also improve quality of life for Flagstaff
residents, such as benefits from green jobs to the
local economy and creation of more comfortable
and inviting homes through energy efficiency
improvements.
Local habitat, recreation, and aesthetics. In
addition to enhancing ecosystem resilience,
minimizing heat impacts, and storing carbon,
actions that improve natural habitat can also
enhance natural beauty and provide recreation
opportunities for visitors and residents.
Economic stability. Looking ahead can help the
Flagstaff community prepare for potential shifts
in both climate and visitation. Climate action can
help existing businesses be more resilient amidst
change, while emerging businesses capitalizing on
the need for climate solutions can create highquality jobs.

Tensions between Climate Action Goals and Other
Community Priorities
While there are strong benefits to climate action, there are also
areas where climate action goals may conflict with other community
priorities. Challenges range from the search for street lighting that
protects our dark skies while conserving energy, and balancing the
need for mixed use buildings that help residents drive less with the
desire to preserve community character.
This Plan seeks to transparently identify these tensions and start
discussions about how to both meet the need for climate action and
advance other community goals. Each focus area of the Plan contains a
case study weighing these questions and discussing possible solutions.
Find these case studies on pages 72, 81, 87, 102, 112, 120, and 127.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 25

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Plan Overview
The Plan presents goals, targets, strategies, and actions for mitigating
and adapting to climate change. It is organized into seven focus areas:

Natural
Environment

Water
Resources

Energy

Natural Environment
refers to ecosystem health,
environmentally sensitive lands,
plants, soils, and wildlife in
the context of natural systems
worthy of conservation and
protection. This focus area
also includes open spaces that
protect environmental quality
and biodiversity, support
tourism, and protect historic and
cultural resources.

Water Resources refers to
surface water, groundwater,
and reclaimed water that serves
our residential, commercial,
industrial, recreational, and
agricultural needs. It includes
100-year water supply
planning, diversification of the
water supply portfolio, and
conservation to sustain our water
supplies and quality for future
generations.

Energy refers to community
energy consumption and
efficiency, clean and renewable
energy sourcing, and a more
climate-resilient energy grid. It
includes strategies for renewable
energy sources and efficient
building standards.

Transportation
and Land Use

Waste and
Consumption

Public Health,
Services, Facilties,
and Safety

Economic
Prosperity and
Recreation

Transportation and Land Use
refers to the form and function of
transportation systems, including
ways to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions through design and
clean and efficient transportation
systems.

Waste and Consumption refers
to the lifecycle of goods and
materials, including opportunities
to reduce emissions associated
with manufacturing, use, and
disposal.

Public Health, Services,
Facilities, and Safety refers to
facilities and services focused
on community health, safety,
security, and emergency
response.

Economic Prosperity and
Recreation refers to community
and economic health, including
opportunities to reduce emissions
and prepare the community’s
tourism and recreational sectors
for climate change.

Where shown, this icon
refers to items that span
two or more of the focus
areas described above.
26 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

For each focus area, this document tells the story of Flagstaff’s climate
goals, related activities, strategies, and actions for achieving those
goals. The strategies and actions are presented in order of priority
as articulated by the Flagstaff community, City staff, and Steering
Committee. Each focus area is organized in the following manner:
Goals, Targets, and Indicators provide metrics for assessing progress
towards achieving the focus area vision.
Strategies represent thematic groupings of actions that all work toward a
specific goal. Strategies within each focus area are ordered by priority.
Priority Actions are actions within a strategy that were prioritized
from a broader set of potential actions through an evaluation of cost,
effectiveness, feasibility, and co-benefits. These actions are ordered from
highest to lowest priority as identified through the evaluation process, and
these actions are also included in the Implementation Strategy.
Other Actions are opportunities that were identified as potential actions
but were not considered high-priority through the community and
stakeholder engagement process. These actions will be revisited in future
plan updates.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 27

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

A LIVING DOCUMENT
To ensure that the Plan reflects the voice of the Flagstaff community,
the plan was developed through an extensive year-long community and
stakeholder engagement process that included:
Nine public open houses, attended by over 350 community members.
Four online surveys, taken by over 250 community members.
Regular meetings with a 15-member citizen steering committee, who
provided input and feedback throughout the planning process.
Workshops and meetings with technical experts, including 30 City staff
across divisions to vet and evaluate plan targets, strategies, and actions.
Meetings with local organizations and neighborhood groups and
collaborations with Coconino County representatives.

28 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Strategies in this plan were developed to be actionable, achievable, and
impactful. Actions focus on mechanisms or “levers” that the City or
community can use to affect change, including:
Inspiring voluntary action through information, outreach,
and technical assistance.
Sending price signals to encourage or discourage behaviors.
Making public investments to visibly demonstrate government
commitment to climate action and influence decision-making.
Mandating change to stimulate comprehensive, communitywide adjustment.
This foundational Plan represents the beginning of an ongoing and iterative conversation
between the City of Flagstaff and the community it serves. The goals, strategies, and
actions presented herein reflect the community’s priorities and needs as articulated by
City staff, residents, and organizations who participated in the plan development process.
As the community’s priorities shift, technologies change, and new knowledge is revealed,
the Plan will undergo a continual process of monitoring, evaluation, and evolution to
keep pace with changing needs.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 29

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Overarching Vision
The Flagstaff community
proactively preserves the natural
environment, works towards
carbon neutrality, and enhances
the quality of life for all residents
while ensuring equity, selfsufficiency, and climate resiliency.

30 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Overarching Goals and Targets

1
2
3

The Climate Action and Adaptation Plan centers on achievement of the
following overarching goals.
REDUCE Flagstaff’s contribution to climate change by reducing community
greenhouse gas emissions.
PREPARE the city’s communities, systems, and resources to be more
resilient to climate change impacts.
ADDRESS climate change in a manner that prioritizes those most impacted
and ensures the costs and benefits of climate adaptation and mitigation are
equitably distributed.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 31

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Greenhouse Gas Reduction Targets
The Climate Action and Adaptation Plan sets a overarching and percapita reduction target for community greenhouse gas emissions.
OVERARCHING TARGET: An 80% reduction in GHG emissions by 2050 compared to 2016 levels.
PER-CAPITA TARGET: An equivalent reduction to the overarching target given anticipated population
growth. This reduction equates to an 85% reduction in GHG emissions by 2050 compared to 2016 levels.
The per-capita target needs to be more ambitious (85% per person) than the community-wide target for
an 80% reduction from baseline because of estimated population growth.
Key Performance Indicator

Annual communitywide
greenhouse gas
emissions
Annual per-capita
communitywide
greenhouse gas
emissions

Baseline (2016)

2025 Target

2030 Target

2050 Target

15% reduction

30% reduction

80% reduction

787,315

669,218
(MTCO2e)

(MTCO2e)

551,121

157,463

25% reduction

41% reduction

85% reduction

(MTCO2e*)

11.0

8.3

6.5

1.7

(MTCO2e / person)

(MTCO2e / person)

(MTCO2e / person)

(MTCO2e / person)

13% growth

18% growth

33% growth

81,044

84,795

95,088

Estimated population

71,617

1.2 M

Communitywide GHG Emissions (MTCO₂e)

1.0 M
Expec

se gas

nhou
d gree

te

ions

emiss

800 K

600 K

15%

Red
u

ctio

Reduction by 2025

30%

400 K

ns n

eed

ed t
om

eet

goa

ls

Reduction by 2030

80%
Reduction by 2050

200 K

2015

32 |

(MTCO2e)

2020

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

*Metric ton carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) serves as a standard unit for
greenhouse gases, indicating the impact of different greenhouse gases in
terms of the amount of CO2 that would create the same amount of warming.
For example, methane has 28 times the impact of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, so 1 metric ton of methane would equal 28 MTCO2e.

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

COSTS OF INACTION

T

his Plan makes an investment in the
preparation and adaptation of the entire
Flagstaff community to climate change.
Preparation is far less costly than response.
While we do not know the exact cost of not taking
action now, we can estimate. For example, the
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project—a local
example of a climate adaptation project—is funded
by a $10 million bond and is expected to prevent
$573 million to $1.2 billion in costs associated with
expected future fires and resulting floods.1 Last year
was the most expensive disaster year in U.S. history,
costing nearly 400 billion dollars.2 We also know
that disasters like those experienced in 2017 are
expected to continue and strengthen in the future.3

In addition to the cost savings of preparation, many
programs and actions in this plan also have a high
return on investment. For example, renewable
energy is now cost-competitive with non-renewable
energy and brings other benefits to the community
such as reduced emissions of dangerous air
pollutants, reduced reliance on imported energy,
and reduced sensitivity to price fluctuations. When
these other societal benefits are taken into account,
the return on investment is even higher.

1 Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project. http://
flagstaffwatershedprotection.org (23 May 2018).
2 Umair Irfan and Brian Resnick. “Megadisasters devastated
America in 2017. And they’re only going to get worse.”
Vox. 26 March 2018. https://www.vox.com/energy-andenvironment/2017/12/28/16795490/natural-disasters-2017hurricanes-wildfires-heat-climate-change-cost-deaths (23 May
2018).
3 “Extreme Weather and Climate Change.” Center for Climate
and Energy Solutions. https://www.c2es.org/content/extremeweather-and-climate-change (23 May 2018).

THE SOCIAL COST OF CARBON

P

urchasing and burning fossil fuels
contributes to impacts that have real
economic consequences, such as
infrastructure damage from flooding, fires,
or extreme storms. Despite the very real nature of
these costs, the market price of fossil fuels does
not include these societal cost “externalities.” The
failure of markets to account for climate risk in
the price of fossil fuels has spurred research into
quantifying the economic impact of each new
metric ton of carbon emitted into the atmosphere.
This estimate is called the social cost of carbon.
The social cost of carbon is a policy tool to estimate
future economic impacts of climate change and
allow entities to calculate the actual costs and
benefits of various options to guide decisionmaking.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
estimates a range of possible social costs of carbon
depending on the year and discount rate applied
to the future. These range from $36 per metric ton
of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) in 2015
to $69 per MTCO2e in 2050.1 However, the EPA
acknowledges current modeling does not include
all important damages; estimates by other agencies
and researchers are far higher. Some recent
estimates have determined the social cost of carbon
could be as high as $100-$200 per ton of emissions.2
1 U.S. EPA. “The Social Cost of Carbon.” 2017
2 Nwuccitelli, Dana. “Republican hearing calls for a lower carbon
pollution price. It should be much higher.” The Guardian. 1 March
2017. www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97per-cent/2017/mar/01/republican-hearing-calls-for-a-lower-carbonpollution-price-it-should-be-much-higher (3 July 2017).

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 33

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

BUILDING ON A FOUNDATION
Flagstaff has already made notable progress toward reducing both its
community emissions and its vulnerability to the potential impacts of
climate change.
Flagstaff has a variety of plans, policies, programs, and studies that are connected to the needs
and solutions for addressing climate change issues and challenges. Some things the community
is already doing to address climate change include the following:

The City tracks and reports on its greenhouse gas emissions inventory annually.1
The Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership, an alliance of environmental,
governmental, and business organizations, works on forest ecosystem restoration
in and around Flagstaff.
The community participates in ongoing invasive weed removal events on Flagstaff
Open Space properties.
The City of Flagstaff has been using reclaimed water for irrigation since 1971,
expanding reclaimed water use to offset potable water use by 20%.
Flagstaff voters approved a $10M bond to support the Flagstaff Watershed
Protection Project - a partnership effort between the State, City, and Coconino
National Forest to reduce the risk of devastating wildfire and post-fire flooding in
the Rio de Flag and Upper Lake Mary watersheds.
The City of Flagstaff provides home energy efficiency, water efficiency, and
rainwater harvesting tank rebates for residents.
1 Reports can be found on the City website at this link: http://flagstaff.az.gov/3625/Greenhouse-Gas-Emissions-Reporting. More
information on other City sustainability activities can be found here: http://www.flagstaff.az.gov/1605/Sustainability-Section.

34 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

The City’s Water Services Division has conducted energy audits of their water and
wastewater treatment facilities to identify ways to reduce energy consumption
and has been proactive at replacing aging inefficient equipment with more energy
efficient equipment.
Several local companies are installing residential and commercial rooftop solar
systems throughout Flagstaff.
In 2018, a six-month pilot program brought bike sharing to the City of Flagstaff
and the Northern Arizona University campus, making bike trips possible for more
residents.
The City is exploring an adaptive reuse incentive program to encourage infill and
the reuse of existing structures.residents.
The Azulita Project, a local non-profit, is partnering with local businesses to
eliminate the use of plastic straws and other single-use plastic.
The Flagstaff Master Recycler program provides training to community members
on waste prevention and composting practices.
The Ready Set Go campaign encourages residents to be more informed about
potential emergencies and prepared to evacuate.
Through the Woods Watch program, the City of Flagstaff, Coconino County and the
U.S. Forest Service partner with residents to monitor for careless fire behavior on
forested lands to protect the community from wildfire.
The Sustainable Economic Development Initiative promotes sustainable
economic prosperity in Northern Arizona.
The Innovate Waste Challenge is incentivizing businesses to discover new ways to
convert waste into marketable products.
The Mountain Line bus system has recently added a weekend bus route to
Snowbowl to serve both residents and tourists who ski and snowboard.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 35

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

THE CITY OF FLAGSTAFF’S EXPANDING COMMITMENT TO
CLIMATE ACTION
This Plan builds on a foundation of climate leadership by the Flagstaff
City Council. A few significant highlights:
2006 Through Resolution 2006-59, the City of Flagstaff adopted the U.S. Mayors Climate
Protection Agreement.
2007 The City of Flagstaff Sustainability Section was established.

2008
2010
2012
2014
2017

The Sustainability Commission was established by Ordinance 2007-27.
Resolution 2008-32 required all new municipal buildings be constructed to earn a
minimum of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) silver certification.
Resolution 2010-16 committed the City to increase energy efficiencies and renewable
energy production and purchase for City facilities and properties.
Resolution 2012-22 adopted the 2012 City of Flagstaff Resiliency and Preparedness
Study.
Resolution 2014-09 requires all occupied City-owned new construction, major
renovations and large additions to achieve LEED, Green Globes, or Living Building
Challenge certification.
City Council set a 2017-2019 term to take meaningful climate action.
Flagstaff became Arizona’s first city to call for national revenue-neutral carbon fee
and dividend legislation, urging the U.S. Congress to assess a steadily increasing fee
on carbon at the point of fossil fuel extraction; return the net revenue to American
households on an equitable basis; and incorporate a border adjustment that levels the
playing field for trade with countries without an equivalent tax.
Mayor Coral Evans joined with over 200 other U.S. Mayors in committing to adopt,
honor, and uphold the landmark Paris Climate Agreement.

The 2012 City of Flagstaff Resiliency and
Preparedness Study
In 2012, the City of Flagstaff conducted the Resiliency and Preparedness
Study to better understand how the impacts of local climate changes
will directly affect City operations. The study assessed the level of
vulnerability, the degree of risk, and the potential impacts of 115 of the
City’s critical operations. Completed by a team of City staff and regional
partners, the study recommends an overarching policy to increase
protection and resilience within government operations to hazards
including fire, severe winter storms, drought and floods.

36 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Relationship to Other City Plans
The list below presents other City plans that inform or could be informed by the Climate Action
and Adaptation Plan. Some of these documents already emphasize climate solutions described
in this plan, while others will need to be updated to integrate climate change and climate action.
Where linkages are clear, this plan highlights “levers” in existing plans and programs and brings
them together to address a common goal.

The Rethink Waste Plan outlines initiatives toward achieving the City’s
waste prevention and recycling goals.
The High Occupancy Housing Plan encourages higher-density housing
that is more compatible with existing neighborhoods.
The City is currently developing a Water Conservation Strategic Plan to
set water conservation targets and identify and prioritize actions to achieve
those targets.
The Flagstaff Regional Plan 2030 presents a comprehensive, long-term
plan for the Flagstaff community.
The Sustainability Section Strategic Plan establishes detailed strategies
for accomplishing sustainability program area goals.
The Management Plan for Legally-Designated Open Space Properties
seeks to restore watershed health, forest structure, native plant
communities, and rare habitat types, among other goals.
The Coconino County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan
includes an assessment of drought, flood, and wildfire risks and strategies
to reduce those risks.
The Coconino County Emergency Operations Plan is a guide for disaster
response activities and includes hazards such as floods, flash floods,
severe weather, and wildfire.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 37

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction

Ties to the Flagstaff Regional Plan
This document builds upon goals outlined in the current Flagstaff Regional Plan 2030 and informs potential
priority areas for the next regional plan update. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to
climate change will improve the local economy, support public health, and benefit ecosystems. There is
strong overlap between the goals of the Regional Plan and the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan.
The following Regional Plan goals are furthered by the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan strategies:
Goal E&C.2. Reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Goal E&C.3. Strengthen community and natural environment resiliency through climate adaptation efforts.
Goal E&C.6. Protect, restore, and improve ecosystem health and maintain native plant and animal
community diversity across all land ownerships in the Flagstaff region.
Goal E&C.10. Protect indigenous wildlife populations, localized and larger-scale wildlife habitats, ecosystem
processes, and wildlife movement throughout the planning area.
Goal OS.1. The region has a system of open lands, such as undeveloped natural areas, wildlife corridors and
habitat areas, trails, accesses to public lands, and greenways to support the natural environment that sustains
our quality of life, cultural heritage, and ecosystem health.
Goal WR.1. Maintain a sustainable water budget incorporating regional hydrology, ecosystem needs, and
social and economic well-being.
Goal WR.2. Manage a coordinated system of water, wastewater, and reclaimed water utility service facilities
and resources at the City level and identify funding to pay for new resources.
Goal WR.5 Manage watersheds and stormwater to address flooding concerns, water quality, environmental
protections, and rainwater harvesting.
Goal WR.6 Protect, preserve, and improve the quality of surface water, groundwater, and reclaimed water in
the region.
Goal LU.8. Balance future growth with available water resources.
Goal E.1. Increase energy efficiency.
Goal E.2. Expand production and use of renewable energy.
Goal LU.1. Invest in existing neighborhoods and activity centers for the purpose of developing complete, and
connected places.
Goal LU.2. Develop Flagstaff’s Greenfields in accordance with the Regional Plan and within the growth
boundary.
Goal LU.5. Encourage compact development principles to achieve efficiencies and open space preservation.
Goal LU.6. Provide for a mix of land uses.
Goal LU.10. Increase the proportion of urban neighborhoods to achieve walkable, compact growth.
Goal LU.18. Develop well designed activity centers and corridors with a variety of employment, business,
shopping, civic engagement, cultural opportunities, and residential choices.
Goal NH.3. Make available a variety of housing types at different price points, to provide housing opportunity
for all economic sectors.
Goal T.1. Improve mobility and access throughout the region.
Goal T.2. Improve transportation safety and efficiency for all modes.
Goal T.5. Increase the availability and use of pedestrian infrastructure, including FUTS, as a critical element of
a safe and livable community.
Goal T.6. Provide for bicycling as a safe and efficient means of transportation and recreation.
Goal T.7. Provide a high-quality, safe, convenient, accessible public transportation system, where feasible, to
serve as an attractive alternative to single-occupant vehicles.
Goal T.9. Strengthen and support rail service opportunities for the region’s businesses and travelers.

38 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Introduction

Community Open Houses asked Flagstaff residents for their input at every stage of
Plan development. At the first Community Open House in January 2018, residents
described why they are proud of Flagstaff and their concerns about climate change.

40 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy

IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
Flagstaff has made progress in reducing emissions, developing innovative sustainability initiatives, and
building community support for climate action. This Plan was developed to build on key climate action
successes and provide a pathway to reach aggressive decarbonization targets. Making progress will require
leadership and commitment from the City government and the community. The Implementation Strategy
identifies a responsible City department for each strategy as well as a timeline for taking action. The
outreach strategy outlines how to preserve momentum in the community while the Community Action
Guide provides a set of strategies that individuals and households can use to take climate action.
To ensure that climate action and adaptation strategies meet the needs of the community and use
resources efficiently, this section also lays out a series of tracking metrics and a reporting structure so that
City staff can report progress to Council, update the community, and measure successes.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 41

Implementation Strategy

Kickstarting Implementation
A strong foundation of internal leadership and process will ensure that Flagstaff meets the goals of this
Plan. Plan implementation will require strategic and coordinated actions among divisions, as well as
leadership to ensure that mitigation and adaptation are priorities throughout the municipal organization.
The first year of Plan implementation sets the stage and determines its relevance and success going
forward.
STRATEGY 1. Reinforce organizational commitments to climate action.
Priority Actions
Join the Global Covenant of Mayors.
IM-1-A
IM-1-B

Update the City of Flagstaff greenhouse gas emissions goals to match the goals of this Plan.

IM-1-C

Develop a climate mitigation and adaptation decision matrix to be integrated into City plan
creation and updates, including the regional plan, zoning code, and engineering standards.

IM-1-D

Establish financing systems that facilitate investments, emergency funds, and cash-flow
availability to develop climate adaptation initiatives.

STRATEGY 2. Establish a foundation for successful Plan implementation.
Priority Actions
Refine targets for all goals in the first six months of implementation.
IM-2-A
IM-2-B

Create detailed blueprints for the implementation of each Plan strategy within the first six
months of implementation.

IM-2-C

Host a community conversation on the Global Warming of 1.5° C special report by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, to identify if City goals should be refined.

IM-2-D

Identify how city codes complement this Plan and identify areas that may need minor and
major modifications.

The Need for Aggressive, Global Action
Global Warming of 1.5° C, the October 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
Special Report, highlighted the need to contain global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius or
less. To achieve this, global carbon dioxide emissions need to fall to 45 percent of 2010 levels by
2030, and net zero global emissions by 2050. This Plan does not incorporate the heightened urgency
for action due to the timing of the report’s release. The Flagstaff community must discuss this report
and determine an appropriate response.

42 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy

Leadership
Flagstaff City Council
The success of this Plan is contingent on the Flagstaff City Council continuing to demonstrate leadership on
climate change. Plan implementation also relies on continued public support for climate action.
The Flagstaff City Council will have oversight responsibility for the Plan. They will receive annual updates
on Plan progress and make policy decisions, budgetary appropriations, and workplan approvals that will
facilitate implementation.
STRATEGY 3. Include climate action in Council priorities.
Priority Actions
Identify goals for the upcoming City Council term that will support Plan implementation.
IM-3-A
IM-3-B

Identify City Council budgetary priorities to support Plan implementation.

IM-3-C

Identify state and federal legislative priorities that support the goals of the Plan and enable
implementation of Plan strategies and actions.

Sustainability Commission
The City Council-appointed Sustainability Commission will provide ongoing assistance by supporting Plan
implementation and public engagement.
The Commission will actively participate in Plan implementation by:


Monitoring and tracking progress towards meeting Plan goals.



Making recommendations to City Council on climate initiatives.



Engaging with local organizations and community groups on climate action.



Working with City staff to make recommendations on policies that further the goals of the Plan.

STRATEGY 4. Utilize the Sustainability Commission to oversee and promote the Plan.
Priority Actions
Review the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan progress report annually to assess the
IM-4-A
effectiveness of Plan implementation.
IM-4-B

As part of the annual budget process, make recommendations to the City Manager’s Office for
areas to prioritize in the City Manager’s proposed budget.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 43

Implementation Strategy
City Leadership
For a city to take meaningful action on climate mitigation and adaptation, it is critical for every aspect of
the municipal organization to be involved in implementation. Leaders at the City of Flagstaff—from the City
Manager’s Office to division directors and individual supervisors—must proactively consider climate action
and resiliency when conducting all City operations.
The City Manager’s Office will actively support the Council’s climate commitment by requiring the
involvement of all City divisions in Plan implementation. Methods to ensure leadership across the
organization include:


Biannual City Manager’s Climate Roundtables, which will foster a culture of climate leadership and
sharing. Hosted by the City Manager’s Office, these roundtables will provide an opportunity for
each Division Director to share climate action successes and challenges in their division with City
leaders.



Forming an internal Climate Action Committee to ensure involvement from all City divisions in the
Plan. The City Manager will work with the Sustainability Section to form this Committee, which will
have a staff representative from each City division, with section-level representation as
appropriate. The Committee will meet quarterly to review implementation responsibilities, report
on progress, and discuss challenges.



Renewing the City’s commitment to the actions recommended in the City of Flagstaff Resiliency
and Preparedness Study, adopted by City Council in 2012.



Integrating climate action criteria and priorities into the budget process to ensure that climate
action remains part of the conversation throughout the budget cycle. While there are many
competing demands on a limited City budget, integrating climate action criteria into the budget
process will:
o
o
o



Highlight opportunities where climate action can help meet the goals of other divisions.
Recognize deliberate steps to increase mitigation or adaptation efforts among City
divisions.
Identify gaps and opportunities for alignment across projects.

Recognizing that the annual budget is a reflection of City priorities, ensure that the annual City
budget signals the City’s commitment to climate action.

STRATEGY 5. Prioritize climate action across the organization.
Priority Actions
The City Manager will host the first biannual Climate Roundtable.
IM-5-A
IM-5-B

Form a Climate Action Committee to coordinate activities across the municipal organization,
consisting of Climate Action Leads from each City division.

IM-5-C

Renew the City’s commitment to the actions recommended in the City of Flagstaff Resiliency
and Preparedness Study, adopted by City Council in 2012.

44 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy
STRATEGY 6. Incorporate climate priorities into the budget process.
Priority Actions
Each division will identify efforts that support resiliency and greenhouse gas mitigation during
IM-6-A
the annual budget review process, strategic planning, and workplan implementation.
IM-6-B

The City Manager’s office will ensure that climate action is prioritized and used as a criterion in
budget team decision making.

IM-6-C

The City Manager’s proposed budget, presented during the annual budget review process, will
incorporate a report on climate mitigation and adaptation projects that are funded in existing
workplans or will be incorporated into workplans for the fiscal year.

IM-6-D

In preparation for the annual budget process, identify Capital Improvement Program projects
that will mitigate the City's vulnerability to climate change impacts.

IM-6-E

To capitalize on existing programmatic infrastructure, take steps to expand existing programs
such as residential energy efficiency rebates, Home Energy Efficiency 101 workshops,
Neighborhood Sustainability Grants, and Climate Ambassador programming.

Municipal Organization Climate Action Planning
During the first year of Plan implementation, the City of Flagstaff will identify how its own activities
contribute to the achievement of Plan goals, ensuring the City is incorporating both climate mitigation and
adaptation into its operations.


The City is committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions to reduce the pace of global
climate change and contribute to the achievement of this Plan’s overarching goals. The City must
recognize how the activities of the municipality contribute to climate change.



The City must prepare for how climate change will impact its ability to serve residents. Building
local resiliency against risk from climate variability and climate change within the municipal
organization will help ensure continued prosperity. To assist this process, the City will update the
2012 City of Flagstaff Resiliency and Preparedness Study to analyze how the municipal
organization can be better prepared for anticipated climate changes.

These efforts will be centered through a municipal planning process, to build capacity within the
organization. Each division will complete a three-part process:


Education and capacity building: Review the potential impacts of climate change, analyze the
division’s impact on greenhouse gas emissions, and identify vulnerabilities.



Climate action assessment: Describe how the division’s activities relate to and align with the Plan;
identify mitigation and adaptation actions that the division will take.



Integration into division budgets: Provide a report detailing how each budget item will affect
greenhouse gas emissions and align with the Plan.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 45

Implementation Strategy
STRATEGY 7. Develop a City-wide Climate Plan integration process.
Priority Actions
Continue to track municipal greenhouse gas emissions and publish a greenhouse gas
IM-7-A
inventory, which will be widely disseminated among City staff.
IM-7-B

Update the City of Flagstaff Resiliency and Preparedness Study to recognize evolving scientific
understanding of climate change risks and identify how City vulnerabilities have changed.

IM-7-C

Implement a municipal planning process that focuses on education and capacity building,
climate action assessment, and integration into division budgets.

IM-7-D

Create a data management plan for the organization to integrate climate-related
considerations into the work of all divisions.

The 2012 Resiliency and Preparedness Study
The seven recommendations of this study will help the City prepare
for climate-related impacts.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Build, sustain, and leverage local and regional partnerships.
Consider how differential exposures to pollution, poverty, and
access to resources exacerbate the effects of climate change.
Ensure that operational decisions integrate resiliency.
Take climate change into account when planning for new
development.
Prioritize proactive education within City operations.
Incorporate resiliency as a priority during City planning efforts.
Allocate resources to adapt City operations to climate change,
including ongoing assessment of vulnerability and risk.

Required Staff Capacity for Climate Action Coordination
Dedicated staff are required to ensure that climate action and adaptation efforts are continually
incorporated into existing City operations, policy development, and community partnerships. This may
include the creation of additional staff to manage the implementation, tracking, and reporting of the
strategies and actions and to coordinate with City staff across divisions and external stakeholders.
The Plan recommends enhancements—and in some cases staff positions—for various City programs, such
as a permanent City of Flagstaff staff position for outreach and education related to forest health. These
staffing decisions will be presented through the budget processes.

46 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy
STRATEGY 8. Ensure staff capacity exists to implement the Plan.
Priority Action
Evaluate staffing needs to address the priorities identified in the Plan, and provide adequate
IM-8-A
resources to implement the Plan.

Incorporating vulnerability and emissions into decision-making
This matrix is a tool that can be used to support decision-making within the City of Flagstaff. The City
should strive for actions that both reduce vulnerability and reduce emissions (top right quadrant).

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 47

Implementation Strategy

Expanding Community Capacity
To reach more people, the City must foster climate change conversations throughout the community: at
community gardens, schools, churches, and dinner tables. Climate leaders surround us in Flagstaff,
whether they are formally recognized Master Recyclers or those who pass down traditions of produce
canning, sewing, or walking with their family to school.
To expand the climate change conversation and inspire action, we need to support current and future
climate leaders within the community, while celebrating those who take climate action daily.
The City will work with community partners to implement or enhance the following programs that
encourage learning among neighbors:


Climate ambassadors. The City will develop a Climate Ambassadors Program to equip Flagstaff
community members with the skills and resources to discuss climate change and climate action
with their neighbors. It will include a workshop series to review climate change resources, bring in
guest speakers, and help participants practice their “pitch” for climate action. This program will
be modeled after successful climate ambassador programs in other U.S. cities.



Youth climate education and action. The City will continue to support climate education and
youth climate action through climate curricula in schools, the Climate Action Challeng,e and the
Flagstaff Youth Climate Summit. These programs ensure that students are knowledgeable about
how climate change will affect Flagstaff and are equipped to deal with climate challenges, while
encouraging and celebrating student-led climate action.



Climate leadership training. This program will support individuals throughout the community in
taking climate action. It will equip leaders to effectively discuss climate change, identify risks to
their industries, and develop practical solutions. Potential partners include NAU and the Greater
Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce. The training will have tracks for different audiences, including
internal City of Flagstaff staff, business leaders, and City partners.



Neighborhood Sustainability Grants. The Neighborhood Sustainability Grants seek to foster
community partnerships that promote sustainable and healthy lifestyles. Grant projects focus on
one of the following priority areas: promoting economic, environmental, and social sustainability;
local food systems; alternative transportation; reducing waste, water, and energy conservation; or
enhancing existing programs that build community knowledge and empowerment.



Climate Action Working Groups. The City will establish working groups, made up of community
members, City staff, or a combination of both, to tackle specific implementation topics. Examples
include climate and equity, climate change and public health, building electrification, and
accelerating electric vehicle adoption.



Resilient Neighborhood Groups. Organizing within neighborhoods can help residents prepare for
energy disruptions, disasters, and other emergencies. Resilient Neighborhood Groups build on the
community’s existing strengths, identify vulnerabilities, and bring neighbors together.

48 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy
STRATEGY 9. Support community leadership on climate action.
Priority Actions
Develop Climate Ambassadors and climate leadership training programs.
IM-9-A
IM-9-B

Strengthen efforts to support youth climate education and action.

IM-9-C

Create community working groups as needed to tackle challenging implementation topics or
undertake work where greater community collaboration is needed.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 49

Implementation Strategy

Operationalizing Equity
Considering equity when implementing climate action goes beyond merely distributing resources equally.
Providing equitable access requires meeting community needs in the context of existing vulnerabilities and
inequalities.
Equity will be considered throughout the Plan implementation process through the following practices:


Design policies and programs that serve disadvantaged communities first. Target policies and
programs at communities experiencing high pollution burdens, low-income, poverty, health
issues, and exposure to climate hazards.



Engage with the community. Proactively engage community leaders on an ongoing basis.



Use the “operationalizing equity checklist” when implementing actions.

Ensuring that participation in climate action is accessible to the entire Flagstaff community will require
considering equity in policy, outreach, and infrastructure development. City staff will work to involve
diverse community voices from the start of any new initiative and will track progress towards advancing
equity.
The most effective climate initiatives achieve greenhouse gas emissions reductions, reduce vulnerabilities,
and serve disadvantaged communities. Taking climate action can create opportunities for underserved
communities and accelerate the penetration of market-based solutions. For example, some cities have
begun selling used electric fleet vehicles to members of their communities to ensure lower-cost electric
vehicles are available to a wider spectrum of the community.
It is also possible that climate action strategies may lead to adverse, unintended impacts. For example,
improving bike lanes and adding open space could increase the speed of gentrification and displacement,
while additional City fees could add new burdens for low-income communities. The potential for other,
unforeseen impacts to the community will be considered during Plan implementation, and efforts will be
made to anticipate and address any such impacts or burdens as they arise.
Equity Implementation
The following steps will ensure that the above considerations are incorporated into Plan implementation.
STRATEGY 10. Integrate equity considerations into Plan implementation.
Priority Actions
Establish a climate and equity working group to build partnerships in the community, identify
IM-10-A
community needs, determine barriers to participation, recommend ways to make climate
action events more accessible to residents, and ensure that Plan implementation follows the
nine key equity considerations in the operationalizing equity checklist.

50 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy
IM-10-B

Conduct a community-wide needs assessment to understand how needs are being met and
how climate change affects neighborhoods differently.

IM-10-C

Incorporate equity indicators into monitoring and evaluation processes.

IM-10-D

Create opportunities for youth to be actively involved in decision-making and climate action.

IM-10-E

Engage community members from all income levels, races and ethnicities, political
persuasions, and neighborhoods in Plan outreach efforts.

OPERATIONALIZING EQUITY CHECKLIST
Below are key equity considerations and questions that Flagstaff will consider when implementing
climate actions. These considerations are drawn from the City of Portland’s Climate Action Plan, which is
recognized as a leading document on integrating climate plans and equity.1


Disproportionate impacts: Does the proposed action generate burdens (including costs), either
directly or indirectly, to communities of color or low-income populations? If yes, are there
opportunities to mitigate these impacts?



Shared benefits: Can the benefits of the proposed action be targeted in progressive ways to
reduce historical or current disparities? Are the benefits dispersed not only equally, but equitably?



Accessibility: Are the benefits of the proposed action broadly accessible to households and
businesses throughout the community—particularly communities of color, low-income
populations, and minority-owned, women-owned, and emerging small businesses?



Engagement: Does the proposed action engage and empower communities of color and lowincome populations in a meaningful, authentic, and culturally appropriate manner? Are
community stakeholders involved and engaged in implementation?



Capacity: Does the proposed action help build community capacity through funding, an expanded
knowledge base, or other resources?



Alignment and partnership: Does the proposed action align with and support existing
communities of color and low-income population priorities, creating an opportunity to leverage
resources and build collaborative partnerships?



Relationship building: Does the proposed action help foster the building of effective, long-term
relationships and trust between diverse communities and local government?



Economic opportunity and staff diversity: Does the proposed action support communities of
color and low-income populations through workforce development, contracting opportunities or
the increased diversity of City and County staff?



Accountability: Does the proposed action have appropriate accountability mechanisms to ensure
that communities of color, low-income populations, or other vulnerable communities will
equitably benefit and not be disproportionately harmed?

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 51

Implementation Strategy

Accountability and Reporting
ACCOUNTABILITY
Accountability will be ensured through consistent and transparent reporting to the community and the
Sustainability Commission, which will monitor implementation progress.
To support Plan implementation and accountability, the City should join the Global Covenant of Mayors for
Climate & Energy. The Global Covenant of Mayors is an international coalition of cities committed to
climate change mitigation and resilience. Becoming a signatory would officially commit the City to
greenhouse gas reporting, submitting a plan for climate action, assessing climate risks and vulnerabilities,
and defining reduction targets. The Plan fulfills many of the Covenant’s requirements. However, ongoing
public reporting and disclosure requirements could help Flagstaff maintain momentum on
implementation, regardless of staff or elected changes.

REPORTING AND EVALUATION
This section presents a structure for ongoing monitoring, evaluation, and reporting on Plan progress.
Investing in data collection and consistent reporting is a key aspect of implementation and increases
transparency. City staff will regularly track and report on Plan indicators, greenhouse gas emissions, and
notable progress on implementing strategies.
Reporting
The City of Flagstaff has been annually monitoring and reporting both municipal and community
greenhouse gas emissions since 2008. These inventories provide insight into Flagstaff’s progress and trends
in emissions. The City will continue to update the municipal and community greenhouse gas inventories on
an annual basis.

52 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy
Regular reporting will ensure transparency and continued progress. City staff will measure progress on key
performance indicators and report to the community regularly. On an annual basis, the City Manager will
request that City staff produce a Plan progress report that includes:


Progress of each Plan action.



Key performance indicator updates, including an annual greenhouse gas inventory.

Evaluation
The Sustainability Commission will evaluate the progress of Plan implementation on an annual basis,
through review of the annual Climate Action and Adaptation Plan progress report. Informal progress
reports will be provided by City Staff at regular Climate Action Committee meetings.
Plan Updates
The City will work with community partners to update the Plan every five years. This five-year update
schedule will ensure that the plan can respond to changing circumstances, market factors, implementation
challenges, and successes. This process will include updating Plan goals, adjusting indicators, and reprioritizing actions based on local circumstances and new technologies.
STRATEGY 11. Report regularly to the community on greenhouse gas emissions and climate action.
Priority Actions
Continue to update and publish greenhouse gas emissions inventories for both the City of
IM-11-A
Flagstaff municipal organization and the Flagstaff community.
IM-11-B

Develop a Climate Action and Adaptation Progress Report to report to the community on an
annual basis, including progress on plan actions and key performance indicators.

IM-11-C

Create an online dashboard to illustrate progress on the Plan’s actions. This dashboard will be
updated annually, with indicators showing which actions have been completed, which are in
progress, and which have not been started.

IM-11-D

Coordinate with the Community Development Division to ensure key performance indicators
from this Plan are aligned with existing metrics used for annual reporting on the Flagstaff
Regional Plan.

IM-11-E

Provide an annual update to the public on Plan implementation through an annual event held
during the Flagstaff Festival of Science.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 53

Implementation Strategy

Funding
Financial investments are necessary to prepare Flagstaff for climate change. Investing in building resiliency
throughout Flagstaff has many benefits, financial and otherwise. The benefits of adaptation include the
costs we avoid by reducing or averting the negative local impacts of climate change, while mitigation helps
us avoid damage from larger changes in the climate. Climate action can also be used to strengthen local
businesses, support vulnerable community members, and improve quality of life.
Funding for the implementation of Plan strategies will need to come from within the City budget, agency
grants, and new revenue sources. Some actions in the Plan require capital investment in City infrastructure
and others will require increases in annual operating budgets. Some actions are good candidates for state,
federal, or foundation funding.
Funding options include:


Renewable energy development savings. The City of Flagstaff is committed to transitioning
to 100% renewable energy for all City government operations. When the City moves forward
with partnerships to develop renewable energy, the cost savings could be substantial. Cost
savings could then be redirected to fund climate action within Flagstaff.



Revisions to the City of Flagstaff Environmental Management Fee (EMF). The EMF,
established in 2002 and authorized in the Solid Waste Code Chapter 7-04-001-0010 FEES, is a
fee of $4 per month per utility bill charged to fund citywide environmental programs,
including but not limited to sustainability, environmental management, and conservation
education programs. The fee assessment structure could be revised to more equitably
distribute the costs of community impacts and programming designed to mitigate those
impacts. An assessment based on water consumption, for example, could generate significant
funding while promoting water conservation.

CLIMATE PREPARATION, CREDIT RISK, AND
BONDING CAPACITY
In 2017, Moody’s Investor’s Services Inc. published
a report outlining how it weights climate change
risks as part of credit rating assessments.1 The
agency assesses how a city takes action to prepare
for both short-term climate shocks and long-term
climate trends. A city that is less prepared to
handle climate extremes and instability may
receive lower credit ratings for bond issues. These
developments further reinforce the economic
incentive for cities to understand their risks and
prepare for climate change. -Climate-change-isforecast to heighten US exposure to PR 376056

54 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy


Energy efficiency upgrade savings. Energy efficiency retrofits can lead to significant savings
for City operations. These savings could be allocated to a climate action fund for reinvestment
into mitigation and adaptation actions.



Carbon pricing. The City of Flagstaff was the first city in Arizona to call for revenue-neutral
carbon fee and dividend legislation.2 A carbon fee and dividend places a fee on fossil fuels at
the source (a mine, well, or port). All revenue from this fee, minus a small administrative
portion, is returned to households equally. Carbon pricing can be both a strategy to
encourage positive environmental behaviors as well as a funding mechanism to support City
climate work. Some leading cities are experimenting with carbon impact fees, and others with
revenue neutral taxes. Strategies to price carbon and support City climate change goals could
include:
•

•
•

Develop a local carbon offset program, collecting optional financial contributions from
residents seeking to offset their carbon footprint. Proceeds would go to local climate
action projects.
Establish a carbon impact fee on new building projects to support climate mitigation
efforts.3
Implement a utility tax on fossil fuel energy that reflects the social costs of emissions.



A climate action tax. A climate action tax, if approved by Flagstaff voters, would fund climate
action. Climate action taxes are often modeled off the City of Boulder’s landmark Climate
Action Plan tax, passed by Boulder voters in both 2007 and 2015. Climate action taxes raise
revenue for climate action programs. In Boulder, tax revenue funds energy advising services
and rebates for residents, energy efficiency requirements for rental properties, and energy
pilot programs, among other initiatives.



Collaborative projects. City staff can identify projects that align with both climate goals and
community investment goals, and work to maximize the adaptation and mitigation benefits.
Economic Vitality currently supports projects that achieve both climate and economic goals
such as the Innovate Waste Challenge and the adaptive reuse program.



External funding opportunities. The City of Flagstaff, local businesses, and individuals
should pursue state and federal incentives and external funding programs. A list of these
programs is included in the Information Sources section on page 61.



Neighborhood Sustainability Grants. These grants, funded by the City of Flagstaff and
overseen by the Sustainability Commission, can catalyze climate action in the community.
This small program could be expanded and linked more closely to climate action and
mitigation.

STRATEGY 12. Create climate action funding proposals through the budget process.
Priority Action
Develop a funding proposal that supports the success of Plan implementation, which will be
IM-12-A
considered by the City Manager’s Office and the City Council as part of the annual budget
process.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 55

Implementation Strategy
FUNDING TENSIONS
The strategies and actions of this Plan will
require funding over the entire course of
implementation, creating another competing
demand on the limited City budget. Yet the
costs must be weighed against the long-term
consequences of inaction.
This Plan will not be implemented right away
or all at once. It will take time, money, and
ongoing work with the community. To ensure
that this Plan does not add undue financial
burdens for Flagstaff’s low-income
communities, Flagstaff must employ creative
funding sources and take advantage of
evolving markets and technology.
Much of Flagstaff’s greenhouse gas emissions
mitigation will be achieved by working with
the solar and electric vehicle markets, and
not against them. The City can help residents
take advantage of tax credits, remove
regulations inhibiting new technology, and
help with up-front financing. Investing in
change at key leverage points, such as during
construction, reduces the cost of action.
Many investments are low-cost or require
only staff time, yet can have a significant
impact. Flagstaff will need to embrace
innovation and get creative.
This Plan overlaps with many other City
plans; identifying common goals should be
the highest priority. Close collaboration will
highlight when seemingly unrelated projects
have climate impacts, or where small
investments can yield large returns. While
climate action is a long-term, complicated
endeavor, creative solutions will ensure that
the benefits outweigh the costs.

56 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Implementation Strategy

Community Outreach
Individual actions and community engagement are crucial to reduce emissions and adapt to climate
change. Over 300 Flagstaff community members have participated in the Plan development process,
demonstrating the City’s deep commitment to collaboratively address climate change. To continue
leveraging community engagement, the City will sustain outreach efforts in person and online through the
following methods:


The City of Flagstaff’s Climate Programs webpage. The “Climate Programs” page on the City
website will be utilized to share information on climate change and efforts to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions as well as case studies of businesses and homeowners exhibiting climate
leadership. The City’s website will also provide information on relevant rebates, incentives, and
climate action programs.



Recognizing leadership. The City can host a climate awards program to showcase businesses,
schools, and homeowners that are taking innovative climate action. The Flagstaff community can
also recognize elder wisdom embedded in communities and those community members who are
unsung experts in resource conservation, whether by necessity or tradition. Promoting success
stories demonstrates what is possible, increases awareness and provides recognition, accelerating
community progress.



Online performance dashboard. The City could develop an online dashboard to track building
and City-wide sustainability performance, thereby providing accountability and increasing
awareness. The dashboard would display energy and water use intensity of public buildings,
schools, or businesses willing to participate in the program. The dashboard could facilitate
friendly competition to see which building can reduce its energy intensity the most.



Social media. Flagstaff can grow its social media presence on platforms like Twitter, Facebook,
Instagram, and NextDoor to facilitate communication about climate change among community
members and City staff and leaders. Social media can be effective for announcing events,
soliciting feedback, and showcasing successes.



Collaboration and community group development. Relationships with existing community
groups are essential to effectively implement strategies, address equity, and spread awareness.
The City will aim to partner with local community groups to implement Plan strategies. The City
can also support the creation of new community groups focused on climate action. For example,
the City could facilitate the creation of neighborhood block groups organized around energy
efficient behavior, shared resiliency tools and resources, or renewable energy.



Partnership with the Flagstaff Climate Action Council and other organizations. The City
should identify groups focused specifically on climate action to partner with on Plan
implementation. Groups such as the Flagstaff Climate Action Council can take responsibility for
implementing various strategies and actions in the Plan that are best achieved by community
groups. Certain community groups focused specifically on climate action can become powerful
forces for Plan implementation, outreach, and achievement of community goals.



Community forums, meetings, and updates. To maintain interest and participation in Plan
implementation, the City will continue to organize public forums each year to share progress and

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 57

Implementation Strategy
new initiatives. Convening spaces for public input and education will play an invaluable role in the
ultimate success of all Plan strategies. Additionally, providing periodic public updates will hold the
City accountable for completing action in a timely manner. For example, coupling Plan reports
with a local climate action speaker series would be educational and support tracking the
implementation of Plan strategies. Coffee and Climate sessions can continue to serve as an
informal forum to discuss climate action with staff.


Community events. Engaging with a wider audience of Flagstaff residents will require having
conversations with people outside of climate-specific events. Climate advocates, City staff, and
partners should utilize existing community events as an opportunity to discuss climate action with
the general public and provide updates on the Plan. Examples include First Friday events, the
Flagstaff Festival of Science, and the County Fair.



Monthly newsletter. The City will continue to use the monthly Climate Plan newsletter to send
updates on new action and upcoming events. This channel could also be used to highlight Plan
implementation success stories or direct residents to new surveys.

STRATEGY 13. Communicate with the public and maintain momentum for implementation.
Priority Action
Create a comprehensive framework that identifies diverse outreach methods.
IM-13-A

58 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF
COMMUNITY
CLIMATE
ACTION
GUIDE
progress towards Flagstaff’s ambitious climate action goals is going
Setting a Making
to take more than just action from the City itself—individuals and community
all have a critical role to play as well. Through thoughtful and committed
goal is just groups
actions from all, Flagstaff can become a more resilient, healthier, and more
city for people to live in and visit for both current and future
the first equitable
generations. This guide highlights actions that individuals can take to
step! reduce their carbon footprint or increase community resilience.

WHICH ACTIONS WILL YOU TRY TAKING?
Reduce my garbage
Reduce the amount of food my household wastes.
Compost organic waste in my backyard or
purchase compost pick-up.
Fix things that are broken instead of buying new.
Use the Hazardous Products Center and bulky
item pick-up programs to properly dispose of old
refrigerators, e-waste, and air-conditioning units.
Talk with my contractor about alternatives
to traditional building demolition, such as
relocation, deconstruction, and salvage.
Shop locally and support local businesses.
Support efforts to reduce and limit single-use
disposable plastics.
Eat more low-carbon foods, such as minimally
processed foods, fruits, grains, and vegetables.
Encourage the creation of community gardens
on public and private lands including school
campuses, City lands, and church properties.

Reduce my energy use
Get an energy audit to find ways to increase
energy efficiency at home and at work.
Install energy conserving appliances and
fixtures, such as on-demand tankless water
heaters, Energy Star appliances, and LED
lightbulbs.
Install electric furnaces, water heaters, dryers,
stoves, and more.
Voice my support for City policies that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
Install solar PV and storage at my home—or sign
up for the APS Solar Communities program to
use my roof for solar.
Replace a wood-burning fireplace with gas or
electric.
Install alternatives to air conditioning when
renovating my home.

Start a tool lending library in my community.

Conserve water
Embrace non-car travel
Increase the number of trips I make by transit,
carpooling, walking, or biking.
Try out an electric bike for my commute.
Organize a “walking school-bus” to walk a group
of kids to school.
Delay my next purchase of a new vehicle, if it’s
possible to get more life out of my current car.
When I decide to make a purchase, I’ll investigate
electric vehicles and hybrids.
Use alternatives to air travel when possible.
Support development that creates vibrant,
higher density, mixed-use areas to reduce the
need for driving in Flagstaff.

Conduct a water audit at my home, and replace
inefficient toilets and fixtures.
Set a goal of reducing my household’s hot water
use by 15%.
Consider efficient alternatives to traditional
water heaters, like tankless water heaters,
electric heat pump water heaters, or solar
thermal hot water heaters.
Install a rain barrel to harvest rainwater for
outdoor use.
Replace turf grass with drought tolerant
landscaping or native plants; install smart
technology on existing irrigation systems.

City of Flagstaff
Community Climate Action Guide

Implementation Strategy

INFORMATION SOURCES
EXTERNAL FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES
Federal incentives and programs
• Residential renewable energy and efficiency tax credits: http://www.energystar.gov/taxcredits
• Business Energy Investment Tax Credit for renewable energy:
https://www.energy.gov/savings/business-energy-investment-tax-credit-itc
• Federal Energy Management Program for federal agency energy efficiency (FEMP):
https://www.energy.gov/eere/femp/federal-energy-management-program
• Fannie Mae Green Financing: https://www.fanniemae.com/multifamily/green-initiative-financing.
• Rural Energy for America Program: Renewable Energy Systems & Energy Efficiency Improvement
Loans & Grants; Energy Audit & Renewable Energy Development Assistance Grants:
https://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/all-programs/energy-programs
• FHA PowerSaver Loan Program: https://www.energy.gov/savings/fha-powersaver-loan-program.
• Federal Tax Credit for Electric Vehicles: https://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/taxevb.shtml
• FEMA Hazard Mitigation Assistance: https://www.fema.gov/hazard-mitigation-assistance
• Natural Resource Conservation Service Programs: Conservation Stewardship Program;
Environmental Quality Incentives Program; Water Bank Program and Agricultural Management
Assistance: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/
Arizona and APS programs
• Renewable Energy Production Tax Credit: https://azdor.gov/tax-credits/renewable-energyproduction-tax-credit
• Multifamily Energy Efficiency Program: https://www.aps.com/en/business/savemoney/bybusiness-type/Pages/multifamily.aspx
• APS Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program:
https://www.aps.com/en/residential/savemoneyandenergy/your-options/Pages/home.aspx
• Energy Star Homes Program for Builders: https://www.aps.com/en/ourcompany/doingbusiness
withus/constructioncorner/Pages/energy-star-homes-program-for-builders.aspx
• APS Business rebates: https://www.aps.com/en/business/savemoney/businesssolutions
External Funding Opportunities
• Keeling Curve Prize and the Urban Sustainability Director’s Network micro-grant funding

REFERENCES
Climate change is forecast to heighten US exposure to economic loss placing short- and long-term credit
pressure on US states and local governments.” Moody’s Investors Service. November 28th 2017.
https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-Climate-change-is-forecast-to-heighten-US-exposure-to-PR_376056.
2
“Climate Programs.” The City of Flagstaff Arizona. http://flagstaff.az.gov/1732/Climate City Council Climate
Action section.
3
See Watsonville’s Ordinance creating a Carbon Impact Fee: Ordinance No. 1314-15. City of Watsonville . 30
March 2015. https://www.cityofwatsonville.org/DocumentCenter/View/196/Carbon-Fund-Ordinance-PDF
1

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 61

Implementation Strategy

This Plan was created by the Flagstaff community, for the Flagstaff
community. Meaningful conversations with residents helped shape the goals
and strategies discussed in this Plan.

62 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Natural Environment

A longer warm season and drier climate
are likely to reduce overall forest health,
lead to more damaging and hazardous
wildfires and floods, and enable
worsening pine beetle infestations. Forest
management and emergency response
systems will need to be ready to respond
to these growing threats.

Forest Health and Wildfire
Vulnerability to Climate Change
By 2100, Flagstaff communities are likely to face:
HIGH
VULNERABILITY

HIGH
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-HIGH
VULNERABILITY

HIGH
VULNERABILITY

Overall declines in
forest health and
widespread forest
loss due to wildfires,
drought, pests, and
invasive species.

Larger, more
frequent standreplacing
wildfires.

Larger, more
frequent flooding
after wildfires.
More floods in
general.

More beetle
infestations and
invasive species
due to warmer,
drier conditions.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 65







—

—

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Water Resources

Our water comes from forests at high
risk of significant wildfire damage.
Despite progress in water conservation,
as our population grows, tourism
increases, and the climate changes, we
expect to face water shortages despite
progress in water conservation. Our
community will need to be ready.

Water Supply, Quality, and Infrastructure
Vulnerability to Climate Change
By 2100, Flagstaff communities are likely to face:
HIGH
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-HIGH
VULNERABILITY

Reduced water
More wildfire,
availability and
drought, and
increased demand are flooding are likely
expected to accelerate to impair water
the need to develop
quality.
new water supply
projects.

76 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

HIGH
VULNERABILITY

More wildfire and
flooding is likely
to significantly
damage natural and
human-made water
infrastructure.



















SMARTregs

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Energy
STRATEGIES AND ACTIONS
STRATEGY 1. Improve energy efficiency in all sectors.
Constructing and upgrading buildings to meet the highest thresholds for green building performance can
dramatically reduce long-term energy use and emissions.
Priority Actions
Establish a revolving loan fund to advance energy efficiency upgrades and make $125,000
E-1-A
available annually in loans for building efficiency upgrades.
E-1-B

Develop viable financing options for energy efficiency upgrades to commercial and
residential buildings, such as a revolving loan program and new service and product models
that enable homeowners to participate in energy efficiency improvements without upfront
costs.

E-1-C

Fund and implement a contractor training and rebate program for solar thermal, on-demand
water heaters, electric heat-pump space heaters, and conversions from gas to electric
appliances, based on analysis demonstrating reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

E-1-D

Subsidize home energy efficiency retrofits for affordable housing units, and housing that
serves low-income and senior populations while maintaining the supply of existing housing.

E-1-E

Adhere to a consistent schedule for adopting the most up-to-date energy codes in alignment
with Coconino County, ensure enforcement, and consider where local Flagstaff codes should
exceed minimum standards.

E-1-F

Perform a full-scale energy audit and implement recommended energy retrofits for all City of
Flagstaff facilities from this full-scale audit and the Airport Sustainability Plan.

E-1-G

Develop and adopt a SmartReg rental licensing policy program requiring minimum efficiency
standards for all housing rentals.

E-1-H

Require zero-net-energy construction for all new residential and commercial buildings by
2040.

E-1-I

Work with partners to develop a specific plan for an aggressive building electrification
program to decrease reliance on combustion fuels.

Other Actions
Expand homeowner energy efficiency workshops and other energy efficiency outreach and
E-1-J
strengthen partnership support for the Coconino County Sustainable Building Program.
E-1-K

88 |

Develop an EnergySmart program to offer technical assistance, help schedule contractors for
energy efficiency improvements, and offer incentives above and beyond what is offered by the
utility.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Energy
E-1-L

Develop a policy requiring new affordable housing to be energy-efficient.

E-1-M

During City facility upgrades and new construction, install electric space and water heaters.

E-1-N

Work with APS to develop programs that incentivize residents to electrify water and space
heating.

E-1-O

Introduce a policy that rewards builders who go beyond energy efficiency code requirements
or obtain 3rd-party certification for green building performance, such as LEED certification, with
lower City fees and expedited review.

STRATEGY 2. Expand renewable energy generation and use.
Clean energy generation presents a key opportunity to cut greenhouse gas emissions, enhance resiliency,
and promote long-term economic security. Careful consideration should be given to ensure that any
energy development is truly reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Priority Actions
Move forward with City Council target of 100% renewable energy use for the municipality with
E-2-A
a plan for achieving that target by 2025.
E-2-B

Move forward with City Council target of 100% renewable energy use for the community with a
plan for achieving that target by 2050.

E-2-C

Establish a revolving loan fund to advance renewable energy and make $125,000 available
annually in loans for renewable energy development.

E-2-D

Buy and produce local and regional renewable energy, including through partnerships with
Arizona tribes.

E-2-E

Introduce local policies that incentivize renewable energy adoption and passive solar. This
could include providing funding for expedited building code review for new homes with solar
and for solar installations on existing homes as well as reduced City fees for homes with
renewable energy.

E-2-F

Establish a locally controlled revolving loan fund or similar mechanism to improve community
access to financing for renewable energy development—particularly solar—at commercial and
residential sites.

E-2-G

Update City code to require pre-wiring for solar in all new residential and commercial buildings
to reduce the cost of post-construction rooftop solar, battery storage, and electric charging
system installations.

Other Actions
Improve the co-digestion process at Wildcat Hill Water Reclamation Plant and increase clean
E-2-H
energy production.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 89

The City will advocate for the following state-level actions to help achieve our greenhouse gas
emissions reduction goals:
• State legislative and regulatory changes to allow broader implementation of solar in the community
and decrease the proportion of fossil fuels in the energy mix.
• A statewide home performance rating system to require home energy performance scores at the
sale of a home.
• Allowing cities to require energy benchmarking, to compare the energy performance of buildings
over time and across the City to inform and motivate performance improvement.
• Improvements in and expansion of demand-side management programs and incentives.
• Legislation enabling local governments to establish Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (CPACE) programs.

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Introduction and Land Use
Transportation

As our population continues to grow,
we may have more people living in
wildfire- and flood-prone areas despite
the goals of our regional growth plan.
Hotter temperatures may stress some
infrastructure.

Land Use, Infrastructure, and Affordable Housing
Vulnerability to Climate Change
By 2100, Flagstaff communities are likely to face:
MEDIUM
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-LOW
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM
VULNERABILITY

Wildfires and hotter, Greater population
Hotter
Hotter
drier conditions
density is planned temperatures may temperatures may
may make healthy, away from wildfire- increase energy
increase energy
open space more
and flood-prone
costs and stress
costs and make
difficult to sustain. areas, with more
infrastructure.
summer cooling out
city parks and open
of reach for many
space to provide
households.
shade.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 93









FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Transportation and Land Use
STRATEGY 2. Prioritize, incentivize, and promote transportation by biking, walking, and transit.
Traveling by biking, walking, and transit has far less of a climate impact than traveling by personal vehicle.
Priority Actions
Expand infrastructure and amenities for pedestrians and bikes by drafting, adopting, funding,
TLU-2-A
and implementing the Active Transportation Master Plan, prioritizing measures that can be
shown to directly reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
TLU-2-B

Implement the transit-supportive recommendations of the Northern Arizona
Intergovernmental Public Transportation Authority (NAIPTA) Five-Year Transit Plan for the
Mountain Line, to increase ridership and transit frequency on the permanent transit network.

TLU-2-C

In order to analyze greenhouse gas emissions impacts for all major transportation
infrastructure decisions, evaluate transportation impacts based on vehicle miles traveled
(VMT), considering person trips.

TLU-2-D

Prioritize bus operations through mechanisms such as signal prioritization, bus slip lanes, and
bus-dedicated lanes. Evaluate the feasibility of introducing dedicated bus lanes or carpool
lanes.

TLU-2-E

Adopt a complete active transportation network policy to ensure there are efficient,
comfortable, appealing, and safe connections throughout Flagstaff for all road users.

TLU-2-F

Secure additional funding to support biking, walking, and transit.

Other Actions
Increase transit service coverage and frequency, including enhancing bus, vanpooling, and
TLU-2-G
shuttle services for outlying communities such as Kachina Village and Bellemont.
TLU-2-H

Develop transit services for visitors to Flagstaff, including to popular destinations such as
Snowbowl, Twin Arrows, and the Grand Canyon, and between Phoenix and Flagstaff.

TLU-2-I

Add showers to City facilities to encourage commuting by active transportation and support
employee health.

TLU-2-J

Re-establish local safe routes to school programming, including programs like trip tracker
dollars and in-school education, to decrease the number of students being driven to school.

TLU-2-K

Promote educational events that teach people how to bike safely and use the bus, and provide
information about the financial, health, and other benefits of transit and active transportation.

TLU-2-L

Increase access to bikes, including electric bikes, through bikeshare, expanded bike parking,
electric bike rebates, and other opportunities.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 99

The City will advocate for the following state-level actions to help achieve our greenhouse gas
emissions goals:
• State-level policies that would encourage more climate-friendly land use policies, including
inclusionary zoning, transfer of development rights, and tax increment financing.
• More stringent vehicle emissions inspection requirements.
• Allowing inclusionary housing, to harness the economic power of the private market to increase the
supply of affordable housing.
• Additional state funding for public transit and active transportation systems.







FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Waste and Consumption
STRATEGIES AND ACTIONS
STRATEGY 1. Increase waste diversion.
Diverting waste keeps material out of landfills, where it would break down and generate greenhouse gases.
Reduction, recycling, reuse, and composting offer climate-positive alternatives to sending waste to the
landfill.
Priority Actions
Expand infrastructure and introduce new technology to divert new waste streams.
WC-1-A
WC-1-B

Expand composting services to divert and reduce food waste from the landfill, including
curbside compost pickup and provision of composting bins.

WC-1-C

Introduce a yard waste program to divert yard waste from the landfill.

WC-1-D

Provide equal access to recycling services for single-family and multifamily housing and
commercial facilities.

WC-1-E

Conduct a study to evaluate the costs and benefits associated with mandating waste
diversion.

WC-1-F

Require and incentivize the collection and diversion of construction and demolition waste.

WC-1-G

Install hydration stations at public facilities to reduce bottle waste.

WC-1-H

Plan for waste diversion services, including recycling, at multi-family housing and commercial
developments.

Other Actions
Develop incentives to divert more waste in the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors,
WC-1-I
such as rate structures, density bonuses, and volumetric pricing.
WC-1-J

Promote new markets for recycled or reused materials, such as through increased local
business purchasing of recycled products and increased reuse of construction materials.

WC-1-K

Introduce restrictions on straws at stores and restaurants.

WC-1-L

Increase community utilization of the Hazardous Products Center.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 109

The EPA Food Recovery Hierarchy can be used in food recovery programming and takes into
account reducing both greenhouse gas emissions and waste in the food system.

The City will advocate for the following state-level actions to help achieve our greenhouse gas
emissions goals:
• Allowance of plastic bag bans or fees and a beverage container deposit program.
• Requirements for access to recycling services at multi-family housing units.
• Support for materials management initiatives at the local level, such as extended producer
responsibility or a bottle bill.
• Extension of producer responsibility at the state and federal levels.

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Public Health, Services, Facilities & Safety

A longer warm season and more
intense wildfires may increase the risk
of some diseases, mental illnesses, and
respiratory health concerns. Emergency
response systems will need to be ready
to respond to these risks.

Public Health, Safety, and Emergency Services
Vulnerability to Climate Change
By 2100, Flagstaff communities are likely to face:
MEDIUM
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM
VULNERABILITY

More periods of More extreme
poor air quality
heat days
due to larger and (>90°F) could
more frequent
increase risk
wildfires.
of heat-related
illness.

42 | CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

LOW
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-LOW
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-LOW
VULNERABILITY

Increased
More frequent Increased exposure
exposure to
extreme events to valley fever and
allergens is
could increase West Nile virus is
possible as
risk of mental
possible as the
spring grows
health issues.
warm season
warmer and
lengthens. Existing
more dry
response resources
weather
may be adequate.
increases dust.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 115







FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Public Health, Services, Facilities, & Safety
STRATEGY 4. Improve the resiliency of public infrastructure.
Functional public infrastructure such as roads, shelters, and utility services are critical for sustainable
economic and social wellbeing in the face of climate change. Actions to improve the resiliency of public
infrastructure, such as through improved maintenance and planning, will enable the community to
withstand unanticipated shocks and disruptions like flood events.
Priority Actions
Create preparedness and recovery plans for all City divisions.
PH-4-A
PH-4-B

Prepare for public buildings to be used in different ways, both in lower-impact ways, such as
seniors using the library to cool down during hot June days, and as safe-havens during acute
emergencies.

Other Actions
Update asphalt engineering standards and maintenance practices to increase resiliency amidst
PH-4-C
higher temperatures and increased incidences of flooding.
PH-4-D

Incorporate green infrastructure principles into all public infrastructure projects, creating more
natural amenities throughout the City.

PH-4-E

Develop reserve funding for extreme weather events in the City of Flagstaff.

STRATEGY 5. Prepare for changing risks to public health due to climate change.
As climate change increases the risk of some diseases, collaborations across agencies will enable more
efficient response.
Priority Actions
Continue collaborations to study and prepare for increased risk of illness and disease due to
PH-5-A
increased dust, a warmer climate, higher mosquito densities, and other potential results of
climate change.
PH-5-B

Initiate a working group on public health and climate change, including participation from the
Coconino County Public Health Services District (CCPHSD), the City of Flagstaff, and NAU,
among others.

Other Actions
Increase collaboration to evaluate the interaction between the built environment and disease
PH-5-C
vectors like mosquitos.
PH-5-D

Study how the changing ecosystem around Flagstaff contributes to increased risk of disasters.

PH-5-E

Support CCPHSD in providing education to healthcare providers on how climate change will
affect heat-related illness, altitude-related issues, fatalities, and demand for services.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 121

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Economic Prosperity and Recreation

Significant losses are expected
to snow-based tourism and
recreation as snowpack declines.
Our businesses and services
will need to be ready to handle a
prounounced shift to warm-season
recreation and tourism.

Tourism and Recreation
Vulnerability to Climate Change
By 2100, Flagstaff communities are likely to face:
MEDIUM-HIGH
VULNERABILITY

MEDIUM-LOW
VULNERABILITY

Significant
snowpack loss
may reduce
winter recreation
and tourism.

More wildfire,
drought, or
extreme heat may
temporarily reduce
recreation and
tourism in summer,
spring, and fall.

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

| 123







•
•
•

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule

Implementation Summary and Schedule
The following table lays out actions in this plan along with information relevant to implementation, including timeframe for implementation and
responsible parties. This implementation matrix covers all of the Priority Actions in each sector.

KEY
Cost

Timeframe

Lever

131 |

Very Low: Less than $50,000
Low: $50,000 to $1,000,000
Medium: $1,000,000 to $7,000,000
High: More than $7,000,000
Shorter-term actions (2019-2025) may be:
 Relatively easy and quick to implement
 Precursors for other additional actions
Longer-term actions (2026 to 2030) may be:
 More difficult or time-intensive to implement
 Contingent upon new funding sources, preliminary research, or coordination with partner entities
 Less important to get started early (e.g., lower priority/ranking action)
 A logical follow-on to a shorter-term action
Policy: a new requirement or formal adoption of a plan
Infrastructure: development or changes to physical structures (e.g., bike lanes, solar panels)
Information/Education: development of informational materials, education and outreach programs, community
engagement
Management: changes in day-to-day management practices

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION
ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Low

Sustainability
Section

Low

COST

CO-BENEFITS

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

City

Ongoing

Policy

Sustainability
Section

City

Long Term

Management

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Long Term

Policy

Medium

Sustainability
Section,
Budget Team

City

Long Term

Management

Both

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

3 Months

Policy

Both

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

6 Months

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Short Term

Education

Both

Low

Sustainability
Section,
Community
Development

City

Short Term

Management

Both

Low

City Council

City

Short Term

Management

IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
STRATEGY 1. Reinforce organizational commitments to climate action.
IM-1-A
IM-1-B
IM-1-C

IM-1-D

Join the Global Covenant of Mayors.

Both

Update the City of Flagstaff greenhouse gas emissions goals
Mitigation
to match the goals of this Plan.
Develop a climate mitigation and adaptation decision matrix
to be integrated into City plan creation and updates, including Both
the regional plan, zoning code, and engineering standards.
Establish financing systems that facilitate investments,
emergency funds and cash-flow availability to develop
climate adaptation initiatives.

Both

STRATEGY 2. Establish a foundation for successful Plan implementation.
IM-2-A
IM-2-B

Refine targets for all goals in the first six months of
implementation.
Create detailed blueprints for the implementation of each
Plan strategy, in the first six months of implementation.

IM-2-C

Host a community conversation on the Global Warming of
1.5° C special report by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, to identify if City goals should be refined.

IM-2-D

Identify how city codes complement this Plan and identify
areas that may need minor and major modifications.

STRATEGY 3. Include climate action in Council priorities.
IM-3-A

Identify goals for the upcoming City Council term that will
support Plan implementation.

132 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION
ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

IM-3-B

Identify City Council budgetary priorities to support Plan
implementation.

Both

IM-3-C

Identify state and federal legislative priorities that support
the goals of the Plan and enable implementation of Plan
strategies and actions.

Both

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Low

City Council

City

Low

City Council

City

CO-BENEFITS

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

State of
Arizona

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Long Term

Policy

Long Term

Policy

STRATEGY 4. Utilize the Sustainability Commission to oversee and promote the Plan.
IM-4-A

Review the Climate Action and Adaptation Plan progress
report annually to assess the effectiveness of Plan
implementation.

Both

Low

Sustainability
Commission

City

Ongoing

Management

IM-4-B

As part of the annual budget process, make
recommendations to the City Manager’s Office for areas to
prioritize in the City Manager’s proposed budget.

Both

Low

Sustainability
Commission

City

Long Term

Management

STRATEGY 5. Prioritize climate action across the organization.
IM-5-A

The City Manager will host the first biannual Climate
Roundtable.

Both

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Short Term

Management

IM-5-B

Form a Climate Action Committee to coordinate activities
across the municipal organization, consisting of Climate
Action Leads from each City division.

Both

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Long Term

Management

IM-5-C

Renew the City’s commitment to the actions recommended
in the City of Flagstaff Resiliency and Preparedness Study,
adopted by City Council in 2012.

Adaptation

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Long Term

Policy

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Ongoing

Management

Resiliency

STRATEGY 6. Incorporate climate priorities into the budget process.

IM-6-A

Each division will identify efforts that support resiliency and
greenhouse gas mitigation during the annual budget review
process, strategic planning and workplan implementation.

133 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Low

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION
ID

IM-6-B

IM-6-C

IM-6-D

IM-6-E

DESCRIPTION

The City Manager’s office will ensure that climate action is
prioritized and used as a criterion in budget team decisionmaking.
The City Manager’s proposed budget, presented during the
annual budget review process, will incorporate a report on
climate mitigation and adaptation projects that are funded
in existing workplans or will be incorporated into workplans
for the fiscal year.
In preparation for the annual budget process, identify
Capital Improvement Program projects that will mitigate the
City's vulnerability to climate change impacts.
To capitalize on existing programmatic infrastructure, take
steps to expand existing programs such as residential
energy efficiency rebates, Home Energy Efficiency 101
Workshops, Neighborhood Sustainability Grants, and
Climate Ambassador programming.

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

Both

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

Both

Low

Adaptation

Both

CO-BENEFITS

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

City

Long Term

Management

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Long Term

Policy

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Low

City
Manager’s
Office

City

Ongoing

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Policy

Adaptation

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Long Term

Policy

Sustainability
Section

City

Long Term

Policy

Management

STRATEGY 7. Develop a City-wide Climate Plan integration process.
IM-7-A

IM-7-B

Continue to track municipal greenhouse gas emissions and
publish a greenhouse gas inventory, improving
dissemination to City staff.
Update the City of Flagstaff Resiliency and Preparedness
Study to recognize evolving scientific understanding of
climate change risks and identify how City vulnerabilities
have changed.

IM-7-C

Implement a municipal planning process that focuses on
education and capacity building, climate action assessment, Both
and integration into division budgets.

IM-7-D

Create a data management plan for the organization to
integrate climate-related considerations into the work of all
divisions.

134 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section, IT

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION
ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

City
Manager’s
Office

City

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

Management

STRATEGY 8. Ensure staff capacity exists to implement the Plan.
IM-8-A

Evaluate staffing needs to address the priorities
identified in the Plan, and provide adequate resources to

Both

Low

implement the Plan.

STRATEGY 9. Support community leadership on climate action.
IM-9-A

Develop Climate Ambassadors and climate leadership
training programs.

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

NAU, CCC,
FUSD

Long Term

Management

IM-9-B

Strengthen efforts to support youth climate education and
action.

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

NAU, CCC,
FUSD

Long Term

Management

IM-9-C

Create community working groups as needed to tackle
challenging implementation topics or undertake work
where greater community collaboration is needed.

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Short Term

Management

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City

Short Term

Management

Adaptation

Low

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City

Long Term

Management

Both

Low

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Management

Both

Low

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Short Term

Management

Both

Low

Quality of Life

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Short Term

Policy

STRATEGY 10. Integrate equity considerations into Plan implementation.

IM-10-A

IM-10-B
IM-10-C
IM-10-D
IM-10-E

Establish a climate and equity working group to build
partnerships in the community, identify community needs,
determine barriers to participation, recommend ways to
make climate action events more accessible to residents,
and ensure that Plan implementation follows the nine key
equity considerations in the operationalizing equity
checklist.
Conduct a community-wide needs assessment to
understand how needs are being met and how climate
change affects neighborhoods differently.
Incorporate equity indicators into monitoring and
evaluation processes.
Create opportunities for youth to be actively involved in
decision-making and climate action.
Engage community members from all income levels, races
and ethnicities, political persuasions, and neighborhoods in
Plan outreach efforts.

135 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

NAU, CCC,
FUSD

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION
ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Low

Sustainability
Section

Low

COST

CO-BENEFITS

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

City

Ongoing

Policy

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Information

Low

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Ongoing

Information

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Information

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Ongoing

Information

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Policy

Sustainability
Section

City

Ongoing

Policy

STRATEGY 11. Report regularly to the community on greenhouse gas emissions and climate action.
IM-11-A

IM-11-B

IM-11-C

IM-11-D

IM-11-E

Continue to update and publish greenhouse gas emissions
inventories for both the City of Flagstaff municipal
organization and the Flagstaff community.

Mitigation

Develop a Climate Action and Adaptation Progress Report to
Both
report to the community on an annual basis, including
progress on plan actions and key performance indicators.
Create an online dashboard to illustrate progress on the
Plan’s actions. This dashboard will be updated annually,
Both
with indicators showing which actions have been
completed, which are in progress, and which have not been
started.
Coordinate with the Community Development Division to
ensure key performance indicators from this Plan are
Both
aligned with existing metrics used for annual reporting on
the Flagstaff Regional Plan.
Provide an annual update to the public on Plan
implementation, through an annual event held during the
Flagstaff Festival of Science.

Both

Low

Resiliency

STRATEGY 12. Create climate action funding proposals through the budget process.

IM-12-A

Develop a funding proposal that supports the success of
Plan implementation, which will be considered by the City
Manager’s Office and the City Council as part of the annual
budget process.

Both

Low

STRATEGY 13. Communicate with the public and maintain momentum for implementation.
IM-13-A

Create a comprehensive framework that identifies diverse
outreach methods.

136 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Low

Resiliency

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
STRATEGY 1. Protect existing forests, resources, and meaningful open spaces.
NE-1-A

Support planning and zoning efforts that
protect natural resources, including surface
water resources.

Both

Low

Environment

Community
Development

City and
community

Coconino County

Ongoing

Policy

NE-1-B

Reduce urban encroachment into the forest,
such as by promoting infill development as
supported in the Regional Plan.

Both

Very
Low

Environment

Community
Development

City

Development
community

Ongoing

Policy

NE-1-C

Integrate leave no trace into City
programming, including Open Space, Parks
and Recreation and the Flagstaff Fire
Department programs.

Adaptation

Low

Environment

Sustainability
Section

City

Coconino County

Short Term

Flagstaff Fire
Department

City and
community

Greater Flagstaff
Forest
Partnership

Short Term

Policy

City

Greater Flagstaff
Forest
Partnership,
Coconino
County, State of
Arizona, U.S.
Forest Service

Long Term

Policy

STRATEGY 2. Improve forest management through collaboration with regional partners.
NE-2-A

Identify permanent funding from the City of
Flagstaff to support forest health
improvements to reduce wildfire risk and
provide ecosystem service protection.

NE-2-B

Establish long-term governmental
agreements with federal, state, local, tribal,
non-profit and private partners to implement
aggressive forest thinning, prescribed
burning, post-treatment monitoring, and
invasive weed control.

137 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Both

High

High

Quality of
Life,
Economy

Quality of
Life,
Economy

Flagstaff Fire
Department

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

NE-2-C

Support forest product industry innovation
and the construction of a biomass-based
energy facility to use the abundant forest
products resulting from the thinning and
restoration of regional forests.

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

Both

COST

Mediu
m

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Long Term

Infrastructure

Short Term

Information,
Education

Long Term

Management

Quality of
Life,
Economy

Economic
Vitality

Community

Greater Flagstaff
Forest
Partnership,
Coconino
County, State of
Arizona, U.S.
Forest Service

Quality of
Life,
Economy,
Public Health

Flagstaff Fire
Department

City

Greater Flagstaff
Forest
Partnership

Quality of life,
Economy,
Public Health

Flagstaff Fire
Department

City

STRATEGY 3. Educate the public on forest health risk and fire prevention.

NE-3-A

Expand public awareness campaigns on
human-caused fires including linkages
between public health, quality of life, and
ecological resources, targeted at both
Flagstaff residents and visitors.

Adaptation

Very
Low

NE-3-B

Create a new, permanent City of Flagstaff staff
position, with dedicated funding, for outreach
and education related to forest health.

Adaptation

Mediu
m

STRATEGY 4: Encourage diverse native plant ecosystems in the built environment.
NE-4-A

Expand current incentive programs to
encourage low-water and climate-adapted
native landscaping.

Both

Low

Environment

Water
Services

City and
community

Flagstaff
Arboretum

Short Term

Policy

NE-4-B

Strengthen current zoning code requirements
for native landscaping to include the use of
climate-adapted varieties of native species
that can survive in changing conditions.

Both

Low

Environment

Community
Development

City

Flagstaff
Arboretum, NAU

Short Term

Policy

138 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

STRATEGY 5: Proactively manage for expected ecosystem transitions, including the potential threats to ponderosa pine forests.

NE-5-A

NE-5-B

Collaborate with the research community on
projects related to assisted migration and
identification of plant varieties that are more
tolerant of future climate conditions.
Partner with land managers to increase the
use of climate-adapted native plants in all
restoration efforts.

Adaptation

Adaptation

Low

Low

Quality of life

Water
Services

Community

NAU, CCC,
Flagstaff
Arboretum

Long Term

Information

Long Term

Policy

Short Term

Policy

Infrastructure

Quality of life

Water
Services

City

Coconino
County, State of
Arizona, U.S.
Forest Service,
Bureau of Land
Management

NAU

WATER RESOURCES
STRATEGY 1. Improve water infrastructure and expand water reuse.
WR-1-A

Evaluate the greenhouse gas emissions and
financial impacts of potable reuse, water
importation, and groundwater mining.

Both

Low

Economy

Water
Services

City

WR-1-B

Incorporate enhanced energy efficiency and
smart controls into water production and
wastewater treatment designs on new
projects and upgrades of existing equipment.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

City Budget

Water
Services

City

Ongoing

WR-1-C

Increase the efficiency of municipal irrigation
systems and practices.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

City Budget

Water
Services

City

Ongoing

139 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

WR-1-D

Purchase backup generators for the Flagstaff
water and wastewater infrastructure system
in order to achieve the City Council’s goal of
providing a “sustained minimal” level of water
services in the event of a catastrophic power
loss.

Adaptation

Mediu
m

Resiliency

Water
Services

City

Water
Services

City

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

STRATEGY 2. Improve ecosystem management for protection of water resources.

WR-2-A

Maximize groundwater recharge, such as by
prioritizing the use of reclaimed water to
recharge aquifers and protecting recharge
zones in perpetuity.

Adaptation

Low

Environment

NAU

Long Term

Management

Long Term

Education

STRATEGY 3. Continue to support water conservation efforts across the Flagstaff community.
WR-3-A

WR-3-B

WR-3-C

WR-3-D

WR-3-E

Expand public education on water
conservation and the “one water” concept,
which says that all water is reusable.
Work with high water users within the
recreational, commercial, and manufacturing
customer classes to maximize water use
efficiency.
Develop policy and processes to evaluate
water use and community benefits such as
economic development when permitting new
businesses and community events.
Evaluate the viability of introducing various
water conservation requirements for new
construction, such as rainwater harvesting for
irrigated spaces.
Create a repair loan program for City
customers to encourage repairs to aging
water infrastructure in homes and businesses.

140 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Adaptation

Low

Resiliency

Water
Services

City and
community

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Water
Services

City and
community

Business
community

Short Term

Management

Both

Low

Economy

Community
Development

City

Business
community

Long Term

Management

Both

Low

Water
Services

City

Development
community

Short Term

Information

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Water
Services

City

Development
community

Medium
term

Economy

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

City

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Long Term

Management

STRATEGY 4. Maximize passive and active community rainwater infiltration.

WR-4-A

Increase implementation of low impact
development and water programs, including
rainwater harvesting, the low impact
development ordinance, and the NPDES
Section 402 Program.

Both

Mediu
m

Environment

Water
Services

WR-4-B

Maintain the rural floodplain ordinance.

Adaptation

Low

Quality of Life

Community
Development

City

Coconino County

Ongoing

Policy

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino County

Short Term

Policy

ENERGY
STRATEGY 1. Improve energy efficiency in all sectors.

E-1-A

E-1-B

Establish a revolving loan fund to advance
energy efficiency upgrades and make
$125,000 available annually in loans for
building efficiency upgrades.
Develop viable financing options for energy
efficiency upgrades to commercial and
residential buildings, such as a revolving loan
program and new service and product models
that enable homeowners to participate in
energy efficiency improvements without
upfront costs.

141 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

E-1-C

E-1-D

E-1-E

DESCRIPTION

Fund and implement a contractor training
and rebate program for solar thermal, ondemand water heaters, electric heat-pump
space heaters, and conversions from gas to
electric appliances, based on analysis
demonstrating reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions.
Subsidize home energy efficiency retrofits for
affordable housing units, and housing that
serves low-income and senior populations
while maintaining the supply of existing
housing.
Adhere to a consistent schedule for adopting
the most up-to-date energy codes in
alignment with Coconino County, ensure
enforcement, and consider where local
Flagstaff codes should exceed minimum
standards.

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

Mitigation

Low

Both

Mediu
m

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Contractors,
business
community, APS,
Coconino County

Short Term

Education,
Policy

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Contractors,
business
community, APS,
Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

Community
Development

City

Contractors,
development
community, APS,
Coconino County

Short Term

Policy

Mitigation

Low

E-1-F

Perform a full-scale energy audit and
implement recommended energy retrofits for
all City of Flagstaff facilities from this full-scale
audit and the Airport Sustainability Plan.

Mitigation

Low

City Budget

Sustainability
Section

City

APS

Short Term

Infrastructure

E-1-G

Develop and adopt a SmartReg rental
licensing policy program requiring minimum
efficiency standards for all housing rentals.

Mitigation

Low

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City

Property owners
and managers,
Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Quality of Life

Sustainability
Section

City

Development
community

Long Term

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Development
community

Short Term

Policy

E-1-H

E-1-I

Require zero-net-energy construction for all
new residential and commercial buildings by
2040.
Work with partners to develop a specific plan
for an aggressive building electrification
program to decrease reliance on combustion
fuels.

142 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

STRATEGY 2. Expand renewable energy generation and use.
E-2-A

Move forward with City Council target of 100%
renewable energy use for the municipality
with a plan for achieving that target by 2025.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City

APS, tribal
nations

Short Term

Policy,
infrastructure

E-2-B

Move forward with City Council target of 100%
renewable energy use for the community with
a plan for achieving that target by 2050.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

APS

Long Term

Policy,
infrastructure

E-2-C

Establish a revolving loan fund to advance
renewable energy and make $125,000
available annually in loans for renewable
energy development.

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City

APS

Short Term

Policy

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

APS, tribal
nations

Long Term

Infrastructure

City and
community

APS

Short Term

Policy

City and
community

APS

Long Term

Policy

E-2-D

E-2-E

E-2-F

Buy and produce local and regional
renewable energy, including through
partnerships with Arizona tribes.
Introduce local policies that incentivize
renewable energy adoption and passive solar.
This could include providing funding for
expedited building code review for new
homes with solar and for solar installations on
existing homes as well as reduced City fees for
homes with renewable energy.
Establish a locally controlled revolving loan
fund or similar mechanism to improve
community access to financing for renewable
energy development—particularly solar—at
commercial and residential sites.

143 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Economy

Sustainability
Section

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

E-2-G

Update City code to require pre-wiring for
solar in all new residential and commercial
buildings to reduce the cost of postconstruction rooftop solar, battery storage,
and electric charging system installations.

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

Mitigation

COST

Low

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Economy

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

City

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

Policy

STRATEGY 3. Manage energy demand and consumption in residential, commercial, and industrial sectors, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

E-3-A

Collaborate with large energy users, such as
Northern Arizona University, on reducing
energy consumption and adopting new
energy-saving technologies.

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Sustainability
Section

Community

NAU, business
community

Long Term

Management

E-3-B

Provide tools and resources to help
households manage their energy use.

Both

Mediu
m

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

APS

Short Term

Education

E-3-C

Update the building code to clarify steps for
the installation of battery storage systems by
residents and businesses.

Economy

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

City

APS

Short Term

Policy

Both

Low

TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE
STRATEGY 1. Advance land use planning that minimizes the distance people have to travel by car and that increases community resiliency.
TLU-1-A

TLU-1-B

Support intentional high-density
development that increases mixed uses and
residential density.
Increase the supply of attainable housing in
proximity to employment opportunities,
activity centers, and the permanent transit
network.

144 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Mitigation

Low

Quality of Life

Community
Development

Community

Development
community

Ongoing

Policy

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Equity,
Quality of Life

Community
Development

City and
community

Development
community

Long Term

Policy

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

TLU-1-C

Reduce vulnerability of new developments to
fire and flooding, including encouraging
development to reduce the risk of fire and
flooding impacts by locating in areas of lower
vulnerability.

Adaptation

Low

Resiliency

Community
Development

City

Development
community

Long Term

Policy

TLU-1-D

Locate businesses, services, governmental
offices, and schools that generate many trips
near the permanent transit network.

Mitigation

Low

Quality of
Life,
Economy

Community
Development

City and
community

NAIPTA,
Development
community

Short Term

Policy

TLU-1-E

Audit the incentives and standards in the
zoning code to promote climate change
resiliency and emissions reduction.

Both

Low

Resiliency

Community
Development

City

Short Term

Information

Mitigation

Low

Economy,
Equity

Community
Development

City

Development
community

Short Term

Policy

Resiliency

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Non-profit
organizations

Short Term

Information

Public Health

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

City

Development
community

Short Term

TLU-1-F

TLU-1-G

TLU-1-H

Stabilize or lower parking minimums for new
developments to decrease the cost of housing
and reduce impervious surfaces, among other
benefits. Consider parking maximums where
appropriate.
The City will support a city-wide, ongoing
discussion about density and it’s implications,
with clear objectives and deliverables, that
align specifically with the Climate Plan.
Community workshops and discussion forums
will discuss trade-offs and opportunities,
while continuous educational opportunities
will review the cost of free parking and other
land use issues.
Request transportation demand management
plans for large developments, to support
transportation choices and reduce parking
needs.

145 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Mitigation

Low

Low

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

Incorporate climate action and adaptation
criteria into entitlement reviews.

TLU-1-I

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

Both

COST

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

Community
Development
and
Sustainability
Section

City

Development
community

Short Term

Public Health

Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization

City

NAIPTA, ADOT,
bike and
pedestrian
organizations

Short Term

Policy,
infrastructure

Economy

Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization

City

NAIPTA

Short Term

Policy,
infrastructure

City

ADOT

Short Term

Policy

City

NAIPTA, ADOT

Long Term

Policy,
infrastructure

CO-BENEFITS

Low

LEVER

STRATEGY 2. Prioritize, incentivize, and promote transportation by biking, walking, and transit.

TLU-2-A

TLU-2-B

Expand infrastructure and amenities for
pedestrians and bikes by drafting, adopting,
funding, and implementing the Active
Transportation Master Plan, prioritizing
measures that can be shown to directly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Implement the transit-supportive
recommendations of the Northern Arizona
Intergovernmental Public Transportation
Authority (NAIPTA) Five-Year Transit Plan for
the Mountain Line, to increase ridership and
transit frequency on the permanent transit
network.

Mitigation

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Mediu
m

TLU-2-C

In order to analyze greenhouse gas emissions
impacts for all major transportation
infrastructure decisions, evaluate
transportation impacts based on vehicle miles
traveled (VMT), considering person trips.

Mitigation

Low

Resiliency

TLU-2-D

Prioritize bus operations through mechanisms
such as signal prioritization, bus slip lanes,
and bus-dedicated lanes. Evaluate the
feasibility of introducing dedicated bus lanes
or carpool lanes.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Economy

146 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization
Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

TLU-2-E

Adopt a complete active transportation
network policy to ensure there are efficient,
comfortable, appealing, and safe connections
throughout Flagstaff for all road users.

TLU-2-F

Secure additional funding to support biking,
walking, and transit.

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

Public Health

LEAD ENTITY

Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization
Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

City

Bike and
pedestrian
organizations

Short Term

Policy

City

NAIPTA, ADOT,
bike and
pedestrian
organizations

Ongoing

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Public Health

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Economic

Economic
Vitality and
Sustainability

City and
community

APS

Short Term

Management

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Economic

Sustainability

City

APS

Long Term

Management

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Fleet Services

City

APS

Short Term

Policy

STRATEGY 3. Support the use of clean, energy-efficient vehicles.

TLU-3-A

TLU-3-B

TLU-3-C

Develop public and private partnerships, and
refine regulations to streamline permitting,
for the installation of fast-charging electric
vehicle chargers in publicly accessible parking
areas along tourism corridors, at workplaces,
and in multi-family housing developments.
Develop public-private partnerships to
develop electric vehicle charging stations at
City facilities including the airport, Aquaplex,
and rights-of-way.
Adopt a policy requiring 100% of new lightduty City fleet vehicles to be electric vehicles,
meet high-efficiency standards, or use
alternative fuels by 2020, and 75% of new
medium and heavy-duty city fleet vehicle
purchases to be electric by 2025.

147 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

TLU-3-D

Adopt electric vehicle-ready building codes
for residential buildings to ensure homes have
sufficient capacity and wiring to
accommodate electric vehicles and avoid
expensive future retrofits.

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Community
Development

City

APS

Long Term

Policy

TLU 3-E

Incorporate electric vehicle information and
education into transportation, energy, and
green business outreach programs.

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

APS

Short Term

Information

TLU-3-F

Educate City staff on best practices to
respond to and support the transition to
electric vehicles within the community.

Mitigation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section, Fleet
Services

City

APS, car
dealerships

Short Term

Education

Mitigation

Low

Economy,
Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

APS, car
dealerships

Short Term

Communicati
on

Mitigation

Low

Economy,
Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City

Car dealerships

Short Term

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Economy,
Public Health

Economic
Vitality

City

Short Term

Policy

Mitigation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City

Short Term

Leadership

TLU-3-G

TLU-3-H

TLU-3-I

TLU-3-J

Educate the public on existing state and
federal incentives for efficient and electric
vehicles, including tax incentives and at-home
electric vehicle charging outlet incentives.
Introduce local incentives to accelerate the
adoption of electric vehicles, such as modest
mid-stream incentives for car dealers to sell
electric vehicles, a sales tax rebate, bulk
purchasing, and incentives for visitors to rent
efficient vehicles.
Encourage car-free living by attracting
additional electric vehicle car-sharing
businesses to Flagstaff, providing incentives
to ensure accessibility to residents in all
neighborhoods.
Work with leading figures—such as elected
officials, Northern Arizona University leaders,
and business leaders—to commit to visibly
switching to electric vehicles.

STRATEGY 4. Encourage efficient driving practices.

148 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

NAU, Coconino
County, Business
Community

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

TLU-4-A

Establish a policy to prohibit idling of City
fleet vehicles, excluding emergency response
vehicles.

Mitigation

Low

City Budget,
Public Health

Fleet Services

City

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

Policy

STRATEGY 5. Manage transportation demand and reduce the frequency with which people drive alone.
TLU-5-A

Provide employee benefits for those who
commute by foot, transit, bicycle, or
carpooling.

Mitigation

Low

TLU-5-B

Fund a Transportation Demand Management
(TDM) program, as recommended in the High
Occupancy Housing Plan.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

TLU-5-C

Invest in training and education for City staff
to prepare for the transition to autonomous
vehicles, including guidance for anticipating
changes in transportation and land use
patterns and potential negative impacts
including zero-occupancy car trips.

Both

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City

NAIPTA

Short Term

Policy

Public Health

Community
Development
and Flagstaff
Metropolitan
Planning
Organization

City

NAIPTA

Long Term

Policy

Community
Development

City

ADOT

Short Term

Information

STRATEGY 6. Increase the supply of housing that is affordable to Flagstaff residents and located in areas that support biking, walking, and transit access to
goods and services.
TLU-6-A

To increase use of affordable housing
incentives, improve the Incentive Policy for
Affordable Housing and increase funding.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Equity

Community
Development

City

TLU-6-B

Encourage the construction of accessory
dwelling units to increase rental opportunities
in both established neighborhoods and new
development.

Mitigation

Low

Equity

Community
Development

City and
community

149 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Development
community

Short Term

Policy

Short Term

Policy

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

TLU-6-C

Adopt a City policy requiring new City facilities
and appropriate City-owned properties to
consider a mix of uses, including housing
where appropriate.

Mitigation

Low

Equity

Community
Development

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

City

Long Term

Policy

Long Term

Infrastructure

Long Term

Infrastructure

Short Term

Infrastructure

Long Term

Infrastructure

Short Term

Policy

Short Term

Policy,
Infrastructure

Short Term

Infrastructure

Short Term

Policy

WASTE AND CONSUMPTION
STRATEGY 1. Increase waste diversion.
WC-1-A

Expand infrastructure and introduce new
technology to divert new waste streams.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Solid Waste
Section

City

WC-1-B

Expand composting services to divert and
reduce food waste from the landfill, including
curbside compost pickup and provision of
composting bins.

Mitigation

Mediu
m

Solid Waste
Section,
Sustainability

City

WC-1-C

Introduce a yard waste program to divert yard
waste from the landfill.

Mitigation

Low

Solid Waste
Section

City

WC-1-D

Provide equal access to recycling services for
single-family and multifamily housing and
commercial facilities.

Mitigation

Low

Solid Waste
Section

City and
community

Mitigation

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Mitigation

Low

Solid Waste
Section

City

WC-1-E
WC-1-F

Conduct a study to evaluate the costs and
benefits associated with mandating waste
diversion.
Require and incentivize the collection and
diversion of construction and demolition
waste.

Equity

WC-1-G

Install hydration stations at public facilities to
reduce bottle waste.

Mitigation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City

WC-1-H

Plan for waste diversion services, including
recycling, at multi-family housing and
commercial developments.

Mitigation

Low

Equity

Community
Development

City and
community

150 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Business
community

Development
community

Development
community,
contractors

Development
community,

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

business
community

STRATEGY 2. Support sustainable and accessible production and consumption.

WC-2-A

WC-2-B
WC-2-C

WC-2-D

WC-2-E

Expand consumer education on sustainable
consumption and materials management,
including prevention of wasted food in
households and businesses and low-carbon
food consumption.
Provide outreach and education to Flagstaff
businesses in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in their supply chains.
Support “collaborative consumption”
community projects like tool libraries and
repair cafes through mini-grant programs.

Increase resources for existing City food
systems programming including
community gardens, food policy and
food waste prevention.
Establish a robust food recovery program
to support community members and
protect against disruptions, including
working with food rescue organizations
and commercial kitchens.

Mitigation

Low

Mitigation

Low

Mitigation

Low

Both

Both

Low

Low

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Waste and
consumption
organizations

Short Term

Education

Economy

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Business
community

Short Term

Education

Resiliency

Sustainability
Section

Community

Waste and
consumption
organizations

Short Term

Infrastructure
and
Education

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City

Waste and
consumption
organizations,
schools

Short Term

Infrastructure
and
Education

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Waste and
consumption
organizations,
restaurants

Short Term

Infrastructure
and
Education

Public Health

STRATEGY 3. Optimize collection and disposal systems to minimize greenhouse gas emissions.
WC-3-A

Reduce the resource consumption of the
waste collection fleet through efforts such as
alternative fuel, fuel efficiency, vehicle
optimization, and other new technologies.

Mitigation

Low

City budget

Solid Waste
Section

City

Long Term

Policy

WC-3-B

Manage the landfill to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, such as through landfill gas

Mitigation

High

Resiliency

Solid Waste
Section

City

Long Term

Infrastructure

151 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Low

Sustainability
Section

City

Low

Solid Waste
Section

COST

CO-BENEFITS

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

Management

City

Waste and
recycling
collection
services

Long Term

Information

capture, biofuel development, and waste-toenergy technologies.

STRATEGY 4. Improve data collection on consumption, waste, and diversion.
WC-4-A

Measure and incorporate greenhouse gas
emissions from consumption in the Flagstaff
community greenhouse gas inventory.

WC-4-B

Work with waste and recycling haulers
operating in the City of Flagstaff to collect
data on collection and diversion.

Mitigation

Mitigation

STRATEGY 5. Increase local food production through partnerships and policies.
WC-5-A

Support local agriculture through economic
development initiatives and enabling policies.

Mitigation

Low

Economy

Community
Development

City and
community

Coconino County

Short Term

Policy

WC-5-B

Expand urban agriculture opportunities in
community gardens, schools, and parks and
on rooftops.

Mitigation

Low

Quality of Life

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino
county, business
community

Long Term

Infrastructure

PUBLIC HEALTH, SERVICES, FACILITIES, AND SAFETY
STRATEGY 1. Identify and target support for at-risk populations.
PH-1-A

Characterize relative fire, flood, mosquito,
and other risk exposures to climate change
among community groups and
neighborhoods.

Adaptation

Low

Equity, Public
Health

Sustainability
Section

City

Coconino County

Short Term

Information

PH-1-B

Adequately fund health and emergency
services reaching populations vulnerable to
climate change impacts.

Adaptation

Mediu
m

Equity

Sustainability
Section

City

Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

152 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

PH-1-C

Address woodsmoke, such as through a
regulation that requires use of only certified
wood stoves, a public education campaign,
and/or rebates for wood stove buybacks or
replacements.

Adaptation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino County

Short Term

Policy,
Information

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

Community

Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

Sustainability
Section

Community

Coconino County

Long Term

Policy

STRATEGY 2. Adequately fund services for disaster preparedness.
PH-2-A

Dedicate increased funding to accommodate
demand for public health services among atrisk populations.

Adaptation

Mediu
m

PH-2-B

Embrace grassroots and neighborhood
movements that advocate for greater
services.

Adaptation

Low

STRATEGY 3. Increase community awareness of climate change risks and impacts and improve community capacity to respond to new or expanding risks to
public health.
PH-3-A
PH-3-B
PH-3-C
PH-3-D
PH-3-E

Train K-12 teachers on climate change science
and curriculum.
Provide in-school lessons on climate change
science and climate action in K-12 classrooms
in Flagstaff.
Improve community messaging on how to
respond to simultaneous heat risks and poor
air quality due to smoke.
Support the development of neighborhood
resiliency groups.
Provide information on what residents can do
to reduce their carbon footprint and how their
households can be more resilient.

153 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Both

Low

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Both

Low

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Adaptation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Adaptation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

Both

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

Flagstaff Unified
School District,
CCC, NAU
Flagstaff Unified
School District,
CCC, NAU

Short Term

Education

Short Term

Education

Coconino County

Short Term

Information

City and
community

Coconino County

Short Term

Organizing

City and
community

Coconino County

Short Term

Information

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

STRATEGY 4. Improve the resiliency of public infrastructure.
PH-4-A

Create preparedness and recovery plans for
all City divisions.

Adaptation

Low

City Budget

Sustainability
Section

City

Coconino County

Short Term

Policy

PH-4-B

Prepare for public buildings to be used in
different ways, both in lower-impact ways,
such as seniors using the library to cool down
during hot June days, and as safe-havens
during acute emergencies.

Adaptation

Low

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino County

Long Term

Management

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino
County, NAU

Short Term

Policy

Public Health

Sustainability
Section

City and
community

Coconino
County, NAU,
Healthcare
providers

Short Term

Policy

STRATEGY 5. Prepare for changing risks to public health due to climate change.

PH-5-A

Continue collaborations to study and prepare
for increased risk of illness and disease due to
increased dust, a warmer climate, higher
mosquito densities, and other potential
results of climate change.

PH-5-B

Initiate a working group on public health and
climate change, including participation from
the Coconino County Public Health Services
Department (CCPHSD), the City of Flagstaff,
and NAU, among others.

154 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Adaptation

Adaptation

Low

Low

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

ECONOMIC PROSPERITY AND RECREATION
STRATEGY 1. Accelerate the transformation to a low-carbon economy that minimizes emissions and can effectively adapt as the climate changes.

EPR-1-A

Promote Flagstaff as an environmentally
friendly destination by highlighting the
businesses that are taking steps to reduce
resource consumption.

Adaptation

Low

Economy

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

Business
community

Short Term

Information

EPR-1-B

With community stakeholders and partners,
conduct a study and host a community
conversation to identify threats to current
industries, opportunities for new businesses
and industries, and areas that need support.

Adaptation

Low

Economy

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

Business
community

Short Term

Management

EPR-1-C

Work with businesses to assess their climate
change vulnerability and plan for the future.

Adaptation

Low

Economy

Economic
Vitality,
Sustainability

City and
community

Business
community

Long Term

Policy

EPR-1-D

Utilize existing community resources to
support community members whose jobs
may be at risk from climate change impacts
through retraining programs and business
support.

Adaptation

Low

Economy

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

Business
community

Long Term

Policy

EPR-1-E

Prepare water, road, and other public
infrastructure for increased demands from
growth and tourism.

Adaptation

High

Quality of Life

Public Works

City

Long Term

Infrastructure

EPR-1-F

Strengthen the fossil fuel divestment policy
for the City of Flagstaff.

Mitigation

Low

Management
Services

City

Short Term

Policy

EPR-1-G

Promote Flagstaff as a car-free destination
through informational campaigns for visitors.

Mitigation

Low

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

Short Term

Information

155 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Quality of Life

Business
community

FLAGSTAFF CLIMATE ACTION AND ADAPTATION PLAN

Implementation Summary and Schedule
ACTION ID

DESCRIPTION

ADAPTATION
OR
MITIGATION

COST

EPR-1-H

Focus business development efforts on
businesses that have lower impacts on natural
resources.

Both

Low

CO-BENEFITS

LEAD ENTITY

CITY OR
COMMUNITY

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

POTENTIAL
PARTNERS

TIME-FRAME

LEVER

Short Term

Management

STRATEGY 2. Protect natural areas and ecosystem services that are most vulnerable to the impacts of increased visitation and climate change.
EPR-2-A

Prioritize natural resource protection in highdemand recreational areas.

Adaptation

EPR-2-B

Enhance the Flagstaff Convention and Visitors
Bureau public awareness campaign that
emphasizes 'treading lightly' on the land to
accommodate increased visitation and
impact.

Adaptation

Low

Environment,
Quality of Life

Sustainability
Section,
Parks and
Recreation

City

US Forest Service

Long Term

Policy

Low

Environment,
Quality of Life

Economic
Vitality

City and
community

US Forest Service

Short Term

Management

STRATEGY 3. Plan for changes to recreation and respond to the impacts of climate change on current Parks and Recreation facilities and operations.

EPR-3-A

Incorporate changing climate conditions and
risks to community health, Parks and
Recreation staff members, and facilities into
the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and
Legally Designated Open Space Management
Plan update processes.

Adaptation

Low

Public Health

Parks and
Recreation,
Sustainability

City

EPR-3-B

Investigate new technologies and techniques
to decrease water, electricity, and fuel use at
Parks and Recreation facilities.

Both

Low

City Budget

Parks and
Recreation

EPR-3-C

Implement energy and water efficiency
retrofits to decrease water and electricity use
and costs at all Parks and Recreation facilities.

Both

Mediu
m

City Budget

EPR-3-D

Continue to utilize low-water, climateadapted, native plantings for all facilities,
parks, and streetscapes, and create a best
practices manual for irrigation and other
operations.

Both

Low

Environment

156 |

CITY OF FLAGSTAFF

Coconino County

Short Term

Policy

City

Short Term

Management

Parks and
Recreation

City

Long Term

Infrastructure

Parks and
Recreation

City

Short Term

Policy,
Management

Flagstaff
Arboretum

