City of Tempe 2019

tempe.gov/Sustainability

Letter from the Mayor
To City of Tempe Residents:
Tempe demonstrates how taking local action can have a global impact. As a commitment
to sustainability, our city joined the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy to
cut our greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and prepare for the effects of climate change.
We are setting Tempe on a path to sustainability and resilience with our first ever Climate
Action Plan (CAP). Our plan focuses on transportation and energy use because they are
the main sources of emissions in our community. In addition to reducing our emissions,
we must adapt to our already changing climate by making sure our city is prepared for
extreme heat. Through this plan and the work of our Office of Diversity and Strategic
Management, we are ensuring our climate actions address vulnerable populations and
frontline communities. Tempe will take local action, to be part of global solutions, by
reducing emissions and preparing for the impacts of extreme heat.
Alongside the community actions in the Climate Action Plan, we are also taking steps
as a city to embed sustainability into municipal operations. One of our Council-adopted
performance measures is to achieve carbon neutrality in municipal operations by 2050,
with a strategy of using 100% renewable electricity sources by 2035. Tempe moved
towards carbon neutrality by investing in the Johnny G Martinez Water Treatment Plant
Solar Project. Over 2,000 solar panels at the plant supply 25% of the power needed
for that facility and helped Tempe have 10% of municipal electricity come from clean
sources. We can build on the success of municipal actions by taking climate action in our
community, such as the construction of the Tempe Streetcar. The streetcar will provide
Tempeans another option to get around the city that is not a single-occupancy vehicle.
It also helps us lower carbon emissions and local air pollution to make our city a more
enjoyable place to live and visit. We can prepare for our future by improving internal city
operations and working toward community solutions with businesses and residents.
With the help of hundreds of Tempe residents and city staff, Arizona State University
(ASU), and the School for the Future of Innovation in Society, it is my pleasure to
introduce Tempe’s first-ever Climate Action Plan. This plan identifies actions the city,
businesses, and residents can take to lower our emissions and make sure our city is
resilient to extreme heat. The City will work with every Tempean to implement the actions
in our Climate Action Plan to ensure we remain a great city to live in, with a vibrant
economy, for generations to come.
Sincerely,

Mark Mitchell, Mayor
ii

Acknowledgements
We are deeply thankful for the community collaboration and input that went into this plan. Below are some of
the main contributors that made Tempe’s first CAP possible:
Authors: Dr. Lauren Withycombe Keeler, Dr. Braden Kay, Grace Kelly, Grace Logan, and Miguel Santos Reyes
Copyeditor: Heather Ehlers
CAP design & layout: Michele Gurrieri
CAP edits: Samantha Sterk
Poster design: Bryan Rauch

City Council Members

Mark Mitchell, Mayor
Lauren Kuby, Vice Mayor
Jennifer Adams, Councilmember
Robin Arredondo-Savage, Councilmember
Arlene Chin, Councilmember
Randy Keating, Councilmember
Joel Navarro, Councilmember

City of Tempe Management

Andrew Ching, City Manager
Kenneth Jones, Deputy City Manager, Chief Financial
Officer
Steven Methvin, Deputy City Manager, Chief
Operating Officer

City of Tempe Staff

Braden Kay, Director of Sustainability
Grace DelMonte Kelly, Energy Management
Marilyn DeRosa, Engineering & Transportation
Rosa Inchausti, Strategic Management and Diversity
Kevin Devery, Fleet Manager
Charlie Bladine, Facilities Manager
Shelly Seyler, Engineering and Transportation
Vanessa Spartan, Transportation Planner
Robert Yabes, Principal Planner
Sue Taaffe, Senior Management Assistant
Eric Iwersen, Transit Manager
Julian Dresang, City Engineer
TaiAnna Yee, Public Information Officer
Cassandra Mac, Environmental Services
Wydale Holmes, Strategic Management Analyst
Aaron Peterson, Strategic Management Analyst
Stephanie Deitrick, Enterprise GIS Manager
Bonnie Richardson, Principal Planner
Shauna Warner, Neighborhood Services
Ambika Adhikari, Principal Planner
Robbie Aaron, Planner
Elizabeth Thomas, Neighborhood Services
Laura Kajfez, Neighborhood Services
Nikki Ripley, Communication & Media Relations
Shannon Reed, Public Information Officer
Michele Gurrieri, Web & Design Coordinator
Brianne Fisher, Mayoral Aide
Elizabeth Higgins, Chief of Staff
Marge Zylla, Government Relations
Miguel Santos Reyes, Sustainability Intern
Grace Logan, Sustainability Intern
Carla Sidi, Engineering and Transportation
Kyrie (Kiki) Hooton, Sustainability Intern
Richard Adkins, Urban Forester
Keith Burke, Community Services
Craig Hayton, Community Services
Naomi Farrell, Human Services

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

Jonae Harrison, Equity and Inclusion Manager
Donna Kennedy, Economic Development
Jill Buschbacher, Economic Development
Maria Laughner, Economic Development
Greg Ruiz, Fire Medical Rescue
Andrea Glass, Fire Medical Rescue
Darrell Duty, Fire Medical Rescue
Chad Weaver, Community Development
Cassandra Holcombe, Sustainability intern
Jorge Kalil, Sustainability intern
Will Nicholson, Sustainability intern

Arizona Public Service &
Salt River Project
Patricia DiRoss, SRP
Brian Bednar, SRP
Andrea Chalmers, SRP
Marc Campbell, SRP
Kathy Knoop, SRP
Joseph DeGraft-Johnson, SRP
Kelly Barr, SRP
Brendan Denker, SRP
Anthony Aguilar, APS
Patricia McLaughlin, APS
Patrick McDermott, APS
Judson Tillinghast, APS
Kent Walter, APS
John Pinho, APS

City of Tempe Sustainability
Commission Members
Kendon Jung, Chair
Ryan Mores, Vice Chair
Sukki Jahnke, Member
Gretchen Reinhardt, Member
Barbie Burke, Member
Stephanie Milam-Edwards, Member
John F. Kane, Member
Serita Sulzman, Member
Katja Brundiers, Member
Steven Russell, Member

Arizona State University

Lauren Withycombe Keeler, Future of Innovation in
Society
Arnim Wiek, Sustainability
Katja Brundiers, Sustainability
Rob Melnick, Sustainability
Meredith Simpson, Sustainability
Anne Reichman, Sustainability
Jenny Carter, Sustainability
Mick Dalrymple, University Sustainability Practices
Corey Hawkey, University Sustainability Practices
Gary Dirks, Lightworks
Gerry DaRosa, Energy
Thad Miller, Future of Innovation in Society
Clark Miller, Future of Innovation in Society
Paul Coseo, Design
Ariane Middel, Computer Science

David Hondula, Geography
Jennifer Vanos, Sustainability
David King, Geography
Lars Geest, MA student, Global Sustainability Science (GSS)
Robin Bruck, MA student, GSS
Friederike Schwarz, MA student, GSS
Ashley Mack, MA student, GSS
David Sailor, Urban Climate Research Center
Oswald Chong, School of Sustainable Engineering
Seungtaek Lee, School of Sustainable Engineering
Phillip Gilbertson, School of Geographical Sciences
Ryan Johnson, Sustainability Education

Other Contributors

Global Consortium for Sustainability Outcomes (GSCO)
City of Tempe Transportation Commission
Valley Metro
Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG)
Sierra Club
Sustainable Cities Network at ASU
Urban Sustainability Director’s Network (USDN)
ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability
Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)
Vitalyst Health Foundation
Pew Charitable Trusts
Kate Borders, Downtown Tempe Authority
Lori Foster, Downtown Tempe Authority
Adam Jones, Downtown Tempe Authority
Helene Tack, Local First Arizona
Kimber Lanning, Local First Arizona
Anne Gill, Tempe Chamber of Commerce
Sukki Jahnke, Tempe Chamber of Commerce
Michele Crim, City of Portland
Fletcher Beaudoin, Portland State University
Kristin Baja, USDN
Cooper Martin, National League of Cities
CJ Hager, Vitalyst Health Foundation
Mimi Narayan, Pew Charitable Trusts
Missy Stults, City of Ann Arbor
Chris Castro, City of Orlando
Kumar Jensen, City of Evanston
Southwest Energy Efficiency Project (SWEEP)
Urban Land Institute
Stephanie Luz Cordel
Sharifa Rowe
Mark Hartman, City of Phoenix
Rosanne Albright, City of Phoenix
Jon Ippel, Amplify GR
Anthony Floyd, City of Scottsdale
Tim Conner, City of Scottsdale
Scott Bouchie, City of Mesa
Laura Hynemen, City of Mesa
Nicole Antonopoulos, City of Flagstaff
Jenny Neimann, City of Flagstaff
Climate Resolve
Kurt Shickman, Global Cities Cool Alliance
Kelly Muellman, City of Minneapolis
Maria Koetter, USDN
Sarah McKinstry-Wu, USDN

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Tempe’s 2019 Climate Action Plan (CAP) is an opportunity for our city to take local action on global climate change by reducing our

Letter from the Mayor

greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and adapting to the changing climate. We plan to do so in a way that is accessible and benefits all

Acknowledgements

1

members of our community.

Table of Contents

2

GHG emissions are estimated through a GHG emissions inventory, which documents all sources of emissions throughout a community

Executive Summary

3

carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e) are emitted across all homes, businesses, and institutions. We also completed a municipal inventory

Overview

4

What is Climate Change?

4

Purpose and Benefits of Climate Action Plan

5

Baseline GHG Emissions: Municipal vs Community

6

Development of the Climate Action Plan

8

Community Actions

11

or organization in a given year. In 2015, the City of Tempe completed a community inventory that details how many metric tons (MT) of
that is guiding action in city operations. This CAP will support Tempe in becoming carbon neutral as a community.
To address these community emissions and adapt to climate change, the CAP focuses on emissions reduction and resilience to extreme heat.

Emissions Reduction

Tempe can become more livable and economically vibrant for all its residents and businesses by further investing in energy and
transportation technologies that reduce GHG emissions. The transportation and energy sectors account for 99% of community
emissions. We must invest in transforming how we move around people and how our utilities produce energy.

Energy
Tempe can support businesses and residents in adopting energy upgrades that save money and grow Arizona’s clean energy

Emissions Reduction

11

Energy

12

Transportation

Transportation

24

Tempe is a leader in Arizona for transportation, demonstrated by the Orbit bus system, bike and pedestrian infrastructure,

Resilience

36

improve our air quality and connect the city without relying on single-occupancy vehicles.

Extreme Heat

37

Municipal Actions

50

Municipal Accomplishments

52

Upcoming Investments

56

Moving Forward
Climate Action Plan 2021 Update

57
57

economy. Additionally, working with utility companies to increase renewable energy use is a priority for Tempe.

light rail, and the current construction of the streetcar. Tempe will continue to invest in alternative transportation options to

Resilience

Resilience is demonstrated when a system thrives after something disrupts it. Urban resilience means creating the capacity for our city
to respond to threats and shocks while still achieving Tempe’s sustainability goals. Tempe must adapt to climate change threats that
are already impacting our city and be prepared for the threats to come.

Extreme Heat
By investing in infrastructure that will cool Tempe, we are creating a city that can protect residents against extreme
heat, including our most vulnerable populations. Cultivating this resilience can reduce negative health, environmental,
and economic impacts that arise with increasing temperatures.

Glossary

60

References

60

CAP 2021 Update

Climate Action Plan Overview

61

to build upon the actions in the 2019 CAP to achieve our performance measures and goals in an inclusive manner. The CAP 2021

Tempe will begin to work on an update to the CAP throughout 2020 for presentation to City Council in Fall 2021. Tempe will continue
Update will be a plan guided by five principles: fiscal responsibility, enterprise, equity, engagement, and evidence.

2

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

3

OVERVIEW
The following sections will introduce key concepts in the CAP. To understand the nature of the twelve actions in the plan, it is helpful
to understand the concepts of GHG emission reduction and resilience. Additionally, the differences between community and municipal
climate actions will be explained.

Purpose and Benefits of a Climate Action Plan
This CAP serves as a guideline for the City of Tempe’s path toward a sustainable and resilient future that will benefit the entire city.
It is a detailed framework for measuring and reducing GHG emissions and climate change impacts. The CAP includes an inventory of
previous years’ GHG emissions, Tempe’s emissions reduction goals, and prioritized actions. The CAP can help Tempe achieve the largest
and most cost-effective solutions in conjunction with other city goals and priorities.

What is Climate Change?

Having a Climate Action Plan is critical to create a thriving community for the future residents of Tempe. The CAP develops strategies

Climate change is happening because of anthropogenic, or human-induced, GHG emissions being released into the atmosphere as by-

reduce GHG emissions and traffic congestion, and adopting green infrastructure (GI) or urban forestry methods to reduce the effects of

products of the fossil fuels used for energy and transportation. These GHGs include carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur

extreme heat.

to conserve resources and make quality of life improvements, which will be notably beneficial to our most vulnerable populations.
These strategic, sustainable improvements can include energy efficiency programs to lower utility costs, increasing public transit to

oxides (SOx), and methane (CH4). GHG emissions speed up the greenhouse effect, the natural process that heats up our Earth and
allows it to be habitable. However, large amounts of GHG emissions block the solar radiation trying to escape our atmosphere, which
leads to increased temperatures and irregular weather patterns. It is becoming more apparent that climate change will have a major
impact on infrastructure, natural resources, the economy, and public health. The City of Tempe recognizes the significance of climate
change and the need to reduce emissions and create resilience.

Natural Greenhouse Effect
More heat escapes into space

What is in the Climate Action Plan?
Emissions Reduction

Greenhouse Effect
Intensified by Humans

Energy

Less heat escapes into space

•

Tempe can invest in cleaner, renewable energy options for residential, commercial, and municipal buildings to reduce
GHG emissions.

N
ATIO
ADI

Less
re-radiated
heat

Re-radiated
heat

More
re-radiated
heat

Transportation

TION
DIA

SOLA
R RA

SOLA
RR

•

Tempe can create a 20-minute city that provides accessible transportation for all residents by increasing transportation
options and supporting more electric vehicles (EVs).

Re-radiated
heat

Resilience

Normal Levels
of Greenhouse
Gases

Higher Levels
of Greenhouse
Gases

CO2
N2O
CH4

CO2
N2O
CH4

Extreme Heat
•

Tempe can prepare for extreme heat by investing in buildings, infrastructure, and urban forestry.

(Source: Global Change)
4

OVERVIEW

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

5

Baseline Greenhouse Gas Emissions:
Municipal vs Community

Municipal vs Community GHG Emissions Sources
The orange denotes GHG emissions from energy production and the blue denotes transportation emissions

In 2015, the City of Tempe conducted two GHG emissions inventories to determine the sectors that were emitting the most GHGs into the

Municipal

Community

GHG Emissions Baseline

Community
2015 Emissions All residents, business,
and organizations in
Tempe

28,723 metric tons
CO2e, electricity only

40,670 metric tons
CO2e, electricity and gas
for vehicles and buildings

equivalent to
electricity use of

6,096
homes

2,023,229 metric tons
CO2e, electricity only

3,667,560 metric tons

Tempe City Hall

equivalent to
electricity use of

Holiday lights

549,694
homes

CO2e, electricity and gas for
vehicles and buildings
Streetlights

Businesses

2015 Emissions City of Tempe

Outdoor Lighting

Municipal

Homes

City Buildings

atmosphere. The data collected from the inventories are being used to formulate goals and strategies for the future.

Businesses along Mill Avenue

In Tempe, GHG emissions come from three main sources: the energy used to power buildings, the infrastructure that creates and

What is the Difference Between Municipal and Community GHG Emissions?
Both the municipal and community GHG emissions inventories show how transportation and energy use contribute to GHG emissions.

Industry

Water Treatment

delivers that energy to our homes and businesses, and the transportation systems that we use to move around the city.

But the community emissions inventory looks at how much the community-at-large produces, while the municipal emissions inventory
South Tempe Water Treatment Plant

Public transit and
fleet fuel

Community energy emissions account for the electricity powering residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. Community
transportation emissions come from all the people driving through and in Tempe.
Municipal emissions account for city facilities and operations managed by the City of Tempe. These include our city buildings, like the
police stations and libraries, our streetlights, our water treatments plants, and our city transit and fleet.

Tempe Orbit bus

6

OVERVIEW

United Dairymen of Arizona facility

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

Transportation

looks at the emissions created by the city when operating the city government and providing city services to residents.

Car tank refill

7

Development of the Climate Action Plan

Community Engagement

In 2016, Mayor Mark Mitchell and the Tempe City Council committed to the four-step process of the Global
Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy (formerly the Mayor’s Compact):

Arizona State University and the City of Tempe co-developed a community engagement process to ensure that residents, students,
experts, nonprofits, and the business community were engaged in the development of the CAP. The process included interviews with
City staff and key stakeholders, public forums on each focus area, expert forums, online forums with survey questions, and an open

Phase 1

Sign Letter of Intent from Mayor and Council.

Phase 2

Complete a community GHG emissions inventory.

Phase 3
Phase 4

Set a community target to reduce GHG emissions.

house for residents to review the proposed actions at the Tempe Community Center campus. For a full description of the community
engagement, please see the public participation report on our website: tempe.gov/ClimateAction.

Interviews

Engagement with City Departments

Dr. Keeler and her students conducted interviews with over

The Office of Sustainability worked closely with City

forty City of Tempe staff and key partners to determine

departments in the development of potential climate actions.

areas of opportunity for Tempe to take action. The interviews

The Engineering and Transportation Department played a

laid the foundation for the rest of the engagement process

critical role in the development of the transportation and

and resulted in a set of recommendations to the Office of

energy sections of the plan. Community Development, Fire,

Sustainability and senior management of the City of Tempe.

Police, and Strategic Management and Diversity supported
work on extreme heat and emergency management.

Develop Climate Action Plan.

Forums
Partnership with Arizona State University
The City of Tempe partnered with Arizona State University on the development of
Tempe’s first Climate Action Plan. Dr. Lauren Withycombe Keeler co-designed workshops
with the City of Tempe to introduce sustainability and resilience concepts to City staff.
The Future Shocks and City Resilience workshop (co-led with Dr. Arnim Wiek) was
funded by the National League of Cities and Wells Fargo through the Leadership in

Dr. Keeler and her students designed public and expert forums for each focus area to get resident and expert feedback on how
the City can address energy, transportation, and extreme heat. The City of Tempe Neighborhood Services and Media Relations and
Communications staff created promotional materials and co-facilitated the events. Input from these forums led to the creation
of the twelve actions in the plan. Dr. Thad Miller and his students from the School for the Future of Innovation in Society co-led
the transportation forums, with a focus on the role of autonomous vehicles (AVs) in climate action. All forums had an online
component for residents and stakeholders who could not attend to express their opinions and shape the plan.

Community Resilience program. The second workshop, AudaCity, was funded by the
Global Consortium for Sustainability Outcomes (GCSO). AudaCity developed skills to
help Tempe set more ambitious goals and develop corresponding strategies, such as the
Climate Action Plan.
These initial workshops led to Dr. Keeler working with the City of Tempe on Tempe’s first
Climate Action Plan. GCSO funded Michele Crim from the City of Portland and Fletcher
Beaudoin from Portland State University to visit Tempe, mentor City staff, and kick

Open House

Sustainability Commission

An open house was held in March 2019 for residents

Tempe’s Sustainability Commission has overseen the

and partners to review the proposed twelve actions

entire planning process, and the chair and vice chair of the

in the plan. Their feedback is included in the Resident

commission hosted the Climate Action Plan open house.

Input section of each action.

The Commission selected the four highlight actions of the
plan and are working to ensure the highlight actions are

off Tempe’s CAP with a keynote address to Tempe residents. Through this important

implemented and cemented into city policy and budgets in

partnership, Arizona State University brought resources, methods, and knowledge to

the next several years.

support Tempe in learning how to approach climate action.

8

OVERVIEW

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

9

Timeline of CAP Project
2017

COMMUNITY ACTIONS
CapaCities: Resilience &
AudaCity Workshops

The City of Tempe will implement twelve actions to prepare for and respond to climate
change. The twelve actions are divided into three focus areas: energy, transportation,
and extreme heat. Each of the twelve actions includes an action description, the city
council strategic priorities being met, key features, resident input received, and how

Energy Stakeholder
Forum

October 2018

collaboration can make the action happen. The Office of Sustainability and Tempe’s

Transportation Public
Forum

Sustainability Commission have indicated four highlight actions that need our
community’s immediate attention.

Transportation Stakeholder
Forum

November 2018

Transportation and
Sustainability Commissions
Joint Forum

Emissions Reduction
The primary cause of climate change is the overabundance of

Energy and Extreme
Heat Forum

GHG emissions in Earth’s atmosphere. The Tempe community

February 2019

emits 3,667,560 MT CO2e, with energy and transportation
accounting for 99% of these community GHG emissions.

Community Emissions
Total Emissions: 3,667,560 MT CO2e

43%

Transportation &
Mobile Sources

Energy and transportation are the focus of the CAP to reduce

Climate Action Open
House

March 2019

Sustainability
Commission Meeting

GHG emissions and reach Tempe’s sustainability goals.
Residential, commercial, and industrial energy use contribute to
most of the city’s community GHG emissions, with transportation
emissions accounting for the rest of these emissions.

Transportation
Commission Meeting

April 2019

Neighborhood Advisory
Meeting

positive impact on the health and well-being of Tempe residents.
Taking climate action in energy and transportation will make
Tempe a better place to live by bolstering our clean energy
economy and transportation infrastructure.

Public Review Meetings

Summer 2019

Draft CAP

9% Residential
Energy

Reducing the amount of GHG emitted will have a substantial

56%
Energy

The City of Tempe will adopt a community carbon neutrality
performance measure. This CAP contains initial actions to move

Commercial

27% Energy

Tempe towards carbon neutrality.

Final CAP

10

Fall 2019

OVERVIEW

Industrial

20% Energy

Tempe City Council
Adoption

1% Other
City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

11

ENERGY

The following actions are being pursued by Tempe to support an energy efficient city:
Resilient energy hubs:

The electricity that powers everyday residential, commercial, and industrial needs is
essential to modern life in Tempe. Coal and natural gas make up at least 50% of the
energy sources that power Tempe’s electrical grid. Because 56% of our GHG emissions are
coming indirectly from electricity usage, it is important to consider our energy sources. Our
overreliance on nonrenewable energy sources can be solved by using more clean energy,
such as nuclear, solar storage, and carbon capture. This would allow Tempe to have a stable

•

A resilient energy hub allows for a city to meet the power needs of its most
vulnerable populations in case of emergency.

•

This is important because every Tempe resident deserves to have access to air
conditioning and power in the case of a natural disaster or extreme heat day.

•

These resilient energy hubs will be located throughout the city at selected 		
community spaces like fire stations, community centers, schools, and
churches that can be outfitted with solar panels, battery storage, and other
resilient technologies.

source to meet the city’s needs now and into the future. By converting to clean energy,
Tempe can stimulate the growth of a clean energy economy. The cultivation of a new
economy that encourages climate action will be pursued by the City in the following ways:

SUPPLY

Revolving fund:
The City can work with utility companies to increase the use
of clean and renewable energy.
•

•

A revolving fund allows businesses access to the money needed to invest in
energy upgrades.

•

This is important because it lowers the barriers to invest in energy-efficient
technologies and infrastructure for local businesses.

Clean Energy: Focus on increasing the use of clean and
renewable energy

•

Storage: Increase the use of battery storage for solar energy

The City can provide tools for residents and businesses to make
smart energy choices.
•

Energy Upgrades: Allow businesses and residents to use technology that
requires less energy

•

Energy Management: Allow businesses and residents to lower their energy
use by having the ability to manage it

•

Load Shifting: Optimize operations to use more energy in the middle of the
day when energy is less expensive and solar energy is abundant

•

Financing: Provide access to funds to invest in energy upgrades

DEMAND

Sustainability platform:
•

A shared website platform can be created to make sure businesses are
aware of opportunities for energy upgrades.

•

The City of Tempe, Tempe Chamber of Commerce, Local First Arizona,
Downtown Tempe Authority, and SRP/APS can inform businesses about
sustainable practices and opportunities.

Solar EV charging stations:
•

Workplace charging stations powered by solar panels can be used to charge
vehicles during the day while the sun is shining.

•

These pilot projects can educate residents and businesses about how shifting
the energy load to the middle of the day can support the use of clean energy.

•

Tempe can launch a flagship project for EV charging in the form of
a public-private partnership (PPP) between the city, businesses, and utilities.

•

The City of Tempe will explore the viability of installing EV charging stations in
new housing and community developments.

ENERGY

12

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

13

Highlight Action

Key Features

1. Resilient energy hubs

Description

Partner with utilities to reduce barriers to
adding solar and battery storage to fire stations,
community centers, schools, and churches.

Ensure that first responders and
evacuees have energy sources in the event
of a power outage.

Prioritize placing first resilient energy hubs close
to frontline communities (i.e. low-income and
aging populations).

Align resilience efforts with the council-adopted
goal of carbon-neutral municipal operations
by 2050.

Resilient energy hubs are fire stations, community centers, schools, and churches that are outfitted with solar
panels, battery storage, and other resilient technologies. In the event of an emergency that compromises the
electric grid, these hubs will ensure that first responders and evacuees have access to electricity. Outfitting
areas of first refuge with an independent energy source means Tempe residents will have a place to get cool on
extremely hot days or in the event of a power outage. Current energy policy is a barrier when installing solar
on the community spaces that will serve as resilient energy hubs. By partnering with APS and SRP, the City of
Tempe can seek to create energy policy that uses renewable energy to keep Tempe residents cool and safe.
Solar panels

Resilient Energy Hubs that run on stored solar energy will keep residents safe during heat and storm-related
emergencies.

on JGM water
treatment plant
(source:
City of Tempe)

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Solar panels on
Tempe Police

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Safe & Secure
Communities

Quality of Life

Investing in solar and battery storage in

A stable electric grid with redundancies in

Resilient energy for areas of first refuge

city buildings supports Tempe’s 100%

case of emergencies is essential to having

ensures Tempe residents can keep cool

renewable energy strategy.

a safe and secure community.

during emergency events.

Department
building
(source:
City of Tempe)

ENERGY

14

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

15

Resident Input

Collaboration

Best Practice

Some residents believe that vulnerable

The City intends to pilot resilient energy hubs in areas of first

The City of Tempe believes that gaining

Energy Resilient Power Hub – New York City, NY

populations must be considered when

refuge by determining the potential energy needs for buildings

insight and inspiration from our peer

After the infamous Hurricane Sandy in 2012, New York City looked to improve its electric

deciding the location of resilient hubs.

during an emergency. To pursue this, partnerships have been

cities in the United States will help our

grid to prepare for future weather catastrophes. The power outages throughout the city

created between different community partners and organizations

city develop effective actions to reduce

sparked Bright Power, an energy management company, to invest in and develop durable

to implement this project.

GHG emissions. Tempe has researched

solar panels and energy storage on multifamily buildings and small businesses, to ensure

actions that other cities have taken

continuous power through harsh, unexpected weather conditions. This Resilient Power

Key Partners: APS and SRP

to combat climate change to expand

Hub (RPH) is essentially a single-building power plant. Some benefits of the RPH include

•

upon the actions that these cities have

the following:

practiced and implemented.

•

Reduce building energy costs

Work with Tempe to modify energy policy to support

•

Produce energy that can be used on site

resilient hub installation

•

Contribute to New York City’s decentralized and resilient micro-grid movement

•

Multifamily homes can use RPH for electricity and water needs

“Do any of the ‘clean
energy’ goals address
our most vulnerable
communities or
populations?”

Determine appropriate technologies to use for the resilient
energy hubs

•

Key Partner: Arizona State University
•

Co-write grants to fund design of the resilient energy hubs

•

Make construction template for the creation of resilient
energy hubs across the city

During a public forum, some residents

•

believed other forms of emergency

Work with the Information Technology department and
Tempe residents to determine appropriate locations

relief, besides battery storage, should be
incorporated.

Residents:
•

“Think bigger than
batteries!”

Work with city and key partners to determine sites for
resilient energy hubs in or near neighborhoods

•

Find other pilot projects, like tree plantings and collective
action projects, that can build a sense of community around
future resilient energy hubs

“And water! Please!”

•

Determine the potential needs of a community during an
emergency with local organizations and neighbors

•

Collaborate with local organizations and neighbors to
proactively determine the potential needs of a community
during an emergency

Installation of RPH solar photovoltaics on NYC building (Source: NYCEDC)

ENERGY

16

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

17

Key Features
Funds dedicated to energyefficient technologies like lightemitting diode (LED) lights
and more efficient freezers and
heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems

2. Revolving fund

Reduces carbon emissions from
building operations

Outreach via faith-based
institutions, news channels,
radio, etc.

Makes energy-efficient
upgrades affordable to small
businesses and schools

Once established, the fund is
self-sustaining

Aerial photo of Tempe Public Library (source: City of Tempe)

Description

Resident Input

A revolving fund which begins with an initial donation can be used to give out loans for energy efficiency
upgrades. Tempe could fund a 501c3 with this donation and use it to support businesses and schools in
upgrading their infrastructure. The loans could initially be made available to local businesses and schools
that are interested in saving money by reducing their energy use. If the revolving fund runs successfully, fund
applications can be extended to residential customers with a focus on frontline communities.

Some residents support this, but believe there
must be collaboration between community
partners to spread information about the
program.

LED lighting at Tempe City Hall (source: City of Tempe)

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Collaboration
The city intends to find sources of capital for a revolving fund to
give businesses the opportunity to invest in energy upgrades. To
achieve this, Tempe must act with different partners to implement
the fund.

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Safe & Secure
Communities

This fund could support schools,

Supporting businesses and residents to

Having access to affordable energy is an

businesses, and residents in adopting

upgrade their infrastructure will save

important part of long-term economic

energy-efficienct upgrades.

them money and support Tempe’s local

security.

economy.

Key Partner: Tempe Chamber of Commerce
•

Build on success of previous loan program to build a fund in
partnership with the City of Tempe and energy utilities

“Would this [mean]
partnering with…solar
companies?”
Some residents from a public forum think that
where and how the city gains funding for this
is important.

“Money talks,
especially on paper
and in politics.”

Key Partners: APS and SRP
•

Work with business community and energy upgrade
contractors to streamline energy upgrade processes

ENERGY

18

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

19

Key Features
Website with energy efficiency programs and access to estimated
cost savings

3. Sustainability platform

Reduce emissions from
commercial buildings

SRP: Helping people understand their energy bill
CoC: Sustainability pledge
LFA: GreenBiz Certification

Alignment with Tempe’s strategic
priorities

Energy upgrades at local business, House of Tricks
(source: City of Tempe)

Description

Resident Input

The City of Tempe, Tempe Chamber of Commerce (CoC), Local First Arizona (LFA), Downtown Tempe
Authority (DTA), SRP, APS, and other interested parties could create a website that provides information
to businesses on energy efficiency programs. These could also include the Sustainability Pledge (CoC)
and the GreenBiz Certification (LFA), a tool to calculate which programs a business qualifies for and the
amount of expected savings to help businesses understand their energy bill. This website could be cohosted by the city and the CoC. To kick-off the website, SRP and APS can host an energy efficiency or load
shifting challenge.

During a public forum, some residents viewed
this action as a good way to encourage
information channels between businesses
about best practices when transitioning to
sustainable methods.
Energy efficiency programs (source: SRP)

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Collaboration

“It also has to be made
easy and economical to
transition.”

The City of Tempe is convening the business community,
interested nonprofits, and energy utilities to support a platform

Some residents are concerned about business

for sharing best practices when investing in energy upgrades.

involvement in this platform.

For this network, Tempe must form partnerships that cultivate

“Consider what the
actual barriers for
implementation are for
businesses.”

meaningful communication channels.

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Sustainable business practices are sound

This platform would guide businesses

By helping businesses use less energy, the

business practices. By implementing

in adopting sustainable practices and

City of Tempe is helping ensure that it is a

energy upgrades and reducing resource

technologies.

livable city in the future.

use, businesses can save money.

Key Partners: Tempe Chamber of Commerce and
Local First Arizona
•

Build on success of past sustainability programs to
coordinate efforts with SRP and APS

Key Partners: APS and SRP
•

Determine best practices for commercial energy upgrades
within the business community

ENERGY

20

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

21

Key Features
4. Solar EV
charging stations
Tempe EV (source: PlugShare)

Enable EV charging in Tempe to attract more EVs

Test impact of scaled EV charging on mid-day
electricity demand

City could provide support programs for lowincome residents

EV charging could be put in the city code

Description
Resident Input

A major barrier to putting more solar energy on the grid is that most electricity from solar is generated during
the day, but most electricity is consumed in the late afternoon and evening. If solar power could charge EVs
during the day, and EVs could charge homes at night, this would help address the mismatch between electricity
generation and use. Tempe could be part of this solution. Tempe can launch a flagship project for EV charging
in the form of a public-private partnership (PPP) between the city, businesses, and the utilities. EV chargers
powered by solar energy could be available in prominent areas, like parking lots or local office complexes. The
PPP could create a working group to explore how solar EV charging could be used to power homes to then
create a pilot project to trial across the city.

During a public forum, some residents stated
that charging stations should be integrated
into public and private spaces.

Electric vehicles (source: City of Tempe)

Collaboration

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Tempe wants to work with businesses and energy utilities to
streamline solar car charging pilots. To ensure the project’s
success, Tempe must create partnerships that will lead to
access to these charging stations in the city.

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Air quality will improve with fewer

By helping businesses become

A stable electric grid is essential to having

gasoline powered cars to move people

sustainable, the City of Tempe is helping

a safe and secure community.

around the city.

ensure that it is a livable city in the future.

Safe & Secure
Communities

Key Partner: APS
•

Use pilot projects to convey how load shifting to EVs can
support investments in the clean energy economy

“I like this as EVs aren’t
going anywhere. It’ll
grow, so it makes sense
for the city to adapt.”
Some residents are concerned that
EV technology is still not accessible
for the public.

“What about people
who cannot afford the
change to an EV?”

Key Partner: Arizona State University
•

Promote research on importance of load shifting (i.e.
using electricity when the sun is shining) and the best
locations for the charging stations

ENERGY

22

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

23

TRANSPORTATION

The following transportation actions are being pursued by Tempe:

Our transportation system in the Valley is built around the single-occupancy vehicle. In

Transportation Demand Management (TDM):

Tempe, transportation contributes to nearly half of the community’s GHG emissions. One

•

TDMs are an effective way to connect property owners, schools, employers,
employees and government agencies to promote alternatives to
single-occupant commuting, thereby reducing the number of vehicles
using the transportation system during its most congested hours: morning
and afternoon commute.

•

The TDM can be custom-designed for the community’s needs but is typically
a private-public partnership (PPP) that aims to reduce traffic congestion.

of the first steps to achieve a sustainable city is to change the car-centric culture that
causes traffic congestion and pollution. To reduce dependence on vehicle trips, and their
associated GHG emissions, Tempe must prioritize investments in alternative forms of
transportation. More people will transition from single-occupancy vehicles to alternative
forms of transportation when it is as convenient and accessible to all residents as the car.
Encouraging Tempe drivers to use different modes of transportation will benefit Tempe’s
environment and increase the livability for residents and visitors. The creation of a more
robust transportation system will be pursued by the city in the following ways:

Encourage walking, biking, and public
transport in city projects:
Programs

Policy

Infrastructure

Vehicles

The City of Tempe can
introduce strategies that
decrease the number of
single-occupancy vehicles on
our roads to decrease GHG
emissions.

The city can implement
transportation policies
to promote the use of
clean, alternative modes of
transportation.

Roadway infrastructure can
be designed and constructed
to support cleaner alternative
modes of transportation.

Switch from conventional
gasoline powered vehicles to
vehicles that emit less GHGs.

• Transportation Demand
Management (TDM)
• Communication, education,
and outreach (ongoing)

• Require and encourage EV
charging stations
• Encourage or incentivize
walking, biking, transit, and
carpooling

• Electric Vehicle (EV)
• Right of way and multi-use
paths can be designed
to complement alternative
transportation modes

•

This action will further Tempe’s Vision Zero and 20-minute city initiatives to
improve walking, biking and transit services to make destinations more
accessible to residents and visitors.

•

Creating a walkable, bikeable, and transit-friendly city means increasing the
availability, convenience, and safety of these transportation methods.

EV charging:

• Automated Vehicles (AV)

• Public transit including
streetcar expansion and
dedicated land Bus Rapid
Transit (BRT)

•

Tempe can increase the number of public charging stations and amend
building codes to support their installation.

•

An increase in charging stations can lead to an increase in EV ownership.

•

EVs can contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions by reducing the
emissions coming from fossil fuel-powered vehicles.

• Bike/pedestrian

Smart mobility guide:
•

A mobility guide will be formed to lay the groundwork for policies
encouraging autonomous vehicles (AVs).

•

The mobility guide ensures that all city departments are prepared for AVs on
Tempe roads.

•

AVs can reduce traffic congestion, support transit, create safer transportation
and reduce GHG emissions.

TRANSPORTATION

24

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

25

Highlight Action

Key Features

1. Transportation Demand Management (TDM)

Encourages transit use,
walking, biking, and
carpooling/vanpooling

Reduces single-occupancy
vehicle trips

Public-Private Partnership

Description

With bicycle and pedestrian facilities, light rail, the bus system and a new streetcar, Tempe leads Arizona cities
in providing alternative transportation options. However, more is needed to get people out of their cars. A
TDM would support Tempe businesses and schools in using alternative transportation and reducing singleoccupant trips. TDM are PPPs that allow businesses and government agencies to pool their resources to
support commuter transportation strategies, like walking, biking, using transit, carpooling, and alternative work
schedules. TDMs allow for a greater understanding of the transportation options available to Tempe residents
and workers, while also improving air quality and lowering GHG emissions.

Tempe Streetcar
(source: Valley
Metro)

Employers and multi-family developments can partner to promote alternative transportation use that reduces
traffic, car use and emissions.

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Downtown Tempe
(source: City of

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Reduces congestion at a much lower cost

Helps businesses attract and retain

Provides more transportation options,

than roadway expansion projects.

employees, achieves corporate

less traffic, and shorter commute times to

sustainability goals, and reduces

reduce stress and improve air quality.

Tempe)

transportation costs.

TRANSPORTATION

26

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

27

Resident Input

Collaboration

Best Practice

Some residents view the creation of a

The City of Tempe can explore how to improve transportation

The City of Tempe believes that gaining

Transportation Demand Management Program – Austin, TX

TDM program as a good way to reduce

choices by collaborating with residents and local businesses.

insight and inspiration from our peer

The City of Austin has implemented a TDM program to mitigate air pollution, reduce

cities in the United States will help our

GHG emissions, and lower traffic congestion. The TDM program aims to improve mobility

Key partners (DTA, Valley Metro, and Tempe CoC):

city develop effective actions that

in cost-effective ways by changing how residents get around the city, rather than trying

•

reduce GHG emissions. Tempe has

to build out of the current congestion. Austin’s TDM program has coordinated with

researched what other cities have done

several city organizations to create alternative modes of transportation that are available

to combat climate change and address

to the public. The TDM program has illustrated that no single strategy on its own will

traffic congestion.

solve traffic congestion, but instead a wide variety of actions should be taken together to

congestion, but worry it will increase
congestion in other areas.

“Can we reduce
congestion in Tempe
without adding
to congestion
in neighboring
municipalities?”

Local organizations can work together to improve
coordination of congestion reduction and have a variety of
travel demand management efforts

•

Partners can pool their resources for strategic investments

reach the goals.

that support commute options, like using carpool apps

The TDM program predicts success in the following areas:

or shuttles

•

Increase in transit ridership by 3–10%

Businesses:

•

Increase in ride sharing by 1–15%

•

•

Increase in van pools/shuttles by 1–13%

Tempe businesses, property management companies and
schools can collaborate to share resources and lower

(Source: Transportation Demand Management Program, Austin Transportation Department)

the cost of providing transportation options to employees,
residents and students

Some residents think it’s important to
consider vulnerable populations when
City:

forming this action.

•

“Make certain to
consider needs of lowincome and homeless
populations.”

The city can support the TDM by funding promotional
programs and education initiatives

Austin transit bus

TRANSPORTATION

28

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

29

Key Features
2. Encourage walking,
biking, and public transport
in city projects

GRID rideshare bikes (source: City of Tempe)

Improves transit service and pedestrian environment,
adds bike facilities, provides transit stop amenities,
converts/narrows travel lanes, and adds road
medians

Increases safety, comfort, convenience, and access
for all users, which can reduce fatalities and serious
injury crashes

Encourages walking, biking, and transit use; supports
businesses and the local economy; and creates
healthy places that foster community livability

Reduces speeding and per-person delay

Description

Resident Input

The increase in available options for walking, biking, or riding transit will improve our transportation system
and reduce our carbon footprint. In coordination with the City’s Vision Zero and 20-minute city initiatives,
safe street and intersection designs that prioritize pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders can be installed
in transportation infrastructure projects. This could require reallocation of street and intersection space
to better serve the full range of users. A broad array of redesign measures can be considered, taking into
account the needs and preferences of the community.

Some residents support alternative
transportation options that are accessible and
accommodating for all people.

Downtown Tempe (source: City of Tempe)

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Collaboration
The City of Tempe can work with Tempe businesses and
residents to design roads that promote safe trips for all types
of travel.

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Safe & Secure
Communities

Quality of Life

Provides a congestion mitigation

Creates safe intersections and corridors,

Supports safe and low-stress connections

alternative to expensive roadway

which reduces fatal and serious injury

for residents and workers, resulting in

expansion projects.

crashes.

reduced trips by car and reduced traffic
congestion.

City:
• Continue to have an inclusive engagement process that
ensures all resident needs are heard during planning of
future transportation projects
Residents:
• Participate in the design process for future transportation
projects and modes
Arizona State University:
• Support the city in using best practices to become a
20-minute city with low-carbon transportation options
and reduced congestion

“Yes! More of this
with shade and edible
landscaping.”
“Right – build the
infrastructure for the
desired behavior.”
A resident suggested making car-free roads
around Mill and ASU.

“Maybe making roads
that don’t have cars
or use AVs on Mill and
around ASU?”

TRANSPORTATION

30

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

31

Key Features
Increases the number of public
charging stations

3. EV charging

Increases public visibility of EVs

Educates residents on the benefits of EVs

Supports residents and business
owners in hosting charging
stations

Works with utilities and partners to increase access
to charging stations

Electric vehicle charging station (source: Arizona State University)

Description

Collaboration

Resident Input

Increasing the use of EVs will reduce GHG emissions in Tempe. Tempe can triple the number of public charging
stations available to residents by 2022. Through expanding charging infrastructure, Tempe can lower the barriers
to own an EV. Tempe can also amend building codes to require that new buildings are charging station-ready,
which will lower the costs of retrofitting buildings.

Businesses, electric utilities, residents, and the City of Tempe
can improve air quality and reduce carbon emissions by
making it easier to own and operate EVs in Tempe.

Some residents believe that EV technology

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

City:
•

Add charging infrastructure for its own EV fleet to serve
as a model for the rest of the city

•

Promote EVs through encouraging the installation of
electric charging in commercial and residential
properties

Key stakeholders (APS and SRP):

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Provides public access to charging stations

Supports adoption of EVs and improves

Improves air quality and public

so that EV owners are less dependent on

local air quality in Tempe neighborhoods.

health outcomes.

home charging.

•

Support pilot projects that increase the number of EVs
in Arizona

•

Support installation of charging stations to
increase the availability of EV charging throughout
the city

Residents:
•

Can support changes to city codes that require buildings
be equipped with the ability to easily install EV charging
stations

•

Exploring options to buy their own EVs and install their
own charging stations

should be encouraged by the city.

“Yes! This is very easy
and within reach.”
Some people wonder how EVs impact the
amount of GHG emissions produced.

“Does this increase
emissions elsewhere
due to the creation
of electricity? The
electricity source
should be considered.”

TRANSPORTATION

32

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

33

Key Features
Provides a comprehensive
review of opportunities and risks
associated with AVs

4. Smart mobility guide

Waymo AV (source: City of Tempe)

Models and analyzes
possible traffic impacts
under different
scenarios

Reviews zoning and development
codes and identifies possible
changes

Reviews data sharing
processes, protocols,
and use

Determines possible
revenue impacts and
explore alternative
revenue sources

Description
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) present Tempe with many opportunities for improving transportation, but also a
number of risks. Tempe and ASU researchers will develop a new mobility readiness guide, which will provide
the necessary groundwork for developing policies to ensure that the adoption and use of AVs result in a moresustainable transportation system. The readiness guide will provide a comprehensive review of Tempe policies
and codes that may help or hinder the adoption of AVs. Tempe believes that AVs can improve mobility, assure
safety, and reduce the carbon footprint of the transportation system.

Some residents think the city should
incorporate more AVs into city operations.

Collaboration
Arizona State University:
•

The School for the Future of Innovation in Society can
co-produce the Smart Mobility guide to help the city
set guidelines for how to operate AVs in Tempe

Key Stakeholders (MAG, GPEC, local
municipalities, and Maricopa County):

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Safe & Secure
Communities

Quality of Life

AVs can lower congestion, use roadways

AVs will make our roads safer by

AVs can help increase accessibility for

City:

more efficiently, and reduce the number of

removing human error, which is a factor in

mobility-limited demographics to ensure

•

single-occupancy vehicle (SOV) trips.

90% of roadway crashes.

that all residents have access to this
technology.

Begins to develop a
policy framework for
operation of AVs in
Tempe

Resident Input

Tempe and its partners can develop policies to guide the use
of AVs in a way that supports the city’s carbon reduction,
safety, mobility, and congestion mitigation goals.

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Reviews roadway design to
provide possible future roadway
configurations

•

Work with the City of Tempe to coordinate regional
efforts to govern AV and smart mobility technologies

City departments including Public Safety, Engineering
and Transportation, Community Development, Economic
Development, and Information Technology can work
together to coordinate efforts with new AV firms that are
operating in Tempe

“AVs are the future!
Safer, more reliable,
and they never text
while driving!”
Some residents are worried about the viability
of AVs in Tempe.

“How would you
make sure that these
are accessible to
populations that need
them and not just who
can afford them?”

TRANSPORTATION

34

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

35

RESILIENCE

The following actions are being pursued by Tempe to establish resilience to extreme heat:

Green infrastructure:

The threat of extreme heat is intensifying due to climate change and the urban heat

•

Green infrastructure (GI) collects stormwater to help grow vegetation to cool
our urban area.

in heat-related deaths and hospitalizations, especially among children, the elderly, and

•

GI can save water, prevent flooding, and create shade.

homeless people. In addition to these health concerns, extreme heat decreases the

•

GI can include street curb design to alter the flow of stormwater and rooftop
gardens that absorb water and create shade for urban cooling.

•

Work within the city to create an education outreach initiative to inform
Tempe residents about the cost benefits of GI

island (UHI) effect. Record-breaking temperatures are sweeping Tempe and the Phoenix
valley, presenting obstacles to keep Tempe safe. Extreme heat has caused an increase

efficiency of HVAC systems, which drives up electricity costs and usage. Extreme heat
also negatively effects Tempe’s economy, as tourism tends to decrease in uncomfortable
weather conditions. It is important for Tempe to adapt to climate disturbances through
infrastructure changes and community-driven action. Resilience to extreme heat will
ensure that Tempe can remain a stable urban center that protects the health of the
public and the environment. Adapting to our changing climate will be pursued by the

Green Construction Code:

City in the following ways:

•

The International Green Construction Code (IGCC) helps to cool the city by
incorporating sustainable components of urban cooling.

•

Shade and cool materials are components of the IGCC.

Urban Forestry Master Plan:

Buildings

Infrastructure

Urban Forestry
and Vegetation

Preparedness and
Response

Implementation of green

Green infrastructure (GI)

construction codes will require

allows buildings, parks, and

Continue to increase the tree

The hiring of an Emergency

new buildings to increase

streets to collect runoff

coverage for Tempe’s Urban

Manager will help prepare

shade coverage and use of

stormwater to cool the urban

Forestry Master Plan to provide

Tempe for emergencies

cool materials.

city and reduce costs of

shade and cooler temperatures

including extreme heat days.

watering.

in Tempe.

•

Investing in the Urban Forestry Master Plan will increase the urban tree
population to cool the city and improve air quality.

•

Tempe can increase staff to help with tree planting and irrigation funding.

•

Tempe can continue volunteer efforts and pilot projects to expand
its urban tree canopy.

Emergency management program:
•

An Emergency Manager can work to make sure that public safety is not
compromised on extreme heat days.

•

An Emergency Manager can draft an extreme heat prevention plan to
coordinate among the city, residents, schools, and businesses to ensure the
city is resilient during extreme heat.

EXTREME HEAT

36

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

37

Highlight Action

Key Features

1. Green infrastructure (GI)

Supports urban cooling

Captures stormwater

Creates shade

Saves water

Keeps streets clear during storms

Description
Tempe can save water and cool the city by designing landscapes that capture stormwater, while also growing
vegetation for shade and cooling. Design standards for GI and Low-Impact Development ensure cities and
developers consider stormwater and urban cooling when creating the landscape of new developments, parks,
and streetscapes. Scottsdale and Phoenix have led an effort with ASU’s Sustainable Cities Network to develop
design standards for stormwater management to cultivate cool landscapes and urban shade. These standards
can be adopted by Tempe’s City Council, so that outdoor spaces in Tempe are protected against extreme heat
and floods.

GI project at Rio
Salado & Hardy
(source: City of
Tempe)

GI and Low-Impact Development Design Standards will save water and keep Tempe cool.

Alignment with Strategic Priorities
Grated curbs allow
stormwater to pass
through (source:

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

GI reduces energy costs and saves water.

Increasing shade reduces exposure to

GI makes the city more livable by

extreme heat and ultraviolet radiation.

increasing comfort and walkability.

City of Mesa)

EXTREME HEAT

38

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

39

Resident Input

Collaboration

Best Practice

Many residents agree that adopting this will

Tempe can build on regional best practices and coordinate with

The City of Tempe believes that gaining

Green Infrastructure / Low-Impact Development –Mesa, AZ

have positive impacts for our city and the

partners by adopting new standards to ensure all new public and

insight and inspiration from our peer

Mesa, Arizona has become more sustainable by managing stormwater runoff to

environment.

private developments use stormwater to support vegetation and

cities in the United States is beneficial

reduce urban flooding and infrastructure damage costs. Mesa drafted the Low-Impact

cooling throughout the city.

to perform effective actions to increase

Development Toolkit in 2015 to pave the way for various green building techniques

extreme heat resilience. Tempe has

and methods to deal with stormwater runoff. The city is already implementing the

Arizona State University:

researched actions that other cities have

infrastructure designs, which have proved to be effective in reducing stormwater runoff

•

taken to adapt to extreme heat and

and beneficial to urban cooling. The main elements of the GI are as follows:

flooding to learn from their experiences.

•

“Critical to reduce
water use, great!”
“Yes, please! Requiring
green infrastructure
is key and shouldn’t
be side-stepped
through petition for
exemption.”

Convene City staff, landscape architects, residents
and private developments to ensure all stakeholders know

the flow of runoff towards roadside vegetation

the benefits of GI and why they should be incorporated into
all new projects
•

•

Vegetated swale: Restoring washes with vegetation to create natural drainage
patterns and flood protection

Work with Maricopa County Flood Control and local
municipalities to adopt regional standards for GI and low-

•

impact development

Bioretention: Basins, cells, and planters that act to reduce and absorb/infiltrate
runoff to supply plants with needed water and replenish groundwater

Businesses and Developers:
•

Green street methods: Manipulating the shape and size of a street curb to change

•

Permeable pavement: Stabilized aggregate and porous materials are used to make
pavements permeable to stormwater to reduce runoff and increase storage volume

Learn from best practices at ASU, other cities, and private
developments to incorporate smart stormwater

•

management, trees, and shade into new developments

Green roof: Rooftop gardens, installed over waterproofing membranes, are naturally
grown with stormwater, reducing runoff

City:
•

Some residents from a public forum were

city projects

concerned about the irrigation water quality
for the plants.

•

“I support this,
but make sure
residents understand
stormwater quality and
their impact on it.”

Source: Low-Impact Development Toolkit, City of Mesa, Arizona

Adopt GI and low impact development standards for all
Work with developers to incorporate GI into private
development

Residents:
•

Support GI pilot projects in their neighborhoods, schools,
and businesses to ensure all development and street
Eastmark

projects include GI
•

Master Planned

Tailor GI projects for single family and multifamily

Community in

residences

southeast Mesa
(source: City of
Mesa)

“How clean is the
water? What if the run
off hurts the plants?”
EXTREME HEAT

40

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

41

Highlight Action

Key Features

2. Green construction code

New optional building code

Encourages more structural
shade

Spreads the use of cool materials

Promotes more tree canopy
coverage

Celebrates developers that construct a new building
using the IGCC

Description
The International Green Construction Code (IGCC) encourages more structural shade, requires more tree
canopy coverage, and supports the use of cool materials. Buildings constructed to the IGCC are more
sustainable than buildings constructed under traditional codes. Adopting IGCC as an optional code in Tempe
would guide new developments to provide shade, as well as using smart surfaces and cool materials to keep
the city cooler, day and night.
Tempe

Tempe buildings should keep occupants and pedestrians cool.

Transportation
Center (source: City
of Tempe)

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Financial Stability
& Vitality

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Green construction practices that

Increasing shade in Tempe reduces

Shade and cool materials make the

include shade and cool materials

exposure to extreme heat and

city more livable by increasing comfort

reduce energy costs.

ultraviolet radiation.

and walkability.

Garden rooftop
and cool materials
(source: City of
Tempe)

EXTREME HEAT

42

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

43

Resident Input

Collaboration

Best Practice

Many residents from a public forum agree

The City of Tempe intends to find opportunities to increase the

The City of Tempe believes that gaining

Green Building Code – Scottsdale, AZ

that shade and greywater are critical

number of green buildings built in the city. Tempe can collaborate

insight and inspiration from our peer

Scottsdale established a green building program that is adaptable to the extreme heat

infrastructure in the Valley.

with developers and residents on piloting the use of the IGCC.

cities in the United States will help our

and weather present in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The program encourages a

City:

city develop effective actions to increase

systems-based approach, through design and building code, to minimize environmental

extreme heat resilience. Tempe has

impact and energy consumption while keeping occupants comfortable and healthy.

researched actions that other cities have

Residential building codes include the following:

taken to update their building practices

•

Building entrances protected from direct summer sun

to make their cities more resilient to

•

Roofs with 50% of run-off diverted to landscape areas (natural irrigation)

climate change impacts.

•

Smart irrigation controllers that regulate irrigation based on current weather/soil
conditions

Developers:

•

Solar-ready roof zones with at least 500 square feet of free roof

•

Pilot the use of the IGCC in new developments

•

Kitchen faucets limited to flow rate of 1.8 gallons per minute

•

Pilot use of new shade and cool material technologies

Commercial building codes include the following:

“This is one of the
critical needs of the
Valley of the Sun –
more shade!”

•

Pilot the use of the IGCC in new city buildings, such as
Fire Station #2

•

Work with developers to find opportunities to pilot the use
of the IGCC in private developments

•

“Greywater should be
a requirement not an
aspiration.”

Pilot use of smart surfaces and cool materials in city projects

Arizona State University:
•

Continue to construct state-of-the-art green buildings
using standards like LEED Platinum and the Living
Building challenge

•

Some residents believe that these codes

Seek opportunities to produce the cost-benefit analysis

regulations.

•

On-site EV charging stations or preferred parking for low-emission/hybrid vehicles

•

On-site renewable energy system designed to generate at least 3% of total
estimated annual electric energy use

•

Indoor paints, coatings, etc. are within low VOC (volatile organic compound)
content limits

Green Building Code. Scottsdale, AZ (source: City of Scottsdale)

of the energy savings that can be seen from using the IGCC

should be mandated with government

•

Research effectiveness of emerging cooling technologies
and smart surfaces

“Optional is
inadequate.”
Appaloosa Branch
Library located in
north Scottsdale,
AZ
(Source: DWL
Architects +
Planners, Inc.)

EXTREME HEAT

44

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

45

Key Features
Supports planting and
maintenance

Promotes adequate staffing to
support the expansion of Tempe’s
tree canopy

Organizes volunteers and
community efforts to plant,
maintain, and water our trees

Can target streets and parks in
the hottest areas of the city

Supports targeting efforts
to combat extreme heat as
experienced by low-income
residents

Further invests in pilot projects
that model best practices to
conserve water

3. Urban Forestry Master
Plan (UFMP)

Description
Tempe adopted an Urban Forestry Master Plan (UFMP) in 2017. The City recently hired an Urban Forester to
support increasing the city’s tree canopy. The UFMP promotes the planting and maintenance of trees in city
parks, streets, and major city intersections. The plan supports efforts to create more urban forestry volunteer
efforts, pilot projects, and tree planting events on city property. The City can continue to increase these
programs by increasing staff, funding trees, and finding resources to improve irrigation, add green infrastructure
(i.e. bioswales), and install greywater systems. Every budget year presents an opportunity to ensure that the City
is fully investing in our urban forestry program to provide shade and to help cool our city.

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

Collaboration

Resident Input

The City of Tempe has budgeted to have the first Urban Forester in
Arizona. There is an opportunity to develop the best urban forestry
program in the Southwestern United States, which can play a role in
combating extreme heat by protecting our residents from experiencing
the worst impacts of extreme heat days. Coordination between city staff,
nonprofits, and residents will be critical to support the growth of Tempe’s
urban forest.

Many residents supported use of shade

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Quality of Life

Green building practices that include

Increasing shade reduces exposure to

By making our city more walkable and

water reuse can reduce energy costs.

extreme heat and ultraviolet radiation.

comfortable, the City of Tempe is ensuring
that it is a livable city in the future.

“One of the most
critical needs – shade.”

City:
•

Coordinate with staff from Engineering and Transportation,
Community Services, and Community Development to create
policies and programs to plant and maintain trees on city property

•

Coordinate with Tempe Municipal Utilities, SRP and APS, to promote
residential tree planting programs

Nonprofits:

Financial Stability
& Vitality

throughout the city.

•

Organizations, such as Trees Matter and Watershed Management
Group, can continue to pursue grants to support pilot projects that
demonstrate best practices in urban forestry and green
infrastructure

•

Continue to look for opportunities, such as the Carbon Offsets
program, to fund tree plantings

Multiple residents from a public forum talked
about using greywater in city operations.

“Use greywater
systems to conserve
water!”

Residents:
•

Residents, neighborhood associations, and homeowners
associations can use the MaryAnne Corder Neighborhood Grants to
support tree-planting projects

EXTREME HEAT

46

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

47

Key Features
4. Emergency Management

Tempe heat map (source: City of Tempe)

Full-time permanent position dedicated to ensuring
that Tempe is ready for emergencies and threats

Can coordinate with City staff, residents, schools,
nonprofits, and the business community to prepare

Can seek additional funding for projects and research
to ensure that the city is lowering the risks presented
by extreme heat

Supports Tempe in creating resilience hubs where
residents can go during emergencies

Description

Collaboration

Resident Input

Tempe has an opportunity to hire an Emergency Manager who will be responsible for ensuring that
the city is prepared for a wide range of potential threats. A prevention plan for extreme heat could
ensure that first responders and residents are prepared for extreme heat days by having water, wearing
appropriate clothing, having access to accessible buildings, and staying in air-conditioning when possible.
Arrangements can be made to increase the number of cooling centers. The Emergency Manager can work
on ensuring that future buildings and city infrastructure are resilient to extreme heat.

The City of Tempe created a new position for an Emergency Manager
in the fiscal year (FY) 19–20 budget. There is an opportunity for the
Emergency Manager to support efforts to make the city more resilient
to extreme heat by working to prevent deaths and illnesses caused by
extreme heat and improving how the city communicates about extreme
heat. There is also the opportunity for the new manager to support the
creation of more hydration stations, cooling centers, and other mechanisms
to ensure Tempe has an effective heat relief program. For this work to be
successful, the following partners can support this effort:

Many residents during a public forum agreed

City:
•
Providing resources to the new Emergency Manager to build
partnerships inside and outside the city to coordinate emergency
management efforts

Alignment with Strategic Priorities

•

Safe & Secure
Communities

Sustainable Growth
& Development

Financial Stability
& Vitality

An Emergency Manager can ensure

Increasing the city’s capacity to work

Preparedness and prevention planning

that public safety is not compromised

with resilience will ensure that Tempe

can reduce the costs of response and

on extreme heat days.

is prepared for climate disasters,

recovery to extreme weather events.

like extreme heat.

Coordinating efforts with City staff to ensure Tempe is prepared
for extreme heat days by making sure that City buildings and
programs support urban cooling

Arizona State University:
•
Continuing to take a holistic approach to emergency
management that combines disaster preparedness,
resilience, and sustainability
•

that extreme heat is important to consider.

“Extreme heat is a
critical choice.”
Residents recognize the importance
of collaborating with other organizations
and cities.

“How will the city
collaborate and
cooperate with
neighboring cities to
achieve this action?”

Hosting workshops to ensure Tempe is working with local and
regional partners to prepare for extreme heat

Residents:
•
Coordinating with neighbors to develop heat resilience programs that
ensures neighbors work together on urban cooling projects and
disaster preparedness training

EXTREME HEAT

48

COMMUNITY ACTION

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

49

MUNICIPAL ACTIONS
In addition to the twelve community actions, the city government has considered what actions it can perform to be sustainable and

Municipal GHG Sources
The following chart describes Tempe’s main GHG sources and their percentage of total municipal GHG emissions.
Percent of
Total Municipal
GHG Emissions

GHG Sources

Description

resilient. In 2015, Tempe collected data to form the city’s first municipal GHG emissions inventory. This GHG emissions inventory allowed
Tempe to identify what operational changes can be made to reduce carbon emissions. The city set a goal of carbon neutrality in municipal

City Buildings

operations by 2050 with a strategy of 100% renewable energy by 2035. The following sections provide strategies the city will employ to
decrease GHG emissions in city operations.

Municipal GHG
Inventory

30%

Municipal GHG Inventory

City buildings such as the library,
city hall, police stations, fire stations,
community centers, and office buildings
require electricity for lighting, air
conditioning, computers and office
equipment. Local utilities provide
electricity from gas, coal, nuclear and
renewable energy sources.

In 2015, the total municipal emissions were 40,666 MT of CO2e.
Approximately 70% of the city’s GHG emissions were from
electricity production, while roughly 30% of total emissions came

30%

Buildings &
Facilities

20%

Outdoor
Lighting

Outdoor Lighting

Total Emissions: 40,666 MT CO2e

from the transportation sector. Tempe currently owns 120 buildings,
which accounts for 30% of the city’s electricity consumption

20%

The city’s streetlights, park lights, path
lights, and traffic signals use electricity
provided by two local utilities.

and GHG emissions. Another prime component of electricity
park lights, and traffic signals. The City of Tempe manages two
drinking water treatment plants that consume approximately 22
million kWh of electricity per year, or 20% of the municipal GHG

Water Infrastructure

consumption is outdoor lighting, which includes 17,000 streetlights,

emissions. Tempe’s municipal fleet comprises vehicles such as
garbage trucks, law enforcement vehicles, field trucks, and code
compliance cars. The transit fleet includes city buses and the light
rail. Solid waste, signified as “Other”, is transported to neighboring

20%

Water
Infrastructure

29%

Municipal Fleet &
Transit Fleet

1%

Other

Office of Sustainability (2019).
Municipal GHG Inventory. Tempe, AZ
(source: City of Tempe)

50

MUNICIPAL ACTIONS

Municipal Fleet &
Transit Fleet

cities, specifically Phoenix, for disposal.

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

20%

29%

Drinking water is filtered and treated
at Tempe’s two water treatment plants,
then pumped out to provide clean
drinking water to businesses and homes
throughout Tempe. Pumps, motors, and
equipment used in the water treatment
process are powered by electricity.

Local buses, police cars, garbage trucks,
and other city vehicles burn fossil fuels.

51

To work toward carbon neutrality in our city, the City can make investments to reduce energy use in city buildings,
outdoor lighting, and water infrastructure, while also greening our city fleet. Over the last several years, we have
made important investments in city buildings, outdoor lightning, water infrastructure, and the municipal and
transit fleet. The City of Tempe intends to invest further in these areas in the next several fiscal years.

City Buildings:
Tempe has completed the
following actions to reduce
carbon emissions derived
from city buildings:

Outdoor Lighting:
Tempe has completed the
following action to reduce
carbon emissions derived
from outdoor lighting:
• Converted 4,000 high-pressure sodium
street lights to LED street lights.

• Conducted annual assessments of city
buildings to determine energy-efficient
upgrades for lighting and electrical
equipment
• Retrofitted city buildings with new
HVAC units to reduce energy demand
and the city’s carbon footprint

Tempe Boys and Girls Club (source: City of Tempe)

• Installed solar panels at six city
facilities to power buildings with
renewable energy. The city will
continue to make clean energy
investments through partnerships with
APS and SRP.

Next action to
improve sustainability
in city buildings:
• Facilities Sustainability Plan: The city
is creating a roadmap to identify which
long-term energy efficiency
investments to make in city facilities.

Kiwanis Tennis Center (source: city of Tempe)

Next actions to improve
sustainability in outdoor
lighting:
• Street lights: Tempe will continue
to replace high-pressure sodium
street lights and incorporate LED
lights into street lights and path
lights.
• Park lights: The city will convert
inefficient park lighting to LEDs.
• Facility lights: The city will continue
to upgrade exterior lighting to LEDs.

NEXT ACTION
NEXT ACTION

LED park lighting (left) (source: City of Tempe)

Kiwanis Wave Pool facility (source: City of Tempe)
52

MUNICIPAL ACTIONS

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

53

Water Infrastructure:

Municipal Fleet & Transit Fleet:
Tempe has completed the
following action to reduce
carbon emissions derived
from water infrastructure:
• Researched what equipment and
technologies can be changed to lower
the energy used to treat and transport
water throughout the city.

Tempe has completed
the following actions to
reduce carbon emissions
derived from its municipal
and transit fleet:
• Added 20 EVs to the municipal fleet to
reduce fossil fuel use.
• Installed 28 EV charging stations at city
facilities to encourage accessible
access to EV infrastructure.

JGM Water Treatment Plant (source: City of Tempe)

EV charging station at Arizona State University (source: City of Tempe)

Next action to improve
sustainability in the city’s
water infrastructure:
• Efficiency study: A study is currently
underway to assess the city’s water
treatment plants, wells, and pumps
to determine how to optimize water
and energy use. The study will provide
recommendations for upgrades and
improvements at the two water
treatment plants.

NEXT ACTION

Next actions to improve sustainability
in the municipal and transit fleet:
• Electric vehicle feasibility study: The city is looking at its
current electric infrastructure at city facilities to
determine what capacity is needed to install future EV
charging infrastructure.
• Increase EV purchasing: The city will continue to invest
in both electric and hybrid vehicles for the city’s fleet,
while reducing purchases of fossil-fueled vehicles.
• Transit fleet upgrades: In addition to investments in
cleaner forms of transit, Tempe’s Orbit and Flash buses are
gradually switching to alternate fuels instead of using
diesel gasoline. Transit is using compressed natural
gas (CNG), which produces far less GHG emissions than
conventional diesel fuel.

NEXT ACTION

South Water Treatment Plant (source: City of Tempe)

CNG garbage truck (source: City of Tempe)

54

MUNICIPAL ACTIONS

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

55

Upcoming Investments

MOVING FORWARD

Over the next two fiscal years, the city can invest in the following ways to achieve municipal carbon neutrality.
Percent of
Total Municipal
GHG Emissions

City Buildings

GHG Sources

30%

Municipal Actions
FY 2019-2020

The city will
complete the
first phase of
our facility
sustainability plan
to identify the
next five years of
energy upgrades.

FY 2020-2021

Climate Action Plan 2021 Update
Tempe’s 2019 Climate Action Plan (CAP) sets out an initial twelve actions to put Tempe on a path toward community carbon neutrality.

Tempe can invest
in solar with
battery storage.

The city’s journey toward a carbon-neutral future will only accelerate with the adoption of the 2019 CAP. Tempe is already looking to
expand and improve on its first CAP with the CAP 2021 Update. Five guiding principles for the CAP 2021 Update have been identified
by Tempe’s Sustainability Commission and the Office of Sustainability: fiscal responsibility, enterprise, equity, engagement, and
effectiveness and evidence. We will work with residents, businesses, and nonprofits to implement the first twelve actions and to create
a CAP update that exemplifies these principles. We elaborate these principles here, as a part of Tempe’s first CAP, to communicate the

Outdoor Lighting

City’s commitment to climate action that aligns with Tempe’s unique character and needs.

Fiscal Responsibility

20%

Tempe will invest
in LED outdoor
lighting in parks,
transit projects,
and city buildings.

The budget
request will
reflect a four-year
financing strategy
for arterial
streetlights.

Tempe will make investments in emissions reduction and resilience that
are financially sound. The City of Tempe will:
• Encourage energy-efficient upgrades to save energy and money
• Prioritize investments with clear financial returns
• Prioritize investments that maximize community benefit
• Provide the cost of inaction when possible

Fiscal Responsibility in Action
The City of Tempe is investigating the use of internal
carbon pricing to understand the carbon emissions
associated with city decisions. If the City knows
the carbon emissions associated with different city
decisions, it can opt to select programs and services
that reduce emissions and are cost-effective.

Municipal Fleet &
Transit Fleet

Water Infrastructure

• Consider building the price of carbon into city decision making

56

20%

29%

A water treatment
analysis
may identify
opportunities for
energy upgrades.

An EV charging
station feasibility
study will be done
to determine which
city facilities will add
new EV charging
infrastructure.
The city will consider
new alternative fuel
buses.

MUNICIPAL ACTIONS

Possible new
energy upgrades
in Capital
Investment
Projects (CIP).

Enterprise
Tempe will focus on the critical role of local businesses in
sustaining climate action by investing in and promoting
new business practices and the deployment of new
technologies. The City of Tempe will:
• Support businesses in prioritizing clean air through
investments in clean energy and transportation
• Inform and incentivize businesses to adopt energy
upgrades, sustainable transportation, and green
infrastructure practices

Up to 30% of the
new municipal
fleet purchased
will be EVs.

• Communicate climate action by businesses to attract
workers and new businesses who value sustainability
Singh Meadows farmer’s market

Enterprise in Action
The Cities of Tempe and Phoenix
have partnered with Arizona State
University and Local First Arizona
to grow a local food economy
that embraces climate action. The
project supports Tempe businesses
in energy, water, and food practices.
This project aims to highlight the
role the business community and
entrepreneurs can play in tackling
carbon emissions and resilience.

• Incubate new businesses that support climate action

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

57

Equity
Tempe will work to include all voices in city decision making by
addressing structural racism and equity challenges in our city. The
City of Tempe will:
• Consider people first, and underrepresented groups, in the
creation of city programs and policies

Equity and Engagement
in Action
Equity in Action is a Tempe project that works
with underrepresented groups to develop and test
new policies and programs that make Tempe more
equitable. The City of Tempe, in partnership with
Vitalyst Health Foundation, funds social justice
organizations and community representatives to
participate in redesigning city policies and processes
to reflect the values and needs of all Tempe
residents. Tempe is committed to building city staffs’
understanding of the implications of race, culture, and
socio-economic status on public processes to advance
equitable opportunities for all.

• Practice targeted universalism, which means pursuing policies
and programs that are targeted at underrepresented groups,
but that will create benefits for all of Tempe
• Build a culture of belonging where all people feel like they can
influence the future of Tempe
• Foster a culture of radical responsibility, which means working
to help our neighbors and improve our local environment
• Prioritize climate actions that create jobs and offer
opportunities for professional development.

Engagement
Tempe will create a climate action plan and a planning process that
residents can interact with and understand. The City of Tempe will:

Effectiveness and Evidence
Tempe will make investments in carbon reduction and
resilience to climate change that are effective and
evidence based. This will help ensure that actions in
the CAP actually reduce emissions and increase our
resilience as intended. The City of Tempe will:
• Select evidence-based climate actions known to
be effective
• Monitor the impact of climate actions to ensure they
have the desired effect
• Use data and research to create argument for
building equity and climate action into all decision
making
• Partner with Arizona State University to support
large-scale research and infrastructure to reduce
GHG emissions and increase resilience to the impacts
of climate change

• Conduct neighborhood- and school-focused engagements
• Consider use of Resilience Hub model to engage residents and
provide resources for local action
• Employ creative gaming and virtual engagement platforms
• Create a culture of sharing and community support
• Prioritize community-focused solutions

58

MOVING FORWARD

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

Effectiveness and
Evidence in Action
The Health Impact Project,
funded by the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation and
The Pew Charitable Trusts,
is partnering with the City
of Tempe and Arizona State
University to address extreme
heat in Tempe. The project
is focused on collecting
temperature and public health
data during extreme heat days
in Summer 2019. The data
collected will help inform how
Tempe builds future playgrounds,
multi-use parks, parking lots,
and arterial walls. This pilot
project will demonstrate how
ASU professors and students
can provide evidence for city
decision making.

59

COMMUNITY ACTIONS

Glossary
CAP: Climate Action Plan; a plan to reduce emissions and make investments in resilience

ENERGY

CO2e: Carbon dioxide equivalent; a way to translate other greenhouse gases, like methane, sulfur oxides, and nitrogen oxides, into
an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide

1.

Resilient energy hubs

2.

Revolving fund

FY: Fiscal year; the government’s budget from July 1 to June 30 of the next year

3.

Sustainability platform

GHG: Greenhouse gases; gases like carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), sulfur oxides (SOx), and nitrogen oxides (NOx) that trap

4.

Solar EV charging stations

Emissions reduction: Using energy and transportation methods that produce less greenhouse gas emissions than
fossil fuel sources

heat in the atmosphere

GHG inventory: Estimation of the amount of greenhouse gases produced from a community or an organization within a year

TRANSPORTATION

MT: Metric ton; equals approximately 2,205 pounds
Resilience: The ability of a system to thrive after something disrupts it

1.

Transportation Demand Management (TDM)

Sustainability: Balancing the environmental, social, and economic needs of today without compromising those needs

2.

Encourage walking, biking, and public transport in city projects

3.

EV charging

4.

Smart mobility guide

for tomorrow

References

PAGE 13

PAGE 25

Chan, T-T. (2018). Transportation Demand Management Program. Austin, TX. Retrieved from

EXTREME HEAT

http://www.austintexas.gov/edims/document.cfm?id=298367
City of Scottsdale. (n.d.). Highlighted Green Projects. Retrieved from
https://www.scottsdaleaz.gov/green-building-program/green-projects

1.

Green infrastructure

City of Tempe, Public Works Department. (2018). Successful Green Infrastructure/Low Impact Development Pilot Project. Tempe, AZ.

2.

Green Construction Code

Logan Simpson & Dibble Engineering. (2015). Low Impact Development Toolkit. Retrieved from

3.

Urban Forestry Master Plan

4 .

Emergency management

City of Tempe. (n.d.). Sustainable Tempe. Retrieved from https://www.tempe.gov/government/sustainable-tempe

https://www.mesaaz.gov/home/showdocument?id=14999
New York City Economic Development Corporation. (2015, May 8). Rising to the challenge: Bright Power’s Resilient Power Hub.

PAGE 37

Retrieved from https://www.nycedc.com/blog-entry/rising-challenge-bright-powers-resilient-power-hub

60

City of Tempe | Climate Action Plan

61

Want to learn more about sustainability
at the City of Tempe?
Check out our website at tempe.gov/SustainableTempe.
For information about Tempe’s Sustainability Commission,
visit tempe.gov/SustainabilityCommission.

Contact:
Shannon Reed

Public Information Officer
480-350-8101
shannon_reed@tempe.gov

printed on 100% recycled paper

