State|Year|Page|N_Pages|Text
Arkansas|2008|29|490|There are a variety of impacts that are expected to affect Arkansas. These include increases in severe weather events and drought, which, in turn, can be expected to adversely affect agriculture. Floods are expected to increase in frequency with related expansion of floodplains and flood damage. Sea level rise will inundate some nearby coastal areas, and related salt-water intrusion, coupled with increased drought stress may impact water supplies. In areas dependent on snow pack, such as the western United States, water supplies will be more severely affected. Ecosystems and sensitive species could be disrupted as climatic zones move north. Tropical diseases and insects will move north. Heat-related deaths will increase, although cold-related deaths will decrease. Climate change impacts in volatile regions of the world could destabilize these areas and pose a national security threat. There is also a possibility of sudden and dramatic climate change that cannot be predicted, but would have far greater and adverse impacts.
Arkansas|2008|36|490|Cost savings— Total net costs or savings were estimated through comparison of monetized costs and savings of policy implementation over time, using discounting. These net costs could be positive or negative; negative costs indicated that the policy saved money or produced “cost savings.” Many policies were estimated to create net financial cost savings (typically through fuel savings and electricity savings associated with new policy actions).
Arkansas|2008|66|490|The GCGW recommends that Arkansas establish a statewide, economy-wide goal to reduce the state’s gross GHG emissions below 2000 levels by 20% by 2020, 35% by 2025, and 50% by 2035. These goals should be adopted by the state by 2009. The GCGW recommends that the Arkansas Climate Change Center prepare a report to the Governor and the state legislature once every 2 years on the state’s progress toward achieving the statewide GHG reduction goal, in coordination with ADEQ and other state agencies, as appropriate. This report should address each sector’s progress toward reducing GHG emissions; identify the contribution of each sector’s emissions (as noted in the GHG inventory and forecast report) toward achieving the statewide goal; and specify future actions and resource needs.
Arkansas|2008|184|490|Potential funding sources include philanthropic organizations, high-net-worth individuals, or others interested in supporting innovative, environmentally effective market solutions. Recognizing that fortunes are likely to be made in the “new energy economy,” for-profit investors, pension funds, mutual funds, and/or venture capitalists may be looking to fund similar business opportunities. Although technology entrepreneurs are often cited as offering potential global warming solutions, equally progressive solutions may lie in the fields of law, accounting, marketing, production, and government relations and lobbying. The objective of this policy recommendation is to leverage a state’s specific talents for global warming solutions into securing the business opportunities and market advantages that well-supported “early-bird” efforts are likely to reap in a carbon-constrained world.
Arkansas|2008|361|490|Total cropland in Arkansas was estimated at about 10 million acres in 2007.14 For the purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that conservation practices include conservation till (no-till and strip-till), and other conservation farming practices that provide enhanced ground cover, or other crop management practices that achieve similar soil carbon benefits. Conservation tillage is defined as any system that leaves 50% or more of the soil covered with residue.15
Arizona|2006|8|13|Reducing Arizona’s GHG emissions to the recommended levels through full implementation of all of the CCAG’s recommendations also would result in significant economic benefits for the state, including substantial economic cost savings, new job creation and enhanced economic development. The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS) has calculated overall net economic cost savings from the CCAG’s recommendations of more than $5.5 billion between 2007-2020, with additional significant cost savings also expected between 2020-2040 (although not calculated by CCS). The CCS also has calculated an average net economic cost savings of nearly $13 per ton of GHG emissions reduced under the CCAG’s recommended policy options (if fully implemented).
Arizona|2006|4|13|The Executive Order emphasized that “Arizona and other Western States have particular concerns about the impacts of climate change and climate variability on the environment, including the potential for prolonged drought, severe forest fires, warmer temperatures, increased snowmelt, reduced snow pack and other effects.”
Arizona|2006|10|13|The CCAG is recommending a set of thirteen (13) policy options to reduce GHG emissions reductions from the TLU sector, including improved vehicle fuel efficiency, increased usage of lower-emissions fuels, greater use of lower- emissions means of travel and land use and other strategies to decrease the growth in fuel use and vehicle miles traveled (VMT). GHG emissions from the TLU sector, which are expected to more than double by 2020 (over 1990 levels), are influenced by transportation technologies and fuels, along with population, economic growth and land use policies that affect the demand for transportation services.
Arizona|2006|11|13|Use Manure Digesters to Reduce Methane Emissions from Livestock Operations and Promote Energy Use of the Captured Methane (A-1) Use Biomass Feedstocks for Electricity or Steam Production (A-2) Increase Ethanol Production and Use (A-3) Convert Agricultural Land to Grassland or Forest to Increase Carbon Sequestration (A-7) Reduce Conversion of Farm and Rangelands to Developed Uses (A-8) Promote Consumption of Locally Produced Agricultural Commodities to Reduce Transportation Emissions (A-9) Decrease the Conversion of Forestland to Developed Uses (F-1) Increase Reforestation and Restoration of Forestland (F-2) Improve Forest Ecosystem Management (F-3a & 3b) Improve Commercialization of Biomass Gasification and Combined Cycle Technologies (F-4)
Arizona|2006|4|13|The Executive Order also recognized that “actions to reduce GHG emissions, including increasing energy efficiency, conserving natural resources and developing renewable energy sources, may have multiple benefits including economic development, job creation, cost savings, and improved air quality.”
California|2017|17|156|The bill also requires the Board of Forestry and Fire Protection to ensure that its rules and regulations that govern the harvesting of commercial forest tree species consider the capacity of forest resources to sequester carbon dioxide emissions sufficient to meet or exceed the sequestration target of 5 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MMTCO2e)/year net annually, as established in the first AB 32 Climate Change Scoping Plan.
California|2017|28|156|California maintains a GHG inventory that is consistent with IPCC practices to allow for comparison of the statewide GHG emissions with those at the national level and with other international GHG inventories. Statewide GHG emissions are calculated using many data sources. The primary data source is from reports submitted to CARB through the Regulation for the Mandatory Reporting of GHG Emissions (MRR). MRR requires facilities and entities with more than 10,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) of combustion and process emissions, all facilities belonging to certain industries, and all electric power entities to submit an annual GHG emissions data report directly to CARB. Reports from facilities and entities that emit more than 25,000 MTCO2e are verified by a CARB-accredited third-party verification body.
California|2017|50|156|The proposed new regulation to achieve a 20 percent GHG reduction in the refinery sector would require all refineries, by 2030, to achieve the benchmark of the most efficient existing refinery on a simple barrel basis. An efficiency benchmark is reflected as GHG emissions per unit of product. This regulation would not limit mass GHG emissions, but would require facilities to become more efficient through any combination of actions such as fuel switching; boiler electrification; onsite investments in newer, more energy efficient technologies; use of lighter crude slates; and any other process efficiencies that would be identified in consultation with local air districts and CARB. As part of the development process for this measure, other metrics such as complexity- weighted barrel may also be evaluated.
California|2017|73|156|There may be technologies or policies that do not appear to be cost-effective when compared to the SC-CO2 associated with the avoided GHG reductions. However, these actions may result in other benefits that are not reflected in the SC-CO2, including diversification of the portfolio of transportation fuels (a goal outlined in the Low Carbon Fuel Standard) and reductions in criteria pollutant emissions from power plants (as in the Renewables Portfolio Standard). Regulatory mandates help to broaden the deployment of these technologies and address market failures. Policies may also reduce the cost of production and utilization of lower carbon technologies over time, helping the State achieve its climate goals and potentially providing other economic benefits such as clean economy jobs.
California|2017|92|156|California’s leadership on GHG reduction is exceptional. However, climate mitigation goals are often treated independently by sector, and the public does not see a unified message that changes must take place on every level in every sector to preserve human health and well-being. Climate strategy could be supported by public communications campaigns that link sectors and present a message of the need for bold action, along with the benefits that action can yield. Mass media communications and social marketing campaigns can help shift social and cultural norms toward sustainable and healthy practices. Messaging about the co-benefits of climate change policies in improving health and well-being can lead to increased community and decision-maker support among vulnerable groups for policies and measures outlined in the Proposed Plan.
California|2014|23|150|Ocean Acidification: Due to excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the pH of seawater has decreased. This increased acidity poses risks to ocean ecosystems—the development of many shellfish, plankton, and other forms of ocean life—as well as to people who depend on oceans for their livelihood.
California|2014|28|150|Unlike other GHGs, the three main categories of fluorinated gases (HFCs, PFCs, and SF6) have no natural sources and only come from human-related activities. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are also potent climate-forcing fluorinated gases, but they are regulated under the Montreal Protocol because of their role in the destruction of the protective stratospheric ozone layer. The fluorinated gases are used as refrigerants, foam-blowing agents, or for a variety of industrial processes such as aluminum and semiconductor manufacturing. Many fluorinated gases have very high GWPs relative to other GHGs, so relatively low atmospheric levels can have large effects on global temperatures.
California|2014|45|150|Cleaner and more efficient power plants, industrial facilities, cars and trucks, modernized freight systems, and reduced travel demand are already greatly reducing air pollution and cancer risks in California, particularly in environmental justice communities. Strengthening our natural environment, including those areas surrounding the most impacted urban and rural communities, will further improve public health.
California|2014|142|150|State law defines environmental justice as the fair treatment of people of all races, cultures, and incomes with respect to the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies. ARB is committed to considering environmental justice in every program and process.
California|2014|147|150|Day by day, in steady steps of visible progress, we are seeing the emergence of a clean energy future. Solar panels are commonplace, whether on roofs, commercial warehouses, or in shiny ground-based arrays across the State. Thousands of wind turbines have become part of the California clean energy panorama, their blades describing slow graceful arcs as they generate more than 4,000 megawatts of pollution-free energy.
Colorado|2018|17|116|A shift in the timing of runoff is one highly probable effect on water supplies that will result from climate change. Projections indicate that runoff timing will shift an additional one to three weeks earlier by mid-century because of increased temperatures.12 For example, this may affect water-right holders who traditionally divert surface water during the crop-growing season, and it may affect those with limited access and rights to water storage options. It is also likely to result in decreased late-summer streamflow both because of increased temperatures—causing earlier snowmelt—and because of the projection that precipitation is likely to increase in the winter months but decrease in the summer months.13 At the same time, increased population, higher crop-irrigation requirements, and longer growing seasons will put additional pressure on a changing water supply.14
Colorado|2018|29|116|State and local government agencies in Colorado work cooperatively to minimize the spread of vector-borne diseases. The CDPHE tracks a number of diseases and publishes an annual assessment. Colorado has set a goal of developing an electronic disease reporting system to improve the state’s ability to monitor, detect, and respond to outbreaks or unusual trends in infectious diseases.2 Colorado will continue to evaluate disease rates and possible links to climate variables.
Colorado|2018|56|116|As the climate warms, it may become more costly to build and maintain roads and highways. Larger temperature variations resulting in drastic freeze and thaw cycles are extremely damaging to roadways, causing buckling and heaving of pavement12 and increased instance of rock fall in the mountains. Increased precipitation intensity is associated with reductions in traffic safety, decreases in traffic efficiency (such as speed and roadway capacity), and increases in traffic accidents.13 These climate changes can shorten the life expectancy of highways and roads by requiring increased maintenance and repair, which results in vehicle congestion, as well as limiting access to businesses and properties.
Colorado|2018|88|116|Active forest management is a critical tool in restoring forest health, reducing the risk of intense wildfires, and mitigating the impacts of climate change. An example of proactive management on a larger scale can be seen in Denver Water’s longstanding partnerships with the U.S. Forest Service and Colorado State Forest Service, which has resulted in tens of thousands of targeted acres being treated to reduce wildfire risk and protect critical watersheds. Activities in high-priority areas include reduction of forest vegetation (i.e., forest thinning), maintaining defensible space around utility infrastructures, and creating fuelbreaks along firefighter and resident ingress/ egress routes.
Colorado|2018|103|116|Colorado’s brewing industry is not only one of the biggest and most robust brewing industries in the country,25 it is a leader in putting in place actions that mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change. In 2015, a handful of Colorado’s locally owned and operated breweries signed the Climate Declaration, committing to a number of actions to monitor and reduce their environmental impact.26 One brewery who signed on to the declaration is Fort Collins-based Odell Brewing Company, Colorado’s third largest craft brewery. The Odell Brewing Company powers 95 percent of its operations through wind generators and the other 5 percent through solar panels. The company also recaptures steam to use for heat in its brewing process.27 MillerCoors, with its largest brewery located in Golden, has identified its own environmental sustainability strategy, which includes a goal to reduce its per-barrel carbon footprint by 25 percent before 2020.28
Colorado|2019|2|11|This transition is already underway and shows no signs of slowing down. The two fastest-growing professions in the United States are solar photovoltaic installers and wind turbine service technicians. Fourteen Colorado towns and counties have already taken the initiative and adopted the goal of getting 100% of their electricity from clean renewable energy: Denver, Pueblo, Boulder, Fort Collins, Summit County, Frisco, Aspen, Glenwood Springs, Breckenridge, Longmont, Lafayette, Nederland to Golden. These diverse communities know that protecting Colorado’s way of life means doing our part to combat climate change, and that swiftly adopting renewable energy in our electricity sector and then extending the impact of that clean electricity across the economy will protect the health of our communities, create good paying jobs, strengthen our economy and keep rates low for customers.
Colorado|2019|4|11|Ensure that all communities across the state, including those served by rural electric cooperatives, are receiving the economic, health and environmental benefits of a transition to renewable energy, by ensuring that generation and transmission cooperatives are subject to PUC review of their resource plans.
Colorado|2019|9|11|As we transition to 100% renewable energy we need policies in place to ensure that workers in fossil fuel industries can put their skills to work in the clean energy economy, that we are creating opportunities for workers to train and compete for the good-paying jobs of tomorrow, and that we are not leaving any community behind.
Colorado|2019|7|11|Work with the Legislature to enable utilities to invest in electric vehicle infrastructure in ways that will support a more efficient grid and greater adoption of electric vehicles.
Colorado|2019|9|11|Strengthens an existing provision requiring electric resource acquisition decisions to be made with consideration of "best value" employment metrics and the use of Colorado labor by requiring a utility to obtain and provide to the PUC relevant documentation on these topics, including the availability of apprenticeship programs registered with the United States Department of Labor.
Connecticut|2005|19|302|The package consists of six complementary elements: 1. Double transit ridership by 2020. 2. Consider potential funding mechanisms for new transit investments, such as road pricing and the Connecticut Transportation Strategy Board’s fuel tax recommendation. 3. Establish a coordinated interagency program to promote smart growth in Connecticut using regulatory, financial, and planning tools. 4. Redirect at least 25% of new development (forecast population and employment) to growth­ appropriate locations, as indicated by the State Plan of Conservation and Development. 5. Study a potential road­-pricing pilot project, prepare a feasibility design study by 2006, and implement the pilot project if it is shown to be effective. Study the potential impact on equity and sprawl and consider broader implementation of road pricing in the long term. 6. Consider complementary VMT reduction incentives, such as commuter choices, location­ efficient mortgages, and mileage­-based insurance.
Connecticut|2005|75|302|An important ancillary benefit from a hydrogen and fuel program for Connecticut’s transportation sector is economic development. Connecticut currently has 35 percent, or 1,300, of the estimated jobs in fuel cell manufacturing, and over $300 million in fuel cell products have been manufactured and shipped from Connecticut.27 The Connecticut Clean Energy Fund estimates that the State’s hydrogen and fuel cell industry in Connecticut could create 33,000 direct and indirect jobs.28
Connecticut|2005|119|302|Promote a “green campus initiative” with all Connecticut colleges, universities, and private and secondary schools to minimize environmental impact and create “learning labs” for sustainability. This program would develop and support an effective process to promote energy and environmental sustainability with Connecticut educational institutions. The program would provide leadership and resources to engage schools and interest them in taking a comprehensive approach to lowering energy use and cost, reducing GHGs from building systems and transportation, improving water and wastewater management, increasing recycling, reducing the need for hazardous waste disposal, and promoting procurement of environmentally friendly products. The program would use a team­-based approach that engaged administrative staff, students, faculty, and technical experts.
Connecticut|2005|199|302|The CCAP modelling of a regional cap­-and­-trade program provides a useful estimate of the regional impacts of such a program. However, the final CCAP report focuses on the CO2 reduction impacts of the program within Connecticut. Focusing on emission changes in Connecticut only is inappropriate given the regional nature of the electric power system. Because electricity is provided via an interconnected, regional grid, generators outside of Connecticut commonly serve Connecticut customers, and generators in Connecticut commonly serve users in other northeastern states. Thus, the impact of any electric­ sector actions taken by Connecticut consumers will be regional in scale. However, it is even more critical to view the results of a cap­-and­-trade program regionally, as this is a regionally implemented program. Electricity consumers across the entire capped region would fund the emission reductions achieved by the power generating sector, and the generating sector would achieve those reductions where it was most efficient.
Connecticut|2005|175|302|There is at least one voluntary carbon offset program operating in Connecticut. Reforest The Tropics, Inc. is a non­profit organization committed to the development and demonstration of projects that offset US­-generated carbon dioxide emissions by planting new tropical forests. Reforest The Tropics has linked a number of CT carbon dioxide emitters with reforestation projects in Costa Rica. Connecticut’s voluntary participants include the Mohegan Tribal Nation, Connecticut College, the CT Municipal Electric Energy Cooperative, schools and individuals.
Connecticut|2018|5|67|With over 600 miles of coastline and 2.2 million people living in shoreline communities in Connecticut, the State’s residents and communities are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of weather and climate events. Connecticut residents are already beginning to experience such effects as climate change ramps up. For instance, in Connecticut alone, Hurricane Irene (2011) caused power outages affecting 754,000 customers and over $1 billion in damage, and Hurricane Sandy (2012) caused power outages affecting more than 600,000 customers and inflicted almost $2 billion in statewide damages.5 The latter forced thousands of Connecticut residents to evacuate, saw thousands apply for FEMA assistance, damaged roads and infrastructure, and took nine days for utilities to restore power.6 Many of Connecticut’s coastal communities and assets face escalating risk of storm events exacerbated by climate change.
Connecticut|2018|20|67|Connecticut is highly vulnerable to changes in mean and extreme climate due to regional characteristics like a dense population and aging infrastructure. Urban areas are at risk for large numbers of evacuated and displaced populations and damaged infrastructure due to prolonged heat waves, extreme precipitation events, and recurrent flooding. As winters become shorter and milder, tick and flea populations are predicted to rise, leading to more annual cases of vector-borne illnesses such as Lyme disease.
Connecticut|2018|30|67|Cost-effective energy efficiency measures are essential in the early years to drive down energy consumption and GHG emissions from fossil fuels. However, in the long term, as the electric-grid decarbonizes, the marginal impact of efficiency leads to less potent reductions in carbon emissions. Nevertheless, in the long run energy efficiency measures will help reduce the extent of increased electricity demand and avoid the costs of developing unnecessary generation and transmission/distribution capacity.
Connecticut|2018|35|67|A carbon fee policy represents the greatest opportunity to raise revenue while reducing economy-wide GHG emissions. A carbon fee charges a fee based on the amount of CO2 emissions released through fossil fuel combustion. A properly priced carbon fee will provide a strong, systematic monetary incentive to transition away from fossil fuels toward a more innovative, clean energy economy.33 Revenues generated from a carbon fee can be reinvested in climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts that provide meaningful local and state economic, environmental, and public health benefits.34 In addition, because carbon fees increase according to a predetermined schedule, they provide market certainty allowing companies and consumers alike to effectively plan how to adjust their operations and behaviors. Carbon fees can also be set in a manner that protects low-and moderate-income households from higher costs, and supports a just transition for impacted workers, communities and businesses.
Connecticut|2018|50|67|Congestion pricing is a travel-demand-management strategy to reduce wasted time and energy associated with traffic congestion. According to the Federal Highway Administration there are four main types of pricing strategies: Variably priced lanes — variable tolls on separated lanes within a highway, such as express toll lanes or high occupancy toll Lanes. Variable tolls on entire roadways — both on toll roads and bridges, as well as on existing toll-free facilities during rush hours. Cordon charges — either variable or fixed charges to drive within or into a congested area within a city. Area-wide charges — per-mile charges on all roads within an area that may vary by level of congestion.
DC|2010|5|54|Compared to other cities, the District’s per capita emissions are relatively high. A leading driver of these high emissions is the fact that the District’s daytime population swells by 400,000 workers every workday, which is the largest percentage increase in daytime population of any large city in the nation. Carbon emissions are also high because much of the District’s electricity comes from burning coal at distant power plants. This carbon-intensive power must be transmitted to the city over long distances, resulting in distribution losses of energy.
DC|2010|8|54|Our city-wide greenhouse gas emissions for 2006 totaled 10.5 million metric tons CO2e, from buildings (residential, non-residential, and federal); vehicles (indicated as VMT or vehicle miles traveled); mass transit (Metro); and waste. Figure ES.5 provides a breakdown of the specific energy sources of our greenhouse gas emissions, including electricity, natural gas, fuel oil, vehicle fuel (gasoline and diesel), kerosene, and emissions from solid waste. Electricity consumption is our largest driver of greenhouse gas emissions.
DC|2010|12|54|DC Water will convert sewage organic matter to methane and generate an estimated 10 megawatts of electricity, offsetting its purchase from outside electric suppliers.
DC|2010|29|54|The quantification for this measure considers only the savings that will occur as a result of installing more energy efficient IT servers. While other energy savings are anticipated with the consolidation, it is not possible to estimate these using available data. These estimated savings are considered conservative, since only a portion of the potential energy savings are included. The estimated energy savings are based upon calculating the existing server count and the expected consumption of each standard server, and applying a 30% reduction to that figure to compute the energy savings.
DC|2010|45|54|District Government, local businesses and associations, and residents can reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by choosing to purchase and use less carbon-intensive products. The use of these products reduces environmental impacts associated with the manufacture, use and disposal of many items in common daily use. The District Government is adopting Environmentally Preferable Purchasing (EPP) practices for District Government agencies. A number of government and private sector EPP program models are available to guide businesses and individuals on EPP, such as the EPA Comprehensive Procurement Guidelines (CPG) for recycled content, and Energy Star and EPEAT Silver ranked computers. Examples of target products include: office sup- plies; computers and peripherals; copiers; vending machines; lighting; carpet; and cleaning supplies and chemicals.
DC|2018|12|275|As existing District Government plans address other areas of the transportation sector, Clean Energy DC zeros in on the opportunities of vehicle electrification. The Plan recommends policies and actions that provide electric vehicle infrastructure, such as public charging stations. It also identifies financial and other appropriate incentives to make it easier for people to choose an electric model when shopping for a new vehicle.
DC|2018|118|275|Given the Plan’s strong focus on GHG emissions, the District Government should also track and report out on the DCSEU’s progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Given that natural gas is currently less GHG intensive than the electricity grid, but that the electricity grid is decarbonizing while natural gas cannot be decarbonized, it may not be appropriate to establish GHG savings as a performance benchmark. Without explicit recognition of the ultimate importance of long-term and permanent GHG reductions, using GHG savings as a benchmark could unintentionally incentivize fuel switching away from electricity and towards natural gas, which would be contrary to the long-term carbon reduction goals of the District. However, it is important that DOEE and the DCSEU are aware of the GHG impacts of each DCSEU project and the DCSEU portfolio so the District should take steps to incorporate GHG savings into the data tracked by the DCSEU.
DC|2018|124|275|Owners of affordable housing developments should also be eligible to apply for a short-term waiver to be exempt from BEPS. In exchange for a grace period, the owners would need to submit a long-term plan detailing a compliance path, or follow a similar requirement. For affordable housing developments required to take compliance actions, the District should also consider offering financial incentives to owners of affordable housing developments. To ensure the BEPS is applied fairly and consistently, the District should also introduce a requirement for verification of the benchmarking data by a licensed professional once every three years. Similar requirements exist in Chicago, IL, and Montgomery County, MD, and have increased data quality and reliability beyond what DOEE has been able to achieve with existing in-house enforcement resources.
DC|2018|208|275|Hosting capacity refers to the capacity of any given portion of the distribution system to accommodate additional DER given existing and already-planned facilities.327 A hosting capacity study of the District’s distribution grid will provide critical information for integrated distribution planning (Action ESM.3), as well as any locational value assessments. In particular, study results will help the District identify and compare different opportunities to increase the capacity of existing feeder lines, either through targeted building energy use reduction actions, or the use of new DER technologies (e.g., smart inverters).
DC|2018|271|275|The Clean Energy DC team coordinated a series of interviews that focused on the intersection of energy, environment, and social equity. The team invited local and national experts, leaders, and organizations focused on local and national sustainability, social justice, policy advocacy, and community development issues to review and critique the draft Plan’s recommended actions. Representatives from the following organizations and businesses participated in an interview:  Anacostia Riverkeeper  Children’s Environmental Health Network  Grid Alternatives  Groundswell  Nspiregreen  Provoc  Sierra Club DC  University of the District of Columbia
Delaware|2014|23|112|Impacts to workforce: Worker health and safety is a particular concern for agencies with many outdoor workers, such as the DelDOT, DNREC, and DSHS, which employ maintenance workers, field staff, park rangers, state police, and emergency personnel. Extreme heat is considered a key risk; safe travel and accessibility to work sites is also a concern during extreme precipitation and flooding events. Agencies have identified responses that include specific discussions regarding revised guidelines for safety training, improved protective equipment, alternative work schedules, changes to uniform dress code, and fleet vehicles able to navigate through flood conditions.
Delaware|2014|44|112|The Delaware State Housing Authority should:  Evaluate energy efficiency standards of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program.  Explore partnering on grants that address resiliency, such as the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's National Disaster Resilience Competition.  Consider sea level rise impacts in its programs that facilitate new construction and or rehabilitation.  Work with the 11 housing counseling agencies to incorporate awareness on sea level rise into their prepurchase counseling.  Promote sustainable building practices in the Downtown Development District grant program.
Delaware|2014|49|112|Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance To accompany the Flood Risk Adaptation Map, a Flood Avoidance and Design Guidance document is under development. The guidance document is envisioned to be an easy-to-use resource for all state agency employees involved in a capital project, from site-selection to construction. It will step users through the process of using the Flood Risk Adaptation Map to avoid construction of new structures and infrastructure in flood-prone areas. If avoidance is not feasible, the guidance document also helps a user find and select the appropriate flood level and adaptation strategies. The guidance is currently in draft form and under review and discussion by FAW members. It is on track to be completed during the first quarter of 2015.
Delaware|2014|89|112|DOE should work with Facilities Management/OMB and the districts to encourage LEED certification, Green Ribbon standards, or any other standards to promote the most efficient design and construction for school buildings that reduces the environmental footprint. The state approves all major capital school plans and will support the use of third-party standards that guide design for capital school projects.
Delaware|2014|101|112|DNREC (Division of Fish and Wildlife) should prepare to control mosquito populations nearly year-round to address increased complaints and to reduce transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, including maximizing use of non-insecticidal source reduction methods (e.g., open marsh water management, impoundment water-level management, fish stocking); expanding public education and outreach efforts to increase participation in water sanitation to decrease mosquito-breeding habitats; and exploring new regulatory tools to increase compliance. Increased mosquito population and mosquito-borne disease surveillance and monitoring will also be needed, as well as an increase in use of larvicides and adulticides as warranted to meet the public's needs, demands, and expectations.
Florida|2008|100|609|In the agricultural sector, the Action Team found significant opportunity in promoting biofuels production using feedstocks and production methods with superior GHG benefits (superior to conventional starch‐based ethanol). It should be noted that the GHG benefits did not include any indirect impacts associated with emissions resulting from land use change.2 The recommendations on biofuels production were aimed primarily at production of advanced (cellulosic) biofuels. The production and use of these fuels was found to offer substantial GHG reduction potential (more than eight MMtCO2e by 2025; see AFW‐7 in Appendix D).
Florida|2008|105|609|This recommendation seeks to increase the sequestration potential of the state’s forests by increasing the forest base through afforestation projects, increasing sequestration potential through reforestation (re‐stocking forests), and aggressive urban tree planting programs. The urban tree element of this recommendation has an additional benefit of reducing energy demand through shading of homes and commercial buildings (producing a greater GHG benefit than the sequestration of carbon in these trees). The afforestation goal is to increase the area of forested lands in the state by 50,000 acres annually through 2025. For reforestation, the goal is to implement reforestation activity on all harvested acres by 2025. For urban forestry there are both primary (based on offsetting metropolitan GHG emissions) and secondary (tree canopy cover) goals; both of these could be met through aggressive tree planting goals of 6.7 million trees on average per year through 2025.
Florida|2008|261|609|The Florida marginal cost curve is developed based on the reduction potential and mitigation cost/saving data of individual mitigation options in the sectors that are covered by the cap‐and‐ trade program. Since the sectoral coverage of the WCI cap‐and‐trade program includes basically all sectors except agriculture, forestry, and waste management sectors, we collected the 2020 Florida GHG reduction potential and mitigation cost/saving data of individual options that are quantitatively analyzed by the ESD and TLU TWGs.
Florida|2008|121|609|Insurance rates should reflect risks from climate and climate change and be equitable and affordable. In addition, policies should discourage high risk development, particularly along the coast.
Florida|2008|139|609|The Legislature, the Florida PSC, and other relevant state agencies are encouraged to prioritize the identification and elimination of barriers that impede the development of renewable resources in the state. Regulatory policies can include solar or wind easements of access rights, development guidelines at the local level to enhance renewable energy generation (for example, requiring proper street orientation), and requirements that utilities provide information and utility leasing programs for renewable energy production to customers in remote regions.
Iowa|2008|39|470|Implementation Mechanisms: The analysis for each option (see Appendices F through J) of the ICCAC includes guidance on the policy instruments or “mechanisms” that were prescribed or assumed for the policy action. This includes a range of potential mechanisms including, for instance, funding incentives, codes and standards, voluntary and negotiated agreements, market based instruments, information and education, reporting and disclosure, and other instruments. In some cases, the recommended instruments are precise. In other cases, they are more general and envision further work to develop concrete programs and steps to achieve the goals recommended by the ICCAC.
Iowa|2008|86|470|By a majority vote, the ICCAC presents a policy option that, if deemed necessary, would build one new 1200-megawatt nuclear power plant in Iowa by January 1, 2020. It is currently estimated that it would take approximately 10–12 years to design, permit, and construct a new nuclear power plant. Therefore, steps should be taken today if Iowa chooses to employ nuclear power as part of a balanced and diversified energy portfolio that achieves Iowa’s long-term carbon emission reduction goals. The focus of this particular option is to determine the economic feasibility of nuclear power in a carbon-constrained environment, and to define specific state legislative and regulatory actions to facilitate licensing, financing, and construction of a new nuclear power plant in Iowa. There are considerable uncertainties about the cost characteristics of new nuclear power. The latest numbers for nuclear power, based on an average of data prepared by Progress Energy Florida and Florida Power and Light, estimate the total levelized unit cost of nuclear power is $100/MWh ($2006 dollars) generated.2 This is nearly double the $52/MWh used in the quantification for CRE-7 in Iowa.
Iowa|2008|250|470|Commission a study that would identify areas in Iowa’s transmission system where upgrading and/or expanding transmission would enable the state’s wind resources to be developed for Iowa users and for potential exports to other states. The study would focus on identifying both areas where large expansions are necessary to catapult Iowa’s wind production, as well as areas where smaller upgrades would enable wind installations for local area purposes. The study would seek to quantify the incremental costs and identify the benefits and implementation time frames for alternatives that yield additional increases to transmission and distribution (T&D) system capabilities, beyond normal planned expansion. The analysis should take into account reductions in GHG emissions that would result from energy saved due to lower line losses.
Iowa|2008|281|470|While a few local metropolitan areas have completed rapid transit (i.e., Bus Rapid Transit, commuter rail) studies, the state will provide the technical assistance and leadership needed to assist or help initiate future studies with local and regional governments. Transit projects and local transit agency goals will be reflected in the State Transportation Plan and will be considered in any inventory of funding needs for traffic mitigation and studies of specific roadway capacity. Currently, travel demand models in Iowa are not able to directly consider the impacts of additional or expanded transit service on total VMT in an area. This ability needs to be researched further and implemented along with other tools that can provide quantifiable estimates of VMT reduction due to additional or expanded transit service along with land use patterns.
Iowa|2008|376|470|This policy option would convert marginal agricultural land used for annual crops to permanent cover, such as grassland/rangeland, orchard, or forest, where the soil carbon or carbon in biomass is higher under the new land use. It would also adopt mechanisms to discourage theses acres from returning to either conventionally tilled production or suburban/urban development.
Illinois|2007|13|64|The positive economic outcomes are largely due to policies that would replace imports of coal, oil, and natural gas with in-state investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency measures. Dollars that would otherwise be exported to out-of-state companies are instead invested in Illinois. Although electricity rates would increase modestly due to compliance costs for fossil fuel electric power plants, the amount of the rate increases is reduced over time. In addition, the rate increases are more than offset by the energy efficiency measures that would reduce overall energy costs through energy savings for homes and businesses as noted above.
Illinois|2007|21|64|The inventory and projections document prepared by WRI was originally presented to the full ICCAG in February 2007. At that meeting there were several technical comments and questions from the group reflecting a desire to have more detailed GHG data in each major sector; to see how GHG emissions in Illinois compare with other states; and to better understand how much electricity Illinois exports and how this compares to others states. As a result, WRI prepared three addenda to the emissions inventory that were presented at the April ICCAG meeting. The original inventory document and the three addenda are found in Appendix C.
Illinois|2007|25|64|Electricity generation increased even though no new coal or nuclear capacity was installed over this time span; instead, existing nuclear and coal plants increased their generation of electricity. The significant growth in electricity generation coincided with Illinois’ adoption of utility deregulation in 1997 and the subsequent expansion of Illinois electricity exports. See Figure 6 below. Electricity exports have steadily increased, more than doubling since 1990, with the exception of a clear decrease in 1997-1998. During this time, a portion of Illinois’ nuclear generation capacity was temporarily off-line. This reduced total state electricity generation as well as net electricity exports, but not GHG emissions since some of the lost, zero-emitting nuclear generation was made up by increased coal generation.
Illinois|2007|52|64|Improve passenger and freight rail service and infrastructure. This policy would fully fund and implement both passenger rail upgrades and service restoration throughout the state and the Chicago Region Environmental and Transportation Efficiency Program (CREATE) freight rail improvement program. Passenger rail upgrades would include: allowing for 110 mph high speed rail service between Chicago and St. Louis; increasing ridership on existing Chicago-Downstate rail lines through investments in new equipment, upgrading, and streamlining rail capacity on existing rail lines to reduce trip times between Chicago and Downstate; and restoring service from Chicago to Rockford, the Quad Cities, Decatur, and Peoria.
Illinois|2007|53|64|Require land-use offsets requirements for large changes in land use. This strategy would create a land-use offset requirement, where developers/owners would be required to replace land with high carbon stocks (e.g., forests) that is lost with a comparable high carbon land use elsewhere. It would apply when land is converted from a higher to a lower carbon capacity use and where the development is above a threshold size (e.g., 10 acres), and meets other conditions (to be determined at a later date). A 1.5 to 1.0 offset would be required (e.g., 1.5 acres for every acre lost). The major barrier to this policy is that it requires a new regulatory structure to track development and offset projects on a statewide basis.
Kentucky|2011|105|620|Emissions from the transportation and land use (TLU) sectors include the emissions produced by the operation of light- and heavy-duty (on-road) vehicles, as well as emissions produced by off- road or specialized vehicles, aircraft, rail engines, and marine engines. Emissions accounted for in the TLU sectors include not only the direct emissions from vehicle exhaust, but also the “upstream” emissions associated with the extraction and transportation of raw materials (usually petroleum), as well as the emissions associated with the energy-intensive processes of refining, distributing, and pumping fuel.
Kentucky|2011|275|620|Produce herbaceous energy crops (switchgrass, Indian grass, big bluestem, and Miscanthus giganteus) on underutilized pasture land, abandoned or reclaimed mine land, and abandoned agricultural land. Note: do not plant crops (invasives) that will have a negative impact on Kentucky species. Encourage use of plants that are native or noninvasive, or have passed testing protocols for invasiveness and overall environmental impact. Avoid species that excessively deplete soil or water resources—i.e., plants that are more of a drain on the environment than the energy they produce.
Kentucky|2011|309|620|Develop and implement an effective and efficient data collection system for measuring solid waste generation, reduction, utilization, and disposal. The system should measure and track trends on the magnitude and percentage of solid waste generated, reduced, utilized, and disposed of. To get the most accurate recycling tonnage numbers, recycling organizations, both commercial and government-operated, should register and report directly to KEEC. A fee should be imposed to help cover the costs of inspecting and managing the data. The fee should be based on a tonnage-processed sliding scale.
Kentucky|2011|399|620|The Shale Gas policy is intended to help stimulate increased shale gas production and development in Kentucky. Increased Kentucky production will provide more natural gas supply as an alternative fuel to help reduce overall GHG emissions. Additional production could provide additional severance tax revenues to the state. Additional production could also have some impact on national supply/demand balance, and thus could have some—although probably limited—impact on natural gas prices.
Kentucky|2011|462|620|A number of programs and incentives that have been successful in other jurisdictions could be designed and implemented in Kentucky as part of this policy recommendation.17 Green mortgages roll the costs of energy efficiency or CHP measures into new or refinanced mortgages and allow the amortization of the costs of the efficient equipment to better match future utility bill savings from the equipment. Public benefit funds provide a source of financing for all types of sales rebate programs to “buy down” the incremental costs of CHP and/or energy-efficient equipment. State income tax credits and property tax credits can also provide a source of funding to households and firms to purchase energy efficient equipment and/or CHP. Energy loan programs, financed by state issued bonds, provide low-interest loans and can also reduce the large up front investments associated with energy-efficient equipment and/or CHP. Finally, Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing programs work through the creation of a public loan fund at the municipal level that is directed solely to financing energy efficiency and/or CHP installations. The repayment of the funds takes place annually along with the building owner’s property tax bill, giving PACE payments the same treatment as taxes for lien priority purposes.18
Massachusetts|2010|33|136|Since air pollution levels are highly sensitive to weather, climate change may significantly affect our overall air quality. For example, ozone is formed in warm weather, so higher summer temperatures may result in increased ozone concentrations in Massachusetts. Climate-driven increases in global and regional wild fires and dust- storms and changes in precipitation may impact PM concentrations in Massachusetts.
Massachusetts|2010|35|136|In addition to eliminating energy waste in buildings, there is a significant opportunity to transition to cleaner energy sources. For example, oil heating can be replaced by solar thermal, sustainable biomass/biofuels, or heat pumps, while electricity supply can be shifted from fossil fuels such as coal and oil to wind and hydro.21
Massachusetts|2010|50|136|Similar to the Solar PV industry in MA prior to its recent exponential growth in the last four years, the small size of the solar thermal market burdens it with high levels of ‖soft‖ costs in sales and marketing (finding customers and designing and installing well-sized systems). This forms a barrier to consumer awareness and competitive pricing in comparison to the dominant market share of fossil fuel-based heating systems. The ‖hard‖ costs of quality equipment are being driven down by global market growth, and so once Massachusetts can develop a significant demand entrepreneurial companies will likely be able to bring turn-key pricing down considerably. Solar thermal systems require a back-up system in the event of a cold and cloudy week in winter, so most customers will retain their pre-existing fossil fuel heating system and new construction will likely move to on-demand electric or much smaller backup fossil fueled boilers.
Massachusetts|2010|96|136|This policy aims to minimize emissions of high Global Warming Potential refrigerants used in stationary non-residential equipment through: facility registration, leak detection and monitoring, leak repair, system retrofit and retirement, required service practices, and record keeping and reporting; and eventual replacement of non-residential refrigeration equipment at the end of its life by equipment using no-GWP or lower GWP substances, where such alternatives are available and practicable. The policy would affect facilities with refrigeration units containing at least 50 pounds of refrigerant, beginning with a voluntary pilot program focused on leak detection and repair.
Massachusetts|2010|124|136|The transportation and buildings sectors are by far the largest end users of energy in Massachusetts. Both scenarios count on considerable gains in building energy efficiency by 2050. These gains go further in the efficiency and conservation scenario, especially for existing houses — more of them are upgraded with energy saving measures and high efficiency mechanical systems. For residential buildings that exist in 2010, the electrification scenario assumes that energy demand per square foot is cut in half by 2050, while in the efficiency and conservation scenario it is cut by two-thirds. Homes that are built between 2010 and 2050 use even less energy, about 50 percent as much per square foot as existing buildings in the efficiency/conservation scenario.
Massachusetts|2015|17|122|A key conclusion that can be drawn from Table 1 is that, to date, the dominant source of emission reductions came from the electric sector. A significant shift from oil and coal to natural gas as a fuel for power generation accounts for a net reduction of approximately 12 MMTCO2e since 1990, as reflected in MassDEP’s GHG inventory.12 Driven in part by energy efficiency investments, electric demand has not grown significantly in recent years, removing load growth as a driver of increased emissions. Emissions from fuel combustion in buildings have also fallen moderately since 1990, largely due to improvements in the efficiency of fuel use and the substitution of natural gas for oil in space heating. Recent year to year variability is largely attributable to weather, as 2012 was a particularly mild year.
Massachusetts|2015|28|122|In addition to improving performance through reducing energy waste in buildings, there is a clear opportunity to transition to cleaner energy sources. Since 1990, there has been a significant economic trend of buildings switching from heating oil to using natural gas. This trend is expected to continue, although it is currently being tempered by a combination of historically low oil prices and natural gas supply constraints in much of the Commonwealth. More recently, the range of economically viable alternative heating options has grown to include cold-climate air- source heat pumps, geo-thermal and solar thermal systems, and clean biomass heating with locally sourced wood pellets or wood chips. These low carbon alternatives to fossil- fuel space and water heating are being supported by the Developing a Mature Market for Renewable Thermal Technologies policy.
Massachusetts|2015|33|122|Tree planting and retention can reduce building heating and cooling loads over the long-term and provide climate mitigation benefits, as well as other benefits such as storm water management. Recognizing the significance of urban tree canopy—each 1% of new tree canopy saves 1–2% in heating and cooling costs—as well as the success of pilot planting efforts in Chelsea, Holyoke, and Fall River, the Baker-Polito Administration has radically expanded the state tree planting program. Over the next three years, the Greening the Gateway Cities Program will fund eleven crews in each planting season, up from three, and more than 27,000 trees will be planted in selected urban neighborhoods in 14 Gateway Cities. The goal of this aggressive planting effort is a 5–10% increase in tree canopy in target neighborhoods as trees reach maturity in 30 years. Because of the slow rate at which trees grow, tree planting and retention provide almost all their GHG emissions reduction beyond 2020. Energy savings and GHG reductions begin about eight years after planting, and increase each year thereafter for decades.
Massachusetts|2015|54|122|The Blue Carbon Calculator is a user-friendly, first-generation tool for calculating GHG emissions from soils resulting from wetlands management restoration activities most typical to Massachusetts.40 The Calculator estimates changes in GHG emissions for two primary categories of restoration activities relevant to Massachusetts wetlands: 1) re-wetting wetlands or restoring wetlands from a drained state (e.g., removal of dams or barriers to restore hydrology); and 2) ‘Wetlands remaining wetlands,’41 or restoration activities occurring on lands that are saturated under both pre-and post-restoration condition, but which may alter GHG emissions on those lands (e.g., conversion of open fresh water to salt (or vice versa)). As additional data and guidance become available, emissions factors for these calculations should be updated.
Massachusetts|2015|106|122|Grid modernization will help make the electric grid more efficient and reliable, and will empower customers to manage and reduce their energy costs. The modern electric system will help maximize the integration of solar, wind, and other local and renewable sources of power. It will minimize outages by automatically re-routing power when lines go down, and immediately alert the utility when customers have lost power. Because customers will have new tools and information to enable them to use less electricity when prices spike, the electric system will be appropriately sized and less expensive.
Maryland|2015|112|188|This program is part of the State’s effort to reduce GHG and other motor vehicle emissions from cars by providing alternatives to single occupant vehicle use. Building appropriate infrastructure for additional bicycle and pedestrian travel in urban areas increases access to and use of public transit and supports the State’s goal of increasing transit ridership.
Maryland|2015|40|188|Climate Change Impact Areas were identified as one of the Local and State Targeted Growth and Conservation Areas that warrant special attention. Climate Change Impact Areas include: projected 50 and 100-year Sea Level Rise Inundation Zones, 50-Year Erosion Vulnerable Zones, Category 2 Storm Surge Inundation Zones, Marsh Transition Zones, Temperature Sensitive Streams, Drought Hazard, and Wildfire Risk Areas. The intent of identifying these areas is to ensure that the State and local governments make wise decisions about how to protect our natural resources, and where and how to develop and redevelop in light of climate change induced hazards and risks. State capital investments consider Climate Impact Areas during the identification of potential sites and the scope of the work associated with the capital investment. Local governments also are educated on how to use the maps and encouraged to utilize them in capital improvement planning.
Maryland|2015|94|188|The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is using the New Source Performance Standard authority under the federal Clean Air Act to promulgate new regulations to reduce GHG emissions from fossil fuel-fired power plants. The performance standards, which are expected to become final in early 2013, will apply to new electric generating units and will be based on existing technologies. EPA is coordinating this action on GHGs with a number of other required regulatory actions for other pollutants, thereby enabling electric generating units to develop multi-pollutant strategies to reduce pollutants in a more efficient and cost-effective way than would be possible by addressing multiple pollutants separately.
Maryland|2015|121|188|In addition to forests, wetlands and marshlands are known to be very efficient at sequestering carbon. Therefore, DNR is planting forested stream buffers and pursuing the creation, protection and restoration of wetlands to promote carbon sequestration through several means, including undertaking on-the-ground wetland restoration projects through its Coastal Wetlands Initiative, the development of a terrestrial carbon sequestration protocol, a DNR Power Plant Research Project wetland study in Dorchester County, and the Sea Level Affecting Marshes Model. The goals of this program are the restoration of 1,142 acres of wetlands on state and public land and planting 645 acres of streamside forest buffers on state and public lands. This program is exceeding the established goals.
Maryland|2015|167|188|The water-energy nexus refers to the connection between how much water is evaporated in energy production and how much energy is used in the human use of water, such as the collecting, cleaning, and moving of water. It is estimated that around 2 gallons of water is evaporated in order to create 1 kilowatt hour of energy. This amounts to around 3,000 to 6,300 gallons of water being evaporated to power one 60W light bulb for one year. This results in water shortages as the energy industry must also compete with other major water consumers, especially the ever- growing agriculture industry. It is also true that a lot of energy is required to use water in all processes. Therefore a way to decrease GHG emissions is to maximize the efficiency of the water-energy nexus. Using less water and less energy continues the cycle in the most efficient way possible. Less water use also means less wastewater to deal with, which produces methane. Some GHG reduction plans have already framed their plans around water mitigation, such as Massachusetts aiming for drinking water and wastewater facilities to reach a 20% GHG reduction goal.
Maine|2004|8|111|One of the more interesting and groundbreaking issues involves the forestry sector, which presents significant opportunities for carbon savings through sequestration. Extensive analysis of data from Federal and State sources, combined with careful exploration of assumptions about, for example, the role of forest soils in the carbon cycle, brought the Working Group to conclude that certain forms of active management already well-understood by the forest industry were capable of producing real carbon savings at very low or negligible cost. The options, voluntary in nature, would improve silviculture to produce more and higher-quality wood as an important co-benefit. It will be important to develop incentives needed to increase markets of this wood. The modeling of the carbon savings and costs suggest the likelihood that, taken together, these options would be close to cost-neutral, and could produce new landowner revenue streams and/or cost savings overtime.Since Maine’s is the first Climate Action Plan in the United States to fully consider the forest carbon cycle and active management options as a significant part of the overall GHG mitigation effort, further research and modeling will be necessary as part of implementation planning.
Maine|2004|36|111|Governors King and Baldacci have used their office to further these goals. In 2003, Governor King formally directed state agencies to pursue the purchase of low emission and more fuel-efficient vehicles. Governor Baldacci, by his March 17, 2004, Executive Order, built on his predecessor’s action, ordering that state agencies:  track state vehicle fleet fuel economy;  track and develop plans to reduce state employee vehicle miles traveled (VMT);  purchase and use cleaner and/or renewable fuels in state vehicles; and  measure the GHG emissions from the state transportation sector.
Maine|2004|51|111|Cap and Trade is a market based policy tool for protecting human health and the environment. A cap and trade program first sets a cap, or maximum limit, on emissions. Sources covered by the program then receive authorizations to emit in the form of emissions allowances, with the total amount of allowances limited by the cap. Each source can design its own compliance strategy to meet the overall reduction requirement, including sale or purchase of allowances, installation of pollution controls, implementation of efficiently measures, among other options. Individual control requirements are not specified under a cap and trade program, but each emissions source must surrender allowances equal to its actual emissions in order to comply. Sources must also completely and accurately measure and report all emissions in a timely manner to guarantee that the overall cap is achieved.
Maine|2004|81|111|The ZEV program was designed to catalyze the commercialization of advanced- technology vehicles that would not have any tailpipe or evaporative emissions. Originally, the ZEV program required that 2 percent of new vehicles produced for sale in1998 and10 percent of new vehicles produced for sale in 2003 would be zero emission vehicles. The automakers convinced the California Air Resources Board (CARB) that they could not meet the 1998 deadline, and full implementation of the program was delayed until 2003. In 2002, automakers sued the state over the program and were granted a preliminary injunction barring its implementation pending a final court ruling. California has adopted a revision to its ZEV program, with the aim of restoring it by 2005.
Maine|2004|88|111|Practices that result in less disruption of the soil or increase organic content through carbon deposition can increase the carbon content (stock) of soil or reduce its rate of loss (flow) to the atmosphere.
Maine|2020|10|124|Reduce light-duty VMT over time, achieving 10% reductions by 2025 and 20% by 2030. Reduce heavy-duty VMT by 4% by 2030. Deploy high-speed broadband to 95% of Maine homes by 2025 and 99% by 2030. By 2024, establish state coordination, strengthen land-use policies, and use state grant programs to encourage development that supports the reduction of VMT. Increase public transportation funding to the national median of $5 per capita by 2024. Relaunch GO Maine to significantly increase shared public commuting options by 2022.
Maine|2020|22|124|Since 1895, Maine’s statewide annual temperatures have risen by 3.2°F (1.8°C), with coastal areas warming more than the interior of the state. Of all the seasons, winters in Maine have warmed the most, which has caused Maine’s agricultural growing season to increase by two weeks. Extreme weather conditions in Maine, such as drought and large rain events, are harming agriculture, shellfisheries, and freshwater and coastal ecosystems susceptible to climate change effects.
Maine|2020|31|124|The analysis showed that if Maine continues on a “business as usual” path, emissions will slowly decline through 2030 and then flatten out in later years. Under that scenario, our 2050 emissions will be 13.8 million metric tons, which is 9.6 million metric tons greater than our 2050 target. In this scenario, transportation accounts for 41% of emissions in 2050 and remains Maine’s largest emissions source.
Maine|2020|75|124|Financial incentives and technical assistance are required to support foresters, landowners, loggers, farmers, fishermen, and communities to reduce emissions, increase their resilience to climate change, and implement enhanced opportunities for carbon-storage initiatives.
Maine|2020|98|124|Creative and diverse means of communication should also be employed to promote state climate programs, incentives, and opportunities. Partnerships with business groups, nonprofits, tribal governments, municipalities, and community groups will help spread key messages. Multiple forms of communication, consumer education, and ongoing efforts will be necessary to support the state’s goals.
Michigan|2009|13|125|The national program should encourage rapid technology development and deployment through the adoption of technology supporting and inducing policies. Cost efficiency and co-benefits should also be considered in achieving reductions of GHG emissions to assure that the timing of reductions coincides with the successful commercialization of emerging technologies. Major reductions from certain sectors may most effectively be accomplished if based on aggressive yet appropriate lead times that allow the necessary infrastructure to be put in place. Examples include carbon sequestration, low-carbon fuels, and commercial viability of high-density energy storage systems.
Michigan|2009|40|125|Emissions associated with electricity consumption are projected to be the largest contributor to future GHG emissions growth, followed by emissions associated with the transportation sector. Other sources of emissions growth include the RCI fuel use sector and the increasing use of HFCs and PFCs as substitutes for ozone-depleting substances in refrigeration, air conditioning, and other applications. The agriculture sector is the only sector in which emissions are projected to decrease from 2005 to 2025. Figure 1-3 depicts the 2005 distribution of sources in Michigan compared to the US.
Michigan|2009|64|125|The forecast of biomass in the draft inventory and forecast used EIA regional projections, which show big increases in biomass generation in the forecast years. The EIA regional projections could be influenced by the existing renewable portfolio standard (RPS) in other states of the region. The electricity generation from biomass has been flat over the past 10 years or so in Michigan, about 1% of the total generation of the state. Biomass generation would be unlikely to significantly increase in Michigan in the forecast years unless there are strong policy regulations, such as an RPS. Therefore, in this report, for the business-as-usual condition in the forecast years, we assumed the same generation capacity from biomass as the existing capacity indicates (an average level of 2001–2005).
Michigan|2009|78|125|The MCAC encourages national action in the implementation of a cap and trade program for the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions. In lieu of national action, or in advance of future action, Michigan should continue to participate in and encourage the development of the Midwestern Accord program. Michigan should not seek to create its own one-state cap and trade program. It is recommended that the program have the broadest possible sector coverage as soon as possible to include the maximum possible number of low cost mitigation and sequestration options. The MCAC does not make a specific recommendation on the method by which allowances are initially distributed (free granting, auction, both, etc.), but regardless of distribution method, the MCAC agrees that the value represented by the allowance should benefit the residents of Michigan.
Michigan|2009|107|125|Enhanced management of the state’s forests can lead to higher levels of carbon sequestration. These enhancements can be achieved through afforestation projects and enhanced stocking in existing forests. Conversion of land to development results in a loss of current and future carbon sequestration potential. Slowing or stemming conversion rates provides opportunities for carbon sequestration. In the waste management sector, waste reduction measures and landfill gas capture and utilization can reduce landfill CH4 emissions.
Minnesota|2015|7|44|Partner across interest groups focused on issues such as air quality, water quality, wildlife protection, as well as climate change to move policies forward . There is much opportunity to do this as climate policies include significant co-benefits for public health, the environment, and the economy.
Minnesota|2015|9|44|There are many pathways to reach 80% greenhouse gas reductions by 2050. One vision for doing so is to make the electric grid nearly carbon free through renewable energy and energy efficiency. Other energy needs could then move from directly burning fossil fuels in vehicles, homes, and industries to using clean, renewably generated electric power. For instance, cars, buses, and trains could be powered by electricity and electric-charged batteries. Heating in homes and industry could switch from directly burning fuels like propane and natural gas to using electric power or fuel from biomass.
Minnesota|2015|23|44|Analysis shows that a 50% Renewable Electricity Standard (RES) alone would reduce more than a quarter of the emissions needed to be on target in the year 2030. This emissions reduction is the largest for any policy analyzed. Analysis also projected that this could create on average 1,500 new jobs annually in the state. Since the analysis was done, several new renewable energy projects have been proposed that, if built, would potentially increase renewable generation to levels over 30% and potentially closer to 40% of the electricity mix. Some of these changes are pending in the Integrated Resource Planning processes. A 50% RES could move the state beyond these projects and create more certainty in increasing use of renewables.
Minnesota|2015|28|44|The best opportunity for achieving energy efficiency at wastewater facilities comes from replacing old aeration equipment with new, more efficient equipment. Aeration equipment typically accounts for half the energy usage at mechanical facilities and nearly all of the energy consumption for aerated lagoon facilities . Replacement of older aeration blowers with new high-efficiency blowers can reduce energy consumption for aeration by 50% or more.
Minnesota|2015|38|44|While cover crops work well for short season sweet corn, edible beans, and other “canning” vegetables, market, logistical, technical, financial, and agronomic barriers exist that prevent widespread adoption of cover crop use in corn and soybean systems. Pilot programs could help reduce these barriers by developing and testing new cover crop varieties and seeding equipment, demonstrating on-farm successes, and quantifying on-farm economic benefits.
Montana|2020|15|73|Build on and complement the climate adaptation work already happening on tribal lands throughout the state, while recognizing the leadership that Montana’s sovereign tribal nations provide and learning from traditional and indigenous knowledge.
Montana|2020|17|73|Expand the use of nature-based solutions that use natural systems, mimic natural processes, or work in tandem with traditional approaches to address natural hazards such as flooding, erosion, drought, and heat. Incorporating these nature-based solutions in local planning, zoning, regulations, and built projects can help communities reduce their exposure to these climate impacts, resulting in reduced costs, economic enhancement, and safer, more-resilient communities. Examples include urban park development, beaver mimicry, and wetland and riparian restoration.
Montana|2020|41|73|The current system size cap for small-scale generation interconnecting to the grid is restrictive for entities like commercial buildings, schools, libraries, and private businesses. The cap involves what is known as net metering – a billing mechanism that credits solar energy system owners for the electricity they add to the grid. The current cap of 50 kilowatts (kW) was passed in 1999 and has not been updated since. Meanwhile, solar technology has become more efficient and less costly. Increasing the allowable system size will allow users to meet more of their energy needs with solar, wind, micro-hydro, and other eligible technologies.
Montana|2020|57|73|With either a federal or regional approach, Montana should consider both the mechanism for pricing carbon (e.g., fee vs. cap), the efficacy of reducing carbon emissions, and how revenues generated from carbon pricing will be invested back into the economy (e.g., through investments such as innovative  energy technology, energy efficiency, job training, and building community climate resilience) and used to mitigate the economic impacts on low-income residents.
Montana|2020|64|73|Electrifying Montana’s economy and eliminating emissions from the electricity sector requires continual advancement in short-term and seasonal energy storage at both distributed and utility scales. By some estimates, the global market for energy storage systems is expected to grow 13-fold from current levels by 2024.59 Designing and deploying these technologies in Montana will help meet the state’s climate goals and offers significant opportunity to grow and establish new businesses. The large industrial proposal from Mitsubishi Hitachi also represents a significant opportunity to develop new skills and job markets for Montana labor.
North Carolina|2008|27|118|Consumption of electricity is growing faster in North Carolina than population. In addition, there appears to be a trend toward an increasing reliance on natural gas and imported electricity. Vehicle-miles traveled (VMT) are also projected to grow faster than the state’s population. Freight traffic (resulting in increased diesel consumption) and increasing use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs) as substitutes for ozone-depleting substances (ODS) in refrigeration, air conditioning, and other applications is also increasing more rapidly than population.
North Carolina|2008|34|118|In contrast, automobile manufacturers estimate that the California standards would cost around $3,000 per vehicle, and calculated that savings on fuel would offset less than half of that cost for consumers. A review of the literature and assumptions used to derive the different estimates gives a range of cost-effectiveness values of –$38 to –$117 per ton of CO2e reduced. That is, for each ton reduced, between $38 and $117 would be saved. More than ten other states have adopted the California standards and, among other factors that support the use of a savings estimate toward the higher end of the range, manufacturers should realize economies-of-scale that would lower manufacturing costs as additional states adopt and implement the standards. Although we believe that savings are likely to be higher than the –$38 per ton end of the range, we use a cost-effectiveness of –$38 per ton of CO2e reduced in our calculations in an effort to be conservative.
North Carolina|2008|66|118|Encourage and enable smaller purchasers to act in aggregate groups to reduce costs and quantify emission reduction benefits from technology and process improvements. This could include, for example, setting up programs to organize consumers and to work with them to provide information resources to evaluate and take advantage of savings emissions reduction opportunities.
North Carolina|2008|71|118|The CAPAG recommends that State facilities purchase energy through NC GreenPower or a similar green power provider to cover 20% of their power needs by 2018, over and above the requirements of renewable generation within an Environmental Portfolio Standard or similar requirement applying to electricity suppliers. This target would be phased in starting in 2008. Additionally, for bulk purchases, the CAPAG recommends a program to address purchases of 10% of electricity-consuming equipment purchased annually by state agencies, and 1% of electricity-consuming equipment purchased annually by all commercial/institutional sector consumers. Devices purchased under the energy efficiency bulk purchase program would have a target consumption of 20% less electricity, on average, than devices that would otherwise have been purchased.
North Carolina|2008|106|118|North Carolina has lost, on average, 61,390 acres of productive forest each year over the last 30 years to development and to a lack of post-harvest regeneration. This amounts to a loss of about 10% of the state’s forestland since 1974, or an annually compounded loss of about 0.36%. The goal of this option is to reduce the rate of conversion of forestlands to non-forest lands by 10% by 2010 and 25% by 2020. When converted to developed areas, these areas contain lower amounts of biomass and its associated carbon. These areas also sequester less CO2 than forested areas. When landowners don’t have the incentive to retain their ownership, they often sell not only for development but they also sell for a forested tract as smaller parcels which may then be too small to allow forest management to be practical. On tracts too small and fragmented to be managed, the goals of AFW 9&10 cannot be achieved.
North Carolina|2019|20|146|In the wake of continuing declining costs of renewable generation and battery storage options, NC regulators and policy makers will be called upon to evaluate the economic viability of traditional infrastructure projects whose costs will be borne by ratepayers for years to come. As NC makes capital investment decisions for future capacity additions, it will be important to select the cost-effective system that maintains affordability, reliability, equity, grid efficiency, and economic viability. In just the past year, many states and utilities have made groundbreaking announcements, some of which are highlighted below.
North Carolina|2019|24|146|The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels calls for reaching net zero CO2 emissions globally around 2050 and concurrent deep reductions in emissions of non- CO2 forcers, particularly methane.15F16 In the "Systems Transitions" chapter, the IPCC notes that new natural gas power generation should be deployed in tandem with carbon sequestering technologies. Similarly, the U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment calls for “replacing conventional, CO2-emitting fossil fuel energy technologies or systems with low- or zero-emissions ones (such as wind, solar, nuclear, biofuels, fossil energy with carbon capture and storage, and energy efficiency measures), as well as changing technologies and practices in order to lower emissions of other GHGs such as methane, nitrous oxide, and hydrofluorocarbons.”
North Carolina|2019|69|146|Shifting to a more performance-based regulatory framework will require some extent of flexibility. Depending on the outputs that result from the investigatory process described in the prior recommendation, pilot programs and phased approaches to policy implementation provide opportunities to test and refine specific regulatory mechanisms, such as performance incentive mechanisms and new procurement practices. In order to be adaptive, there should be processes for evaluation built in to ensure new mechanisms are working as intended. Performance metrics that measure and track utility data for certain outcomes are a key, no-regrets tool to ensure that utility performance is improving after implementing a given regulatory change. For example, testing a shared savings mechanism before full- scale implementation will provide an opportunity to ensure that the savings retained by the utility and given to customers are well-balanced. Alternatively, using a phased approach to the development of new performance incentive mechanisms could result in better informed targets and incentive levels that don’t under- or over-compensate the utility.
North Carolina|2019|100|146|Different options for increasing the amount of clean, zero-emitting generation on the grid were discussed by stakeholders in the Clean Energy Plan process. One option is to simply increase and extend the current REPS policy by adding targets for 2030 and 2050, maintaining the current resource carve-outs or establishing additional resource carve-outs. Another option is to allow the REPS to coexist alongside a new policy that would require a certain percentage of generation to come from zero-emitting resources by 2030 and 2050, without any carve-outs for specific technologies. The latter would allow all zero-emitting generation resources to compete to be the preferred option for meeting the target.
North Carolina|2019|138|146|Not only can rate design help encourage the off-peak charging of vehicles, it can impact the economics of driving an EV as compared to a gasoline-powered vehicle. This is particularly true for charging stations located at commercial sites, such as workplaces, shopping centers, truck stops, etc. The typical rate design structure that utilities use for these kinds of customers can be a major inhibitor to the adoption and usage of charging infrastructure. Utilities are beginning to experiment with new structures that will recover costs from charging stations in a way that is more advantageous to the economics of EV charging.
New Hampshire|2009|19|82|As a small state, New Hampshire is responsible for only a minor fraction of emissions contributing to global climate change. However, the actions identified in this plan will enable New Hampshire to continue to do its part to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and prepare for a changing climate, es- pecially when these actions are aggregated with the actions of its neighbors in the New England5. These actions, in turn, will benefit the economy, increase state and regional energy security, and improve environmental quality. Taking action now in the areas of energy efficiency, renewable energy, and more efficient transportation will provide New Hampshire with a competitive advantage as energy resources become even more costly in the future.
New Hampshire|2009|22|82|The emissions originating from the building sector, which includes direct energy consumption in residential, commer- cial, and industrial space, grew more slowly. Building related emissions grew by nearly 32 percent from 1990 to 2005 and these emissions accounted for 29 percent of New Hampshire’s total emissions in 2005. The leading cause of this increase was due to a significant expansion in the use of natural gas which increased from 14 billion cubic feet in 1990 to 25 billion cubic feet in 2005.
New Hampshire|2009|36|82|New Hampshire’s current response to winter storm events could provide a model for coordinating state-wide efforts to extreme weather events (e.g., flooding, hurricanes) that are projected to increase in the future. The development of more extensive projections of extreme weather (e.g., frequency, magnitude) can be provided to decision-makers to facilitate integrated planning and coordination of event response by state and local entities. This development would include the communication channels over which event forecasts could be disseminated to state and local authorities and to the public to enhance preparation in advance of storms.
New Hampshire|2009|53|82|Support more stringent, near-term Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for all passenger vehicles and light trucks up to 10,000 lbs. gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). CAFE is the sales-weighted average fuel economy, in miles per gallon, of a manufacturer’s light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks. Current standards apply to vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States with a GVWR of 8,500 lbs. or less. The higher limit would allow for inclusion of large sport utility vehicles and pick up trucks in these standards. In addition, the state should support the adoption of CAFE standards for vehicles greater than 10,000 lbs. GVWR in the near term. New standards recently proposed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)2 would raise the required cor- porate average to 35 mpg by model year 2020, up from the current 27.5 mpg for light cars and 22.2 mpg for light trucks. Existing analyses indicate that higher fuel economy is achiev- able with currently available technology and that significant improvements could be made by model year 2015.
New Hampshire|2009|72|82|Establish a comprehensive education program on energy efficiency and renewable energy to help close the tremen- dous gap that exists between knowledge and practice. It is estimated that just by using current technology correctly and efficiently we could cut building energy consumption and associated greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent. In the proposed action, state government, utility companies, colleges, professional and building trade organizations, would sponsor ongoing training and offer demonstration sites for energy-efficient and renewable energy practices. The program would provide accessible resources and educational opportu- nities to any individuals and organizations that design, build, evaluate/rate, maintain, sell, own, and occupy buildings. It would be of particular value to contractors, code officials, and energy raters, and would establish working groups for build- ing managers and real estate agents. The program would be established and administered at various settings throughout the state, including demonstration centers, community col- leges, training seminars.
New Jersey|2009|58|259|The State's land and cultural assets constitute a valuable infrastructure, as much as highways and bridges, and as such require a recurring, broad-based investment in stewardship. This "green" infrastructure (of forests, meadows, watersheds and wildlife habitats, freshwater wetlands and tidal marshes, working farms and agricultural landscapes) has an even more vital role than physical infrastructure in that it provides essential ecosystem services including climate regulation and carbon storage and sequestration.
New Jersey|2009|68|259|The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the U.S. Maritime Administration, and others are considering a new generation of waterborne commerce as an alternative to truck and rail movements for some container movements. Containers could potentially be moved from New Jersey facilities in the Port of New York and New Jersey by barge or special vessels to Raritan Center, Camden, Paulsboro or Salem for example, reducing land traffic and potentially reducing vehicle emissions. Future developments could include port-to-port movements along the Eastern seaboard.
New Jersey|2009|114|259|Equally as important, in terms of climate change, to the number of vehicle miles accumulated in the State is the number of individuals in each vehicle. Private automobiles remain the most commonly used mode of travel for people living in the United States, and this is true for New Jersey residents as well. According to data from the U.S. Census Bureau, most New Jersey workers (71.8 percent) drive alone to work.136 While this rate is lower than that of most U.S. workers, including those workers living in Pennsylvania and Connecticut, it is higher than that of workers living in New York State. Slightly over 10 percent of New Jersey workers take public transportation to work, while 9.2 percent carpool, 3.2 percent walk to work and 3.3 percent work at home.137
New Jersey|2009|163|259|For existing buildings (GB-2), the goal is for the State of New Jersey to develop and facilitate State Green Building Remodeling, Operation, and Maintenance Programs for all Existing Residential and Commercial Buildings through existing and emerging state programs. In anticipation of the release of the New Jersey’s Green Building Manual in the Summer of 2010, which will be used by State agencies to identify specific actions to incorporate into regulatory and / or incentive-based programs to facilitate new and existing green buildings, the next 18 months will be used to build capacity in the emerging green building industry in New Jersey.
New Jersey|2009|237|259|As a direct consequence of the greenhouse gas effect, the greenhouse gas reduction benefits occur throughout the world, although New Jersey is particularly affected by global climate change as discussed in the Supporting Recommendations. Moreover, the greenhouse gas reduction benefits due to the Supporting Recommendations depend on reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by other states and countries. The non-greenhouse gas reduction benefits accrue primarily, if not exclusively, to New Jersey. In many cases, the benefits, whether greenhouse gas related or not, are uncertain. In other words, wide variations exist among the various estimates of the economic benefits.
New Mexico|2006|20|96|The costing approach used was similar to a conventional cost-benefit framework but had some important differences: Benefits vs costs. The principal benefit of the CCAG options is reduced GHG emissions and these were quantified simply as tons. There was no attempt to monetize the benefit of these reductions. Many options did create easily monetized non-GHG benefits, e.g., fuel savings and electricity savings. In these cases, monetized benefits were subtracted from monetized costs, resulted in net costs. These net costs could be positive or negative; negative costs indicated that the option saved money or produced “cost savings.”
New Mexico|2006|27|96|The State’s gross GHG emissions increased by about 21% during the 1990s, somewhat slower than the US as a whole, where emissions rose by 23%. This slower increase appears largely attributable to a few key factors, in particular limited growth in new power generation facilities and the decline of the mining industry and its fuel and electricity requirements. Were it not for these factors, New Mexico’s emissions could well have increased as fast as, or faster than, the national average, given the State’s more rapid population and economic growth.5 Transportation-related GHG emissions, which are driven directly by fuel use and in turn by population, rose by 29% in the 1990s, and represent one of the State’s fastest growing GHG emissions sources.
New Mexico|2006|34|96|Other key sources of emissions growth include direct use of fuels in the residential, commercial, and non-fossil fuel industrial sectors, the switch to use of HFCs as substitutes for ozone- depleting substances, and methane emissions from dairy herds.
New Mexico|2006|55|96|Building codes will be amended to reduce the building energy needs in areas including but not limited to HVAC systems, daylighting design to reduce lighting needs, electric lighting design, building envelope design, using integrated building design strategies.
New Mexico|2006|83|96|The CCAG recommends that New Mexico increase its efforts to reuse land that is already developed but is now vacant, underused, or even mildly polluted, and meet the growing demand by a larger number of households comprised of singles, working parents and single parents for housing located close to services, jobs and transit. New Mexico should move beyond current policies in this area, and:  Use fiscal, tax and other financing mechanisms to remove barriers to and otherwise support recycling of existing buildings and underused land.  Adapt planning policies and regulations to give infill and brownfield sites priority for development over sprawling sites at the edges of communities. Include New Mexico government and educational units in these adapted policies and regulations, so that state government buildings, universities, and public schools do not contribute to sprawl.
New York|2010|17|428|To fund some policy proposals, New York State will need to identify new funding mechanisms of sufficient magnitude and duration to catalyze a change in how we produce or use energy. Such funding sources could be created by a combination of carbon pricing, federal cost sharing, and public-private partnerships. Leveraging private capital will be absolutely critical to achieving a goal as bold as 80 by 50. Public funding should come from sources that directly link revenue generation to GHGs, promoting efficiency and low-carbon technologies, and avoiding burdens on desired activities such as economic activity and employment.
New York|2010|26|428|Growth rates of fuel use for space heating, industrial processes, transportation, and electricity demand, the principal determinants of New York’s future GHG emissions, are driven by economic, demographic, and land-use trends, which are difficult to predict. Improving forecasts of growth patterns and transportation system impacts will be a crucial task for climate planners going forward.
New York|2010|117|428|All the scenarios include four core strategies to reduce GHG emissions:  Energy conservation through energy efficiency, which is the simplest and the most cost-effective strategy.  Reducing combustion of fossil fuels, another obvious strategy because combustion accounts for about 85 percent of all GHG emissions in New York State. All scenarios minimize point sources of combustion (such as vehicles and oil or natural gas heating appliances), and rely principally on low-emission electricity. The scenarios assume combustion of fossil fuels only when and where necessary, or with controls to effectively limit GHG emissions.  Fuel switching to minimize the GHG footprint where combustion must still be used, as in aviation and cement production.  Local, point-of-use renewable energy technologies (such as solar) employed to reduce the reliance of homes and businesses on centrally generated electricity.
New York|2010|299|428|Differences in farm and herd size are also potentially significant factors in determining vulnerability and capacity to adapt to climate change. Comparison of small versus large farms throughout the state reveals significant differences in the costs, milk production per cow, capital efficiency, income, and profitability. All of these differences may affect the overall capacity of smaller farms to adapt to climate change, particularly if such adaptation requires significant new outlays of capital for the purchase and installation of cooling systems in dairy barns, as well as additional costs associated with energy for operating the equipment, and the installation of on- farm renewable energy generation.
New York|2010|386|428|Industries and private corporations throughout New York have already been successful in creating or attracting clean energy businesses and jobs. The sector already boasts 3,300 clean energy businesses employing over 34,000 people, making the State a national and international leader in the sector.15 These businesses include large corporations and small startups alike. For example, General Electric recently opened its $45 million Renewable Energy Global Headquarters in Schenectady, New York. Emphasizing smart growth principles, GE created 650 new jobs in the city, with the capacity for growth in the future. Another example of new economic development is Global Foundries’ new semiconductor manufacturing facility in Saratoga County, currently the largest economic development project in the country.16 This facility is expected to bring over a thousand jobs to the local economy.
Oregon|2010|6|173|The Oregon Global Warming Commission reaffirms its support and advocacy for a national carbon cap or other means to regulate and reduce greenhouse gas emissions economy‐wide, as previously asserted in Resolution 2009‐1‐009, and will communicate with the President and with Oregon’s Congressional Delegation to this effect.
Oregon|2010|37|173|A “usage” charge would reflect miles traveled in the system and how efficiently those miles are traveled. The usage charge would reflect miles traveled by different modes (e.g., auto, bus, train, bicycle) and the efficiency of the mode (e.g., an average emissions per VMT/passenger for a bus rider; an efficiency rating that might be captured instead as a graduated registration fee within the “access” charge).
Oregon|2010|61|173|Improve tools and transparency to accurately show how freight moves through the system in order to improve efficiency of freight movement and infrastructure investment. This includes the development and deployment of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) elements to inform drivers of existing conditions and route alternatives as well as the collection and sharing of truck trip routing data to identify where operational or infrastructural inefficiencies exist.
Oregon|2010|75|173|Oregon financing and incentives have not directly targeted GhG emissions reductions. Energy efficiency and renewable resource incentives and finance have resulted in GhG reductions. Oregon’s largest industrial natural gas uses are not eligible for public purpose charge incentives or services. Access to GhG specific incentives and financing will help industry to set goals for reductions while providing ready, assured, fixed rate and terms finance. Coupled with focused cross‐cutting technology knowledge, service and implementation assistance, bond backed financing of industrial GhG reduction efforts will improve industry profitability, provide employment and sustain accomplishment of industry GhG emissions reductions. Maintain and expand state incentives and financing that target industry GHG. Review, evaluate and adopt the most effective emerging or innovative funding mechanisms, particularly those that leverage private dollars Increase Energy Trust of Oregon (ETO) initiatives for industry. Encourage congressional delegation to expedite energy legislation with expansion of investment tax credit to GHG.
Oregon|2010|166|173|In‐vessel anaerobic digestion (AD) offers an alternative to composting as a method of recovering value from food waste. AD rapidly decomposes food waste and produces three outputs of value: biogas that can be used to generate electricity, heat, and an undegraded waste remnant that can be further stabilized via composting. Advocates for AD have suggested that feed‐in tariffs would help to make AD economically viable in Oregon (and elsewhere). A feed‐in tariff guarantees a producer of electricity from renewable sources (such as AD) access to the grid and a guarantee of a long‐term price for power produced that covers the difference between the actual cost to produce the electricity and what utilities are otherwise willing to pay for it. The State should provide a feed‐in tariff for anaerobic digestion.
Pennsylvania|2019|39|231|Macro-economic modeling (e.g., changes in jobs) was conducted using the REMI PI+ model. This is a structural economic forecasting and policy analysis model that integrates several analytic techniques including input-output, computable general equilibrium (CGE), econometric, and economic geography methodologies. REMI is a dynamic model, with forecasts and simulations to include behavioral responses to wage, price, and other economic factors. It can be used for estimating national, regional, and state-level impacts of any policy changes. The dynamic modeling framework supports the option to forecast how changes in the economy, and adjustments to those changes, will occur on an annual basis.
Pennsylvania|2019|61|231|Implement a strategic plan and incentives for increasing electric vehicle use in line with the PA’s Electric Vehicle Roadmap (PA DEP 2018a). Tactics might include: encouraging workplace charging; incentivizing the purchase of alternative, low, and zero emissions vehicles through financial mechanisms or programs; and expanding electrification for off-road applications, including vehicles, construction, and materials handling equipment. More specifics for implementing this action can be referenced in the Electric Vehicle Roadmap.
Pennsylvania|2019|115|231|Install water-efficient technologies and better water-saving practices, such as toilets, faucets, laundry equipment, commercial ice machines, combination ovens, steam cookers, steam kettles, wok stoves, dipper wells, pre-rinse spray valves, food disposals, commercial dishwashers, and wash-down sprayers. Use non-potable water sources or reclaimed water for non-potable uses (e.g., industrial cooling, landscape irrigation) with adequate public health safeguards.Increase water recycling in industrial processes. Install smart water meters that allow different rates to be charged when overall system demand is higher. Monitor water use and educate facility staff, building occupants, employees, and visitors about water use and water management. Ensure that your facilities have leak detection and repairs performed regularly. Use soil moisture sensors that water plants based on their needs by measuring the amount of moisture in the soil and tailoring the irrigation schedule accordingly. Use rainfall shutoff devices and rain sensors to decrease water waste by turning off the sprinklers in rainy weather. Use natural or constructed means (e.g., green roofs, rain barrels, cisterns) to harvest rainwater.
Pennsylvania|2019|128|231|Emission reductions from strategies that affect the electricity generation fuel mix (e.g., utility scale renewable generation, nuclear generation, cap and trade) are accounted for in the energy consumption sector based on the reduction in the electricity consumption emission factor (i.e., a reduction of carbon intensity of the grid). Distributed renewable electricity generation is also accounted for as reductions to energy consumption emissions. Thus, emissions from these strategies are compared to the BAU emissions from energy consumption. Emissions reductions from coal mine methane capture and upstream oil and natural gas are accounted for in the energy production sector, so these are compared to the BAU emissions from energy production.
Pennsylvania|2019|198|231|Finally, the CAP also makes positive recommendations in the area of supporting research and development to better assist farmers in handling weather events and better adapting to weather conditions, including establishing a network of agro-meteorological stations statewide to collect climate observations, including estimates of evapotranspiration, to support research and development of agricultural practices; expanding the collection and dissemination of local weather information for irrigation planning; improving the accuracy of existing real-time weather warning and forecasting systems for drought and extreme events; and developing and disseminating seasonal climate forecasts.
Rhode Island|2002|14|44|Also the Group stresses the importance of Rhode Island needing to continue to monitor new technologies as well as programs and policies adopted by other jurisdictions to identify opportunities to improve Rhode Island’s in-state GHG reduction programs and policies. To this end, the Stakeholders agree that the Rhode Island GHG Plan should be reviewed every 3-5 years to ensure that it is appropriate and achievable, and reflects the best technologies and program/policy designs, as well as the right mix of local, regional and national initiatives, and to adjust its targets and Plan accordingly. The Group further notes that the options delineated in the next section would need to be coordinated among a wide range of entities including state agencies, local government, the Legislature, businesses, and citizens. To this end the Group acknowledges the importance of having one entity such as state agency serve in a shepherding (i.e., coordinating and tracking) role.
Rhode Island|2002|20|44|This new program would target facilities heated with natural gas or oil in order to conserve fossil fuel. New sources of funding such as a gas/oil system benefit charge and/or Energy Office resources would be needed and could be used to support this program, which could be structured like Narragansett Electric Company’s SBC-funded current “Energy Initiative” program for facilities heated with electricity. The program would provide education, program marketing and/or contractor training as well as financial incentives.
Rhode Island|2002|24|44|This program would expand programs of the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, the Rhode Island Tree Council and the Statewide Planning Program to expand tree cover and thus achieve energy savings as well as other environmental and aesthetic benefits.
Rhode Island|2002|28|44|A policy to increase the gasoline tax by $0.50 per gallon would provide an incentive to purchase more fuel-efficient vehicles and to encourage more efficient travel choices. It could be explicitly tax-revenue neutral, thus not increasing overall household taxes, via complementary income-tax reductions, or it could be implicitly tax-revenue neutral by providing the funding for the rebate portion of the feebate system. The Stakeholder Group was unable to reach consensus due to significant disagreement about the wisdom and feasibility of a gasoline tax and its relative priority. The group discussed several options, including putting it in the higher priority category with clearly expressed uncertainty or the lower priority category because of the political and social barriers. The Group did agree on a need for more research, analysis and discussion to assess this option, including elasticities, neighboring state effects, the advisability of state vs. federal taxes and equity issues.
Rhode Island|2002|30|44|The Stakeholder Group acknowledges that the idea of VMT-based insurance is potentially promising, but the members felt that RI should not be the first to implement such a program. The Group agreed to recommend monitoring developments in this area and keep it open as a possibility. It also agreed that this program may be more effective regionally.
Rhode Island|2016|22|89|The transition to a clean energy economy offers significant opportunities for economic development and job creation in Rhode Island.30 The vast majority of current expenditure on fossil fuels exits our state because no natural gas or petroleum is produced or refined in the region. With a shift to a greater use of local and regional clean energy resources, however, Rhode Island can keep more energy dollars and jobs in-state. State policymakers should continue to place a priority on fostering nascent local clean energy industries, supporting innovation in clean energy, providing workforce training, and assisting incumbent fossil fuel industries (e.g., the delivered fuels industry) and disadvantaged communities with resources to excel in the burgeoning clean energy marketplace.
Rhode Island|2016|39|89|Reference case projections in the electric power sector are driven by Rhode Island’s requirements for electricity. To represent the electric power sector through the year 2050, two processes must be modeled: the expansion of generating capacity including power plants, technologies and other resources (such as electricity imports and demand resources), as well as the operation (or dispatch) of these resources to meet electric load.
Rhode Island|2016|45|89|The land-use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF) sink was added to 1990 based on available land cover datasets (downloaded from the Rhode Island Geographic Information System (RIGIS) website http://www.rigis.org/), estimates of carbon stocks for each land cover type (Abt Associates 2015), and trends in carbon dynamics from the EPA State Inventory Tool (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2015b). RIGIS land cover datasets were available for the years 1988, 1995, 2003/2004, and 2011. These were used to identify historical changes in acreage of multiple land cover classes, including three types of forest. These historical changes were interpolated across the dataset years to derive an estimate for the 1990 Rhode Island GHG inventory.
Rhode Island|2016|49|89|A fraction of behind-the-meter generation capacity (determined from ISO-NE (2015b)) does not need to be represented explicitly in the model because it is assumed to be embedded in the AEO-derived demand projections and therefore embedded in the load curves used in the model. Other behind- the-meter capacity is included in the electricity supply model, where its production contributes to meeting demand and load. Projected growth in behind-the-meter capacity is taken from ISO-NE’s Distributed Generation Forecast, which accounts for the incentives provided by net metering in Rhode Island and other New England states (ISO New England 2015b).
Rhode Island|2016|69|89|Despite the northern latitude, rooftop solar PV has a relatively large technical potential across New England relative to electricity demand, based on a 2016 NREL report. The NREL report notes that even though solar is a below-average resource in New England compared to other U.S. regions, the amount of generation needed is offset by the New England states’ below average per-capita electricity consumption. Within Rhode Island, NREL estimates a technical potential for rooftop solar PV generation in an amount greater than 55% of the state’s total electricity sales in 2013. The New England states as a whole have the technical potential to generate electricity from rooftop solar PV in an amount greater than 50% of the region’s 2013 electricity sales (NREL 2016).
South Carolina|2008|15|121|H. 3649 enhances incentives for biomass energy development by removing legislative caps on tax credits for biomass energy equipment, biodiesel and ethanol production, and other alternative energy incentives. It also removes caps on incentive payments for alternative fuel retailers and biomass energy producers.
South Carolina|2008|31|121|The CECAC presents this report covering:  An inventory of historical, current, and forecasted GHG emissions in South Carolina;  A description and analysis of recent policies and programs that will reduce GHG emissions in South Carolina;  GHG emission reduction goals for South Carolina and recommended policies to achieve these goals;  Recommended mechanisms for implementing these goals and policies across all sectors of South Carolina’s economy;  Estimated GHG emission reductions from the recommended policies, expressed in metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents (tCO2e);  Consideration of the costs or cost savings associated with the recommendations; and  Challenges inherent in each recommendation, as well as feasibility issues.
South Carolina|2008|54|121|Emissions of aerosols, particularly “black carbon” from fossil fuel combustion, could have significant climate impacts through their effects on radiative forcing. Estimates of these aerosol emissions on a CO2e basis were developed for South Carolina based on 2002 and 2018 data from the Visibility Improvement State and Tribal Association of the Southeast (VISTAS) regional planning organization. The results for current levels of black carbon emissions were a total of 7.0 MMtCO2e, which is the mid-point of a range of estimated emissions (4.5–9.6 MMtCO2e) in 2002. Based on an assessment of the primary contributors, it is estimated that black carbon emissions will decrease substantially by 2018 after new engine and fuel standards take effect in the on-road and nonroad diesel engine sectors. These estimates are not incorporated into the totals shown in Table 2-1, because a global warming potential for black carbon has not yet been assigned by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
South Carolina|2008|70|121|Recommended steps to respond to the identified impacts, so as to minimize risk in South Carolina to humans, natural and economic systems, water resources, temperature-sensitive populations and systems, energy systems, transportation systems, communications systems, vital infrastructure and public facilities, natural lands (such as coastal areas, wetlands, forests, and farmland).
South Carolina|2008|100|121|South Carolina can achieve greater alternative fuel use through a combination of voluntary and mandatory measures. The Low-GHG Fuel Standard (TLU-12) can increase the use of ethanol and biodiesel, and the policies recommended in Chapter 7 (Option AFW-4) can promote in-state production of these fuels through methods with lower lifecycle GHG emissions. The Low-GHG Fuel Standard would also promote the use of vehicles powered by electricity or hydrogen. When produced from renewable sources, these fuels can dramatically reduce GHG emissions. Tax Credits for Efficient Vehicles (TLU-3) and the promotion of expanded Alternative Fuel Infrastructure (TLU-6) would offer incentives to consumers and retailers to use more alternative fuels.
Virginia|2008|29|124|Many recommendations will provide ancillary environmental benefits. For example, growing cellulosic energy crops or algae for biodiesel can result in reduced nutrient runoff into the Chesapeake Bay and other waters. Other actions can reduce emissions of regulated air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and toxics, while others will minimize the amount of waste placed in landfills. Also, efforts to conserve land so as to protect existing carbon sinks in forests, farmlands, and wetlands helps advance the Commonwealth’s longstanding land conservation goals to preserve habitat, support key industries, and provide clean water.
Virginia|2008|34|124|Recommendations for implementing carbon capture and geologic sequestration 8A. Fund carbon capture and storage research and development in unminable coal seams and emission-free energy sources.
Virginia|2008|38|124|The Secretary of Transportation should ensure that climate change impacts, particularly sea level rise and storm surge vulnerability in coastal areas of Virginia, are taken into account in all transportation planning, project design, and prioritization of projects for funding as well as transportation systems management, operations, and maintenance. Where existing transportation infrastructure already is vulnerable to sea level rise, more intense storm events and other climate change impacts, state, regional, and local transportation agencies should develop plans to minimize risks, move infrastructure from vulnerable areas when necessary and feasible, or otherwise reduce vulnerabilities.
Virginia|2008|63|124|The workgroup recommended that, at a minimum, Virginia should plan for a 3.6°F increase in air and water temperatures, and at least a 2.3 foot rise in sea level. The full range of sea level rise expected throughout the Chesapeake Bay region is estimated to be between 2.3-5.2 feet, with great local variability as a result of subsidence (or land sinking). Air and water temperatures are projected to increase 3.6-10.8° F. Changes in precipitation and weather patterns are more difficult to estimate, although there has been scientific consensus that most of Virginia will experience a slight (0 to10%) increase in precipitation and an increase in coastal storm intensity (IPCC, 2008; Pyke et al, 2008). While it is unlikely Virginia will see drastic changes in the next few years, advance planning is recommended, given the scale of many adaptation efforts and the risks associated with being unprepared for key impacts (e.g., large scale coastal flooding from sea level rise).
Virginia|2008|88|124|The life cycles of animals and plants are closely tied to temperature cues. For example, many Chesapeake Bay fish are triggered to spawn when water temperatures reach about 15o C in the spring. Since 1960, springtime has advanced by three weeks, causing fish to spawn much earlier in the year. Similar shifts also have been documented in many other types of plants and animals, causing changes to typical predator/prey relationships. One such shift has been observed in jellyfish within the Bay. Jellyfish have been blooming earlier in the year, consuming zooplankton and potentially depriving later arrivals of juvenile fish of this food source.
Vermont|2007|7|14|Cost-effectively enhance energy efficiency by developing mechanisms to extend Vermont’s existing and highly effective demand-side management (DSM) efforts to include additional fuels beyond electricity and natural gas, especially heating oil used in residential, commercial, and industrial establishments.
Vermont|2007|8|14|Future development along the lines of Vermont’s historic settlement pattern of compact town centers surrounded by open countryside will also provide multiple benefits. Not only would it be consistent with Vermont’s traditional character, it would reduce travel demand and create a more transit-oriented pattern of growth. In the long run, this will help bend the upward curve of Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT), which is the most significant source of greenhouse gas production in Vermont.
Vermont|2007|10|14|In particular, we urge the Governor to insure Vermont state government leads by example by:  Creating a climate change cabinet that will coordinate climate change efforts across all agencies and initiate the review and accountability process with respect to the further analysis and development of the 38 recommendations of the plenary group;  Completing the transformation of the fleet of government vehicles into a model of fuel efficiency by purchasing hybrid vehicles or other highly efficient modes of transportation as appropriate to its needs and uses, and challenging other major institutions and enterprises in Vermont to follow the government lead.  Developing an internal carbon offset program within state government specific to functions, such as air travel, which may not be possible to eliminate or dramatically alter by behavior changes, and using the proceeds from such offsets for the purposes of supporting renewable energy or carbon sequestration initiatives in Vermont.
Vermont|2007|12|14|Pursue the potential of the “green economy” as an opportunity to explore new economic models and paradigms and encourage innovation as well as creating new, job-creating enterprises devoted to environmental technologies and new markets.
Vermont|2007|12|14|Ensure that the collective resources of the State are coordinated and effectively deployed to address research and implementation of energy efficiency and conservation initiatives, including matching federal grants with public and private funds already committed to environmental initiatives.
Vermont|2018|10|123|While emissions rose in each energy sector, the 2015 inventory highlights the fundamental imperative that Vermont more aggressively address emissions from the unregulated fuels sectors in particular – transportation and residential, commercial, and industrial fuel. We will not meet this challenge otherwise despite a strong focus on transforming our energy sector – primarily our electric supply.
Vermont|2018|47|123|The State, Vermont households, and Vermont municipalities can realize significant capital, operational, and maintenance savings by growing smartly. Smart growth reduces initial and ongoing costs Vermonters pay to provide and maintain public infrastructure, facilities and municipal services through efficient economies of scale. Compact development is a wise investment: it means more subscribers per linear foot of sewer and water line, more children served per mile of bus route, fewer trips that must be taken by vehicle, and more efficient public safety response time. Bottom line: development of compact centers surrounded by working and natural lands generates more public wealth and costs less to service than the sprawl alternative. Financial solvency isn’t an afterthought – it is a prerequisite to long-term prosperity. Smart growth accounts for revenues, expenses, assets, and long-term liabilities.
Vermont|2018|58|123|Over the last decade, adoption by Vermont farmers of these soil-building practices has resulted in the rebuilding of soil health. These soil health improvements have the co-benefits of improving water quality and enhancing flood resiliency while increasing sequestered carbon in the soil and decreasing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural lands. New regulations (Vermont Clean Water Act) have promoted these practices for their water quality value and have increased funding for implementation and education. Vermont farmers also lead in trying innovative practices like a roller crimper that increases the return of organic matter in cover crop residues to a field, with lower chemical inputs.
Vermont|2018|69|123|Developing forest or farmland eliminates much of the stored carbon. Conservation easements are a valuable tool for keeping agricultural and forest land undeveloped. Funding for the Vermont Housing Conservation Board should be continued, with priority given to projects that emphasize the aggregation of like-minded and neighboring landowners to maximize the conservation values and set the stage for future aggregated forest carbon offset projects.
Vermont|2018|78|123|Grid modernization is not as attractive for investors as recent investments in renewable energy generation, yet the sector offers great promise to consumers, businesses and utilities. Understanding its economic value will enable the State and Stakeholders to identify innovations for future use of the grid that in turn will facilitate the realization of beneficial greenhouse gas reduction policies.
Washington|2014|11|96|A market mechanism program aims to align private economic incentives with a public policy commitment to reduce GHG emissions. Under a market mechanism, entities have flexibility to either pay the internalized carbon price or reduce their emissions to reduce their exposure to carbon prices. In contrast, direct regulation would generally require specific emissions standards or installation of particular technologies. Market mechanisms aim to provide greater compliance flexibility at a lower overall cost.
Washington|2014|25|96|There are important short-term public health gains related to the reduction in black carbon emissions from diesel exhaust and wood smoke. There are a number of environmental justice communities that are close to ports and transportation corridors that have high cancer risk and high rates of juvenile asthma that could see substantial public health benefit from black carbon reduction efforts. This is one area where revenue from a carbon limit should be directed.
Washington|2014|51|96|Millions of people are scrambling now to rebuild their lives in the wake of intensifying climate-related disasters, and we’ve “only” raised the average global temperature by less than 1 degree C. This isn’t hypothetical. There are victims, now. And there are the prospective victims of still preventable disasters – our kids and theirs. If my comments reflect impatience, it’s because I’m increasingly disturbed by how comfortable, fortunate people (myself included) – people with immense capacity and responsibility for delivering solutions – inch forward so timidly while significant and growing populations who did little to cause the problem are ravaged by floods, storms, droughts.
Washington|2014|60|96|The most vulnerable populations include the elderly, pregnant women, low income and minority communities, people with chronic illnesses ... and of course our children. Looking just at the respiratory impacts of climate change, children breathe deeper than adults so pound for pound they inhale more toxic pollutants than adults; what can make an eight year old cough can literally make an infant stop breathing.
Washington|2014|80|96|If the Governor should propose a cap-and-trade system, his policy must exclude the option of offsets. Any purchase of offsets decreases emission reductions within the state, thereby missing important opportunities to improve public health. At best, even the strictest offset protocols are very difficult to monitor. Proving any externality (a key component to offset protocols set forth by the Western Climate Initiative) is difficult, and quantifying it is nearly impossible. It also requires that certain sectors be exempt from the cap in order to serve as options for offsets, including agriculture. Other jurisdictions, including California, have found that offsets in other countries have led to serious human rights abuses by pushing indigenous populations off their land to increase forestry. If Washington is to approach climate change mitigation with long-term goals in mind, any “short cuts” or loopholes like offsets allow industries to procrastinate their commitment to carbon emission reductions.
Wisconsin|2008|10|239|As in the Agriculture and Forestry sectors, the policies recommended by the Task Force consist of a series of voluntary programs, supported by incentives, to reduce direct emissions from industrial activities. In contrast to other sectors, GHG emissions in the industrial sector have been declining. Given this fact, cost competitive concerns and recognition that industry will experience an increase in energy prices as a result of Task Force recommendations, voluntary policies were viewed as appropriate. However, as with Agriculture and Forestry sectors, the Task Force recommends that in 2012 the state review the success of voluntary programs and, if additional progress in reducing emissions is not being made, consider mandatory measures, with appropriate funding, to the extent that industrial sources are not included in a Cap and Trade Program by that time.
Wisconsin|2008|15|239|For the long-term, substantial R&D of low- carbon technologies will be essential. The Task Force’s recommendations do not try to pick future technology winners, which would be difficult and risky. Instead, increased R&D, at the federal and state levels, are recommended for renewable technologies, clean coal technologies such as capture and sequestration of CO2, and other strategies to reduce GHG emissions, including demand-side measures. Funding for R&D related to climate change adaptation also is recommended.
Wisconsin|2008|91|239|These assumptions result in the following reduction calculations: estimates for new commercial buildings are based on two policies: (1) the commercial building code update is estimated to yield a reduction of 55,000 metric tons of CO2 in 2010; (2) the Commercial Green Building Code is estimated to yield an incremental reduction of 36,700 metric tons of CO2. By 2020 these two policies are estimated to yield total reductions of approximately 1.7 million metric tons of CO2. By 2020 improved residential/multi- family codes are estimated to yield a reduction of 0.3 million metric tons of CO2. Annual reductions, when totaled, are estimated at 2.0 million metric tons of CO2 by 2020.
Wisconsin|2008|238|239|The freight industry in general is facing significant cost impacts due to the price associated with Tier 4 emission regulations (e.g. fine particles and NOx emissions). Anti-idling regulations will further add cost pressure. Operators/companies unable to absorb the costs will leave the industry, though growth by more competitive fleets may dampen employment losses. Drivers may choose to deliver cargoes and then leave regulated areas to park in locations where they can idle without restrictions. This could impact businesses supporting the trucking industry in Wisconsin.
Wisconsin|2008||239|Offset projects can be implemented by a party outside the regulated cap and trade program. Offset projects can also be implemented by a regulated entity through activities outside their regulated portfolio. Criteria. A project must demonstrate that emission reductions would not otherwise have occurred. Emissions reductions from a project must be verified, quantified, enforceable and permanent. The overarching program objective is to have projects that result in certified offsets that are compatible with and “recognized” by other programs. It should be recognized that as GHG policies develop, an increasing share of reductions previously made voluntarily may become mandatory and therefore no longer qualify as offsets. Offset buyers must be aware of and plan for this risk.