Maryland

Department of
the Environment

Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reduction Act
PlanUPDATE

2015

Plan Partners
The Maryland Departments of:
Agriculture
Commerce
Environment
General Services
Health & Mental Hygiene
Housing & Community Development
Natural Resources
Planning
Transportation
Maryland Emergency
Management Administration
Maryland Energy Administration
Maryland Insurance Administration
University of Maryland

Maryland
Department of
the Environment

1800 Washington Boulevard
Baltimore, Maryland 21230
1-800-633-6101
410-537-3000
TTY Users 1-800-735-2258
www.mde.maryland.gov
Larry Hogan, Governor
Boyd Rutherford, Lieutenant Governor
Ben Grumbles, Secretary

Chesapeake Bay Program
National Oceanic &
Atmospheric Administration
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service
U.S. Forestry Service
U.S. Geological Survey
Forest Health Emergency &
Contingency Program
Forest Stewardship Councils
Forestry Boards
Maryland Invasive Species Council
Sustainable Forestry Initiatives
University of Maryland Cooperative
Extension Service
Local Governments
Metropolitan Planning Organizations

Maryland Commission on Climate Change
Maryland General Assembly
Senator Paul G. Pinsky
Delegate Dana Stein
Government Appointees
Ben Grumbles, Chair of Commission and Secretary of the Environment
Nancy K. Kopp, Maryland State Treasurer
Jack R. Smith, Interim Superintendent of Maryland Schools
Joseph Bartenfelder, Secretary of Agriculture
C. Gail Bassette, Secretary of General Services
Mark Belton, Secretary of Natural Resources
David Craig, Secretary of Planning
Pete Rahn, Secretary of Transportation
Adelisia “Leigh” Williams, Director, Maryland Energy Administration
Donald Boesch, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES)
Nongovernmental / Nonprofit Appointees
Stuart Clarke, Town Creek Foundation
Lori Arguelles, Alice Ferguson Foundation
Mike Tidwell, Chesapeake Climate Action Network
Amy Owsley, Eastern Shore Land Conservancy
Lynn Heller, Abell Foundation
Chuck Fry, Maryland Farm Bureau
Brad Karbowsky, United Association of Plumbers and Fitters
Local Government Appointees
Kelley Russell, Frederick City Alderman
Jacob Day, Maryland Municipal League
Business Appointees
Sue Briggum, Vice President, Waste Management, Inc.
C. Richard D’Amato, Retired Attorney
John Quinn, Director of State Affairs, BGE
Peter Zadoretzky, Sustainability Manager, The Bozzuto Group
Michael Powell, Business Community Representative

View from Johns Hopkins — Mary Jane Rutkowski

A Message from Ben Grumbles, MCCC Chair
“We are on track to meet our own climate change goal and requirements. We have even greater
opportunities ahead of us. Maryland and its citizens and communities can reduce environmental and economic risks, increase energy choices and improve statewide resilience and preparedness through smart and balanced actions. We are committed to market-based strategies and
partnerships that link our energy, environmental and economic goals more than ever before.”

Climate Change Milestones in Maryland
2004

Passage of Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (Amended and strengthened in 2007, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013)
Maryland Commission on Climate Change Established
•

In April 2007, the Climate Change Commission was established by the Governor (Executive Order 01.01.2007.07).
In November 2014, its mission and membership were expanded (Executive Order 01.01.2014.14).

•

To address the causes and ramifications of climate change in Maryland, the Commission is to develop a Plan of Action with
benchmarks and timetables for its implementation. For the Governor and the General Assembly, the Commission also
provides advice and expertise on issues relating to climate change.

•

Effective June 1, 2016, the Climate Change Commission will be established by statute in the Department of the
Environment (Chapter 429, Acts of 2015).

2007

Passage of the Maryland Clean Cars Act
Maryland joins the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
Amendments to the Critical Area Act and passage of the Living Shorelines Protection Act
2008

Passage of the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act
Publication of the Initial Climate Action Plan

2009
2011
2012

Passage of the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act (GGRA)
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Published
Draft GGRA Plan published
Regional Economic Studies Institute (RESI) of Towson University published Economic Study
Issuance of the Executive Order on Climate Change and “Coast Smart” Construction
Passage of the Maryland Offshore Wind Energy Act

2013

Passage of the Transportation Infrastructure Investment Act
Final Issuance of Maryland’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act Plan
Launch of Maryland Zero-Emission Vehicles Programs

2014

Passage of the Coast Smart Council and Bay Acidification Task Force Legislation

2015

GGRA Plan Update

THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION ACT OF 2009 AND
THE 2012 PLAN

I

n 2009 the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act (GGRA) was signed into law. The GGRA
requires the State to achieve a minimum 25 percent
reduction in Statewide greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from 2006 levels by 2020. The State was also
required to demonstrate that the reduction goal could
be achieved in a way that has a positive impact on
Maryland’s economy, protects existing manufacturing
jobs and creates significant new jobs in Maryland.
To achieve this goal, the GGRA required the Maryland
Department of the Environment (MDE) to develop
a proposed Statewide GHG reduction plan, to solicit
public comment on the proposed plan from interested
stakeholders and the public, and to adopt a final plan
by 2012.
To achieve a 25 percent reduction in Maryland’s GHG
emissions from 2006 levels by 2020 while fostering
a healthy economy and creating new jobs, the State
developed a comprehensive, multi-sector, multiagency plan with input from more than a dozen state
agencies and non-governmental organizations. The
2012 GGRA Plan lays out a blueprint which, when
fully implemented, will achieve the 25 percent GHG
reduction required by the GGRA, with positive job and
other economic benefits. The 2015 GGRA Plan Update
will also provide additional environmental benefits by
helping the State restore the Chesapeake Bay, improve
air quality, and preserve agricultural and forest lands.
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update
The GGRA requires MDE to submit an updated report
to the Governor and General Assembly by October 1,
2015. This report updates the information contained
within the 2012 GGRA Plan. The 2015 GGRA Plan
Update summarizes the State’s progress toward
achieving the 2020 emissions reduction goal established
by the GGRA and shows that Maryland is on target to
not only meet, but to exceed the emission reduction
goal of 34.66 MMtCO2e by generating 38.37 MMtCO2e
of reductions. The reduction programs outlined in the
2015 GGRA Plan Update have worked well, but changes
in the energy market and travel behavior have also

helped Maryland achieve the goals of the GGRA. While
this is a positive first step to combating climate change
in Maryland, efforts to continue the progress will be
needed because scientific consensus is that worldwide
GHG reductions as high as 72 percent by 2050, or
earlier, are needed to minimize the impacts of climate
change. As discussed in Chapter 2, Maryland is already
experiencing loss of land from sea level rise, which
has risen over one foot in the last 100 years. Maryland
has also experienced floods, heavy rains, heat, and
strong winds over the past three years, which have led
to millions of dollars in property losses and the loss of
human life.
Maryland Commission on Climate Change
On May 12, 2015 the Maryland Climate Change
Commission Act of 2015 was signed into law. MDE has
worked with the Maryland Commission on Climate
Change (MCCC) on the 2015 GGRA Plan Update and
will continue to work through the Commission on both
implementation of the 2012 GGRA Plan through 2020
and any beyond 2020 efforts to continue to address
climate change.
The Commission is chaired by MDE Secretary Ben
Grumbles and is supported by four working groups
who all assisted in the development of the 2015 GGRA
Plan Update. The MCCC Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
Working Group (MWG) focuses on regulatory,
market-based and voluntary programs to reduce GHG
emissions while supporting economic development
and job creation. The Adaptation and Response
Working Group (ARWG) is charged with developing a
comprehensive strategy for reducing Maryland’s climate
change vulnerability through both short – and longterm measures that State and local governments may
use to plan for and adapt to a rise in sea levels due to
climate change. The Scientific and Technical Working
Group (STWG) has prepared much of the material
in this report on the science of climate change. The
Education, Communication and Outreach Working
Group (ECO) assisted with the public outreach
and public meetings on climate change. All of the
Workgroups have provided valuable input on the 2015
GGRA Plan Update.

STATUS OF THE 2012 GGRA PLAN –
ARE WE MEETING 2020 GOALS?
Maryland Jobs and the Economy
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update will support new
industry and will accelerate investments in green
technologies in Maryland by encouraging investments
in the energy, transportation, and land use sectors of
our economy. Implementing the 2015 GGRA Plan
Update will lead to increased investments in energy
efficiency, green buildings, renewable energy and
low emission vehicles. Investing in Maryland’s green
economy now will encourage smarter investments
and support more sustainable economic growth for
generations to come. Current analyses project that the
2012 GGRA Plan will result in estimated economic
benefits of between $2.5 billion and $3.5 billion in
increased economic output by 2020 and help create and
maintain between 26,000 and 33,000 new jobs.
Updated Estimates of 2020 GHG
Emission Reductions
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update summarizes the
various strategies, programs and initiatives that the
State is developing and employing to meet the GGRA’s
emission reduction and economic benefits goals. The
State is already implementing the 2015 GGRA Plan
Update and as implementation continues, there may
be opportunities to enhance emission reductions and
economic and job creation benefits through additional
legislative, budgetary or regulatory action.
The suite of programs have been updated for 2015 to
include revised benefits from program enhancements
to date, refined estimated emissions reductions, revised
estimated economic and job benefits, summaries of
progress including current implementation efforts and
where applicable, recommendations for enhancements
by the lead implementing agency.
Through the process used to develop the 2015 GGRA
Plan Update, the 25 percent reduction in Statewide
GHG emissions from 2006 levels by 2020 goal of the
GGRA was calculated to be 34.66 MMtCO2e. The
combined emissions reductions of all programs in the
2015 GGRA Plan Update are projected to yield a total
of 38.37 MMtCO2e in emissions reductions. This will
exceed the GGRA 2020 goal by 3.71 MMtCO2e. The

following table provides a detailed summary of the GHG
emissions reductions associated with the major program
groups contained in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update and how
those reductions are projected to meet the requirements of
the law. It includes refined estimates of emission reductions
for each program and updates to projected GHG emissions
growth through 2020.
The Public Review / Comment Process
The ECO Working Group of the MCCC held a series
of five public meetings across Maryland between July
and August of 2015. The purpose of these meetings
was to inform the public of the mission and actions of
the MCCC, the purpose of the GGRA and the content
of the 2015 GGRA Plan Update, and to take public
comment on relevant issues of concern regarding
climate change in Maryland.
Time was allotted during each meeting for attendees
to address members of the MCCC with comments,
and written comments were collected at the conclusion
of each meeting. While these comments addressed
a wide range of topics related to climate change,
comments addressing the dangers of climate change
and Maryland’s vulnerability, the Cove Point natural gas
facility, hydraulic fracturing in Maryland, amending
Maryland’s Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) and
the renewal of the GGRA occurred with the greatest
frequency.
BEYOND 2020
An Update on the Science of
Climate Change
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update includes an update from
the MCCC’s STWG on how climate change is already
impacting Maryland and what additional future GHG
reductions need to be considered to continue the State’s
progress in reducing GHG emissions.

MDE Recommendations on
Continuing Progress
The GGRA requires MDE to provide
recommendations in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update on
how the State should move forward on climate change.
The law requires the General Assembly to take an action
in 2016 or the requirements of the GGRA sunset. The
2015 GGRA Plan Update is intended to provide the
General Assembly with the information they need to
determine how the State should move forward. MDE’s
recommendations include the following:
➢➢ Continue to implement and enhance the
programs in the 2012 GGRA Plan with a
increased focus on finding ways to continue
emission reductions that also support economic
development and job creation.
➢➢ Work through the MCCC and the Workgroups
to develop these enhancements where
appropriate.
➢➢ Move beyond 2020 by adopting a “next step” of
incremental progress towards the deeper
reductions needed by 2050. This next step
should also increase the emphasis on improving
Maryland’s economy by establishing quantitative

goals for economic growth, job creation and
wages linked to the GHG reduction efforts.
➢➢ Continue efforts to analyze issues linked to
continuing the progress the State has made in
reducing GHGs that have been identified
by MDE over the past ten years, the MCCC
Workgroups and stakeholders. These emerging
issues include:
✼✼ Enhanced efforts on renewable energy, energy
efficiency and transportation that seek to
further reduce emissions in a way that fosters
economic development, creates new jobs and
protects consumers
✼✼ Continuing analyses of new scientific and
technical issues like life-cycle analysis,
hydraulic fracturing and other natural gas
related topics, fast acting climate changers,
and other emerging issues related to the
science and mitigation of climate change
✼✼ Increase the emphasis on adaptation,
resilience and preparedness.

GHG Reductions by Major Program Groups.
Projected 2020
GHG Emission Reductions (MMtCO2e)

Program
EmPOWER Maryland

7.24

The Maryland Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS)

4.13

The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)

3.60

Other Energy Programs

0.14

Transportation Technologies

6.88

Public Transportation

1.85

Pricing Initiatives

1.99

Forestry and Sequestration

4.55

Ecosystems Markets

0.68

Building and Trade Codes in Maryland

3.15

Zero Waste

1.48

Leadership-By-Example

1.78

Maryland’s Innovative Initiatives

0.21

Future or Developing Programs

0.02

Land Use Programs

0.64

Outreach and Public Education

0.03

Total Reductions 38.37
GGRA 2020 Emission Reduction Goal 34.66
Meeting the 2020 Goal? Yes. 3.71 MMtCO2e above goal reductions.

1

CONTENTS

Background & the Science of Climate Change in Maryland..........................................................12

2

Climate Change & the Cost ofInaction in Maryland.........................................................................18

3

Adaptation.......................................................................................................................................................22

4

Inventory & Forecast....................................................................................................................................64

5

Summary of Reduction Programs...........................................................................................................78

6

Maryland Jobs & the Economy.............................................................................................................. 156

7

Emerging Technologies............................................................................................................................ 166

8

Impact Analysis of GGRA on the Manufacturing Industry in Maryland................................ 172

9

Federal Actions............................................................................................................................................ 176

10

Multi-Pollutant Planning Exercise for Maryland.............................................................................. 180

11

MDE Recommendations.......................................................................................................................... 186

T he App e ndi ce s for thi s P l an Upd ate are av ail abl e on - line :

http://w w w.mde.state.md.u s/prog rams/Air/ClimateChange/Pages/Air/climatechange/leg i slation/index.aspx

Clarendon Avenue in the Snow — Mary Jane Rutkowski

1
Background
& the Science
of Climate
Change in
Maryland

Mary Jane Rutkowski

This chapter summarizes work conducted by the Scientific and Technical
Working Group of the Maryland Commission on Climate Change

THE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS REDUCTION
ACT OF 2009

I

n 2009 the Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reduction Act
(GGRA) was signed into law. The
GGRA requires the State to achieve
a minimum 25 percent reduction in
Statewide greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions from 2006 levels by 2020.
This reduction goal evolved from
the Maryland Commission on Climate Change’s Climate Action Plan,
which was released in August 2008.
To achieve this goal, the GGRA
required the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to
develop a proposed Statewide GHG
reduction plan by 2011, to solicit
public comment on the proposed
plan from interested stakeholders
and the public, and to adopt a final
plan by 2012. The State was also
required to demonstrate that the

reduction goal could be achieved
in a way that has a positive impact
on Maryland’s economy, protects
existing manufacturing jobs and
creates significant new “green”
jobs in Maryland. The GGRA is in
Appendix A.
THE 2012 GGRA PLAN

T

o achieve a 25 percent reduction in Maryland’s GHG
emissions from 2006 levels by 2020,
the State developed a comprehensive, multi-sector, multi-agency
plan with assistance from more
than a dozen state agencies and
non-governmental organizations.
Using Maryland’s 2008 Climate
Action Plan1 as a roadmap, the
2012 GGRA Plan lays out a blueprint, which if fully implemented,
could achieve the 25 percent GHG

1

http://www.mde.state.md.us/programs/Air/
ClimateChange/Pages/Air/climatechange/
legislation/index.aspx.

reduction required by the GGRA,
with positive job and other economic benefits. Through implementation, additional environmental benefits could also be achieved
through advances in efforts to
restore the Chesapeake Bay,
improve the State’s air quality, and
preserve Maryland’s agricultural
and forest lands.
THE 2015 GGRA
PLAN UPDATE

T

he GGRA requires MDE to
submit an updated report to
the Governor and General Assembly by October 1, 2015. This report
(the 2015 GGRA Plan Update)
updates the information contained
within the 2012 GGRA Plan. The
2015 GGRA Plan Update is an
appropriate appellation, as this
report is intended to only provide
an update on the contents of the
2012 GGRA Plan. In considering

the impacts of climate change and Maryland’s response as a whole, there is still much work that needs to be done.
The programs outlined in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update can still be modified and improved, and adjustments to
the entire plan can still be made if needed.
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update summarizes the State’s progress toward achieving the 2020 emissions reduction goal
established by the GGRA. It also provides a review of the best available science regarding the level and pace of GHG
emissions reductions and sequestration needed (Chapter 1), and an update on emerging technologies to reduce GHG
emissions (Chapter 7). In reviewing the suite of programs described in Chapter 5, MDE has made recommendations
on the need for adjustments to the requirement to reduce statewide GHG emissions by 25 percent by 2020 (34.66
MMtCO2e), and has summarized any additional revised regulations/control programs/incentives that are necessary
to achieve that goal

A

n analysis of the overall economic costs and benefits to the State’s economy, environment, and public health
of a continuation or modification of the requirements to achieve a 25 percent reduction by 2020 is also
required by the GGRA. MDE contracted with RESI to assess, via modeling, the economic effects of various climate action policies and/or programs in development or already enacted by a number of state agencies in Maryland. These policies/programs are being developed or have already been enacted by various state agencies in
order to meet the target GHG emission reductions required by the GGRA. This analysis, in Appendix K, updates
the economic and jobs impacts from each program identified in the 2012 GGRA Plan.
The GGRA also requires an independent study conducted by an institution of higher education in the State to
determine the impact of requiring GHG emissions reductions from the State’s manufacturing sector. MDE contracted
with RESI to assess the impacts of the programs described in the 2012 GGRA Plan on Maryland’s manufacturing
sector, a summary of which can be found in Chapter 8. The study can be found in its entirety in Appendix I.
Additionally, the GGRA requires that MDE report on the state of any federal program designed to reduce GHG
emissions, an analysis of which is in Chapter 9.
THE SCIENCE OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN MARYLAND

S

cience has demonstrated with a high degree of certainty that Earth’s climate is being changed by human
activities, particularly the emission of heat-trapping gases, generally called greenhouse gases, including
carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide.
Science has also provided a reliable description of:
➢➢ how further emissions will warm the Earth,
➢➢ how this will alter the climate and have consequences for human society and the natural systems on which
it depends, and
➢➢ the amount and timing of reductions in emissions needed to limit climate change in order to avoid its most
harmful consequences. A comprehensive report on the Science of Climate Change is in Appendix L.

Maryland’s Greenhouse Gas Reductions Act of 2009 requires the State to reduce Statewide greenhouse gas emissions
by 25% from 2006 levels by 2020. The Act further directs the Maryland Department of the Environment to report on
“the greenhouse gas emissions reductions needed by 2050 in order to avoid dangerous anthropogenic changes to the
Earth’s climate system, based on the predominant view of the scientific community” on or
before 2020.
The Maryland Commission on Climate Change, established by Executive Order in 2007, was responsible for laying
the groundwork for the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act by developing a Climate Action Plan in 2008. During the
2015 Session the Maryland General Assembly passed House Bill 514, which codified the Maryland Climate Change
Commission. House Bill 514 was signed into law by Governor Hogan and became effective on June 1, 2015. Among
the actions the Commission is charged to undertake include “maintaining a comprehensive action plan, with 5-year
benchmarks, to achieve science-based reductions in Maryland’s greenhouse gas emissions.”

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

13

CLIMATE IMPACTS TO MARYLAND

M

aryland will be significantly impacted by changes to the global climate. With thousands of
miles of shoreline and a vast and vital resource in the Chesapeake Bay any increases in
temperature will have large impacts that reshape our State.
➢➢ Realized warming for Maryland will differ from any global averages; in fact, because of our relatively high
latitude, it is very likely to be greater.
➢➢ Warming in Maryland will be controlled by global emission and not Maryland’s own emissions. Of course,
Maryland contributes only a small part of annual global greenhouse gas emissions.
➢➢ A full assessment of the impacts to Maryland from climate change can be found in the 2008 Climate Action
Plan. Impacts include changes to temperatures, heat waves, Chesapeake Bay temperatures, precipitation,
soils moisture and agriculture, water supply and quality, and coastal vulnerability.

14

Maryland Department of the Environment

Severe Thunderstorm Damage in Cambridge, Maryland — Jane Hawkey, IAN, UMCES

2
Climate
Change
& the Cost of
Inaction in
Maryland
Annapolis City Dock Flood — National Trust for Historic Preservation

T

he earth is warming and this
is largely the result of humancaused emissions. The National
Climate Assessment (NCA)
found that U.S. average temperature has increased by about 1.5°F
since 1895 with 80 percent of this
increase occurring since 1980.
Similarly, the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change Fifth
Assessment Working Group 1
report (IPCC AR5 WG1), Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis came to many of the same
conclusions as the NCA, but with a
global focus.
The amount of warming that will
occur by the end of this century
depends on our choices now. If
we don’t make much progress in
curbing emissions, temperatures
for the planet could rise between
4.7°F to 8.6°F (2.6°C to 4.8°C) by
the end of this century, compared
to the average temperature around

the end of the 20th century (19862005). Warming in the United States
is expected to be higher than the
global average. Warming averaged
across the country could be between
5°F to 10°F, assuming emissions
rates continue. Average summer
temperatures in Maryland could
increase around 9°F by the end of
the century, if little is done to reduce
emissions.

or Antarctica melt especially quickly.

Although we have the opportunity
to avoid some of this warming, we
mare still likely to face a number of
impacts arising from climate change
in the coming decades. In fact, we
are already observing some of these
impacts now.

More heavy downpours – Rain is
coming in heavy precipitation events
in many parts of the world, including
the United States. This may
contribute to stronger or
more frequent floods.

Sea level rise – Sea level has risen
about 8 inches in the last 100
years, making coastal storms more
damaging and accelerating erosion.
Globally, future sea level rise is likely
to range from 1 to 4 feet, and could be
even higher if glaciers in Greenland

Arctic Polar ice – Sea ice during
the summer has been shrinking,
and sometime in the 21st century,
perhaps within the next few decades,
the Arctic will likely be ice-free in the
summer. The ice sheets in Greenland
and Antarctica have also been
melting more rapidly in recent years,
which could increase the rate of
global sea level rise.

More heat waves – Heat waves have
become more frequent and intense,
threatening human health, stressing
water resources, and increasing
energy demands.
Threats to ecosystems – Many plants
and animals will be forced to shift
their habitats to higher elevations or
higher latitudes as warming makes
it more difficult to thrive in their
current locations.
Increased agricultural pests – With
milder winters, many pests and
pathogens that affect plants and
livestock have been able to migrate
to new areas, posing problems to
farmers and ranchers.
Ocean acidification – Increased
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
has caused the oceans to become
more acidic. Further acidification
could dissolve the shells of many
organisms at the bottom of the food
chain, threatening to disrupt the
ocean ecosystem.

These impacts pose challenges
to infrastructure, businesses,
and communities, particularly
incountries already struggling to
meet the basic food, water, shelter,
and securityneeds of their citizens.
The state of Maryland is presently
experiencing some of these types
of impacts, which are expected to
become more intense and occur
more frequently as a result of climate
change. No one individual weather
event can be attributed directly to
climate change; climate is a pattern
of events over time. However, it is
clear that the costs to property, crops,
public health and human life from
impacts consistent with climate
change are significant. Costs from
recent weather-related events and
the scientific assessments remind us
of the need to take action to reduce
risks.

Crisfield During the Flood — Somerset County Long Term Recovery Committee, Inc.

Derecho in Maryland — WeatherUnderground

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

19

Raising a House for Flooding — Jane Hawkey, IAN, UMCES

3
Adaptation

Savage River Outfitters

C

limate change will affect Maryland in a variety of ways. More
obvious impacts could include an
increased risk for extreme events
such as drought, storms, flooding,
and forest fires; more heat-related
stress; the spread of existing or
new vector-born disease; and
increased erosion and inundation
of low-lying areas along the State’s
shoreline and coast. In many cases,
Maryland is already experiencing these problems to some degree
today. Climate change raises the
stakes in managing these problems
by changing the frequency, intensity, extent, and magnitude of these
problems.
Even as the State moves forward
with actions that will reduce GHGs
and ultimately result in increased
energy efficiency, a more sustainable
economy, and cleaner air; climate
impacts will still be felt into the
future. Therefore, adaptation,

together with mitigation, is necessary
to address climate change. It is noted,
however, that these actions are by
no means independent of each
other and any program or policy to
mitigate the effects of climate change
will complement steps to reduce the
state’s risk to climate impacts.
Climate change adaptation is an
extremely complex process and
there is no single means of response.
As stressed in a recent report by
the National Academies,1 climate
change adaptation must be a highly
integrated process that occurs on
a continuum, across all levels of
government, involving many internal
and external partners and individual
actions, and often evolves at different
spatial and temporal scales. That
said, the State is already taking steps
to enhance the resilience of a broad
spectrum of natural and human1

National Research Council. 2010. Adapting
to the Impacts of Climate Change. National
Academies Press, Washington, DC

based systems to the consequences of
climate change.
Maryland’s Climate Action Plan
includes two climate change
adaptation strategies that are
currently being used to guide
state-level adaptation planning
efforts. The first strategy (Phase
I), released in 2008, addresses the
impacts associated with sea level
rise and coastal storms. The second
strategy (Phase II), released in 2011
as a compendium to the Climate
Action Plan, addresses changes in
precipitation patterns and increased
temperature and the likely impacts
to human health, agriculture, forest
and terrestrial ecosystems, bay
and aquatic environments, water
resources, and population growth
and infrastructure. Together, the
strategies are the product of the work
of more than 100 experts from the
governmental, nonprofit, and private
sectors that held a series of meetings

for the purpose of interpreting the
most recent climate change literature,
evaluating adaptation options, and
recommending strategies to reduce
Maryland’s overall climate change
vulnerability. The strategies provide
the basis for guiding and prioritizing
state-level activities with respect to
both climate science and adaptation
policy over the near and longer
terms.
Between 2008 – 2015, the State as a
whole made substantial progress to
implement high-priority elements of
Maryland’s Phase I and II Adaptation
Strategies. Chapter 8 of the 2012
GGRA Plan, the Adaptation Update,
provided detailed information
on state agency implementation
efforts to date, along with short,
medium and long-term priorities
for future action. Summaries of a
selection of high priority Phase I and
II adaptation strategies, including
current and planned near-term
implementation efforts are outlined
below.
ADAPTATION STRATEGY
IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE
(2008-2015)
Leading by Example
Initiative: “Lead by Example”
Policy: Building Resilience to
Climate Change
Maryland Department of
Natural Resources (DNR)

T

he DNR has the lead role
among state agencies in
advancing the scientific understanding of Maryland’s vulnerability to climate change, and
advocating for sound planning to
avoid or minimize the anticipated
impacts. In October 2010, the DNR
issued a new policy to direct its
investments in and management
of land, resources, and assets so
as to better understand, mitigate
and adapt to climate change. The

policy establishes practices and
procedures related to new land
investments, facility siting and
design, habitat restoration, government operations, research and
monitoring, and resource planning. The goal of the policy is to
lead by example; and along the way,
encourage and educate others in
the methods for managing natural
resources and designing facilities
with an understanding of the effects
of climate change.
Sea Level Rise and
Coastal Storms
The Chesapeake Bay region’s
geography and geology make the
state one of the three most vulnerable
areas of the country to changes
resulting from sea level rise – only
Louisiana and Southern Florida
are more susceptible. Historic tide
records show sea level has increased
approximately one foot in the
Chesapeake Bay over the last 100
years. Estimates provided by the
Scientific and Technical Workgroup
of the Maryland Commission
on Climate Change indicate that
Maryland is projected to experience
between 2.7 to 3.4 feet of sea level rise
over the next century.
The Phase I Strategy, produced
by the Maryland Commission on
Climate Change’s Adaptation and
Response Working Group, detailed
the actions necessary to protect
Maryland’s future economic wellbeing, environmental heritage, and
public safety in the face of climate
change and sea level rise.
In 2008, Maryland passed two
pieces of key legislation called for in
the strategy: The Living Shoreline
Protection Act and amendments to
the Chesapeake and Coastal Bays
Critical Area Act. Both will reduce
Maryland’s vulnerability over time
and protect natural resources from

the impacts of sea level rise by
restoring natural shoreline buffers,
such as grasses and wetlands, helping
to limit new growth in vulnerable
areas. In addition to these two pieces
of legislation, a variety of other
projects designed to implement the
Strategy have been completed or are
currently underway.
Climate Change and Coast
Smart Construction
Executive Order
State of Maryland
On December 27, 2012, the
Climate Change and Coast Smart
Construction Executive Order (EO)
was signed, enacting a number of
policy directives, including directing
all State agencies to consider the
risk of coastal flooding and sea
level rise when they design capital
budget projects and charging the
Department of General Services
with updating its architecture and
engineering guidelines to require
new and rebuilt State structures be
elevated two or more feet above the
100-year base flood level.
The EO also charges the Maryland
Department of Natural Resources
to work with the Maryland
Commission on Climate Change,
local governments and other
parties as appropriate, to develop
additional Coast Smart guidelines
within nine months, for the siting
and construction of new and rebuilt
State structures, as well as other
infrastructure improvements such
as roads, bridges, sewer and water
systems, and other essential public
utilities. Recommendations for
applying the new construction
guidelines to non-state infrastructure
projects that are partially or fully
funded in the State’s capital budget
were also developed.
Additionally, the EO requested that
the Critical Area Commission for

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

23

the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal
Bays evaluate existing regulations
and policies for State Agency Actions
Resulting in Development on
State-Owned Lands and consider
the adoption of new or revised
provisions that address climate
change and the risk of sea level rise
and other extreme weather-related
impacts.
Lastly, the EO tasked the Scientific
and Technical Working Group
of the Maryland Commission on
Climate Change with providing
updated sea level rise projections
for Maryland. In 2008, the Scientific
and Technical Working Group
published sea level rise projections
for Maryland, with a high-end range
of 3.4 feet by the year 2100. However,
considerable new research on sea
level rise has since been published
requiring the updating of these
projections. Updated sea level rise
projections were published by the
Scientific and Technical Working
Group in June 2013 (http://www.
umces.edu/sites/default/files/pdfs/
SeaLevelRiseProjections.pdf). A
best estimate of 3.7 feet by 2100 was
developed, with a low of 2.1 feet and
a high of 5.7 feet.
Local Government Technical
and Financial Assistance:
Coast Smart Communities
Maryland Department of
Natural Resources (DNR)
DNR’s Coast-Smart Communities
Program supports local level
implementation of the adaptation
strategy. Under CoastSmart, the
DNR administers a competitive
grant program to provide financial
and technical assistance to local
governments looking to reduce
their vulnerability to the effects of
coastal hazards and sea level rise
through planning and permitting
activities. Grants of up to $75,000,
24

Maryland Department of the Environment

drawn from the state’s federal Coastal
Zone Management Act funds, are
awarded on anannual basis and may
be renewed for up to three additional
years. In coordination with the
Coastal Training Program, a training
curriculum for local planners and
official is available to complement
and inform available technical
assistance. Further, CoastSmart
developed a self-assessment tool to
guide local communities in their
understanding of current and future
risk and opportunities for increasing
resiliency. Attendance of trainings
and completion of a Scorecard
Self-Assessment exercise will allow
for improved targeting of grants.
All activities within the CoastSmart
Program aim to foster knowledge
exchange on coastal hazards among
local communities to help integrate
hazards planning into a wide range of
existing planning processes.

to existing data are made.

Adaptation Toolbox:
The Coastal Atlas
Maryland is using the latest
technology, and detailed information
to undertake state-of-the-art sea
level rise mapping and research.
Results acquired by both the DNR
and individual Maryland counties is
housed on the Coastal Atlas
(http://dnr2.maryland.gov/ccs/
Pages/coastalatlas.aspx#), an online
toolbox of resources available
to assist local governments with
becoming ready, adaptive, and
resilient to the impacts of sea
level rise and coastal storms.
Data products and technical tools
currently available on the Coastal
Atlas include: statewide sea level
rise vulnerability mapping, historic
shoreline position and erosion
rate calculations, and the Erosion
Vulnerability Assessment Tool. The
Coastal Atlas mapping application
will be continuously updated as new
data becomes available or as updates

All of these practices increase
ecosystem resiliency by improving
water quality, reducing erosion, and
enhancing habitat condition and
connectivity. Due to the fact that
most living shoreline projects involve
a channelward encroachment with
sand fill, these shoreline restoration
techniques provide space for
potential marsh migration.

Sustainable Shoreline and
Buffer Area Management
Through the Shoreline
Conservation Services and its
Natural Filters Program, DNR
is working to implement buffer
reforestation, wetland restoration,
and shoreline practices to enhance
ecosystem resilience to the impacts
of climate change. Practices include
on-the-ground habitat restoration
projects such as stream and shoreline
buffer plantings, stream-floodplain
reconnection, marsh hydrology
restoration, and living shorelines.
DNR Staff provide various
technical assistance (site visits and
evaluations, problem assessments
and recommended solutions) for
different stakeholders (private
citizens, local government, nonprofit organizations, state and federal
agencies).

Maryland Coastal
Resiliency Assessment
The DNR partnered with The
Nature Conservancy in 2015 to
conduct a “Statewide Coastal
Resiliency Assessment.” The
Assessment will evaluate the
risk reduction value of natural
infrastructure, assess coastal
community vulnerability to coastal
hazards, and identify priority
conservation areas that currently
provide risk-reduction benefits to
vulnerable human communities. The
Assessment will also identify priority
restoration areas or opportunities
where natural features could provide
future risk reduction benefits. The
Assessment considers a wide range
of natural features such as tidal
wetlands and marshes, vegetated
buffers, oyster reefs, submerged
aquatic vegetation, Bay islands,
beaches, and dunes. These features
buffer coastal communities from the
impacts of coastal hazards through
wave attenuation, infiltration,
sediment stabilization, and other
risk-reduction benefits. The purpose
of this project is to establish state
priorities for natural infrastructure
solutions within tidal regions of
the coastal zone. The priorities
established through this project will
be integrated into Maryland’s “Blue
Infrastructure” framework and a
parcel-level scorecard used to review
land acquisition projects. Following
completion in 2016, trainings will
be held with state land managers,
conservation planners, restoration
specialists, and local partners to
share the Assessment datasets
and integrate results into current
land conservation and restoration
targeting efforts.

The Maryland Department
of Transportation (MDOT) is
working to assess Maryland’s
critical transportation facilities and
systems’ vulnerability to projected
sea level rise and extreme weather
damage. This assessment provides
the information necessary to
evaluate options for dealing with
potential impacts to infrastructure
and connectivity, as well as aid in
the development of adaptation
policies for existing and planned
transportation facilities. The
assessment will ultimately influence
long-term strategic planning for
system adaptation that can account
for the uncertainty of future climactic
conditions.
Maryland State Highway
Administration (SHA)
Transportation Vulnerability
Assessment
Among Maryland agencies,
SHA has the largest and most
geographically dispersed network
of facilities requiring the most
complex long-term action plan.
SHA is studying the effects of severe
weather and climate change to
the infrastructure on the highway
system. SHA with Maryland
Transportation Administration
(MDTA) developed a climate
change adaptation strategy and
implementation plan to address
severe weather and climate change
impacts to the state maintained
highway network. This plan provides
a foundation for strategies and
priorities actions by near-, mid-,
and long-term actions. In order
to implement the strategies, SHA
needs more specific information on
vulnerable assets. SHA completed
the FHWA funded 18-month pilot
project for the Climate Adaptation
and Vulnerability Framework. The
study was completed in October
2014 and includes a detailed

Vulnerability Assessment for two
pilot counties (Anne Arundel
& Somerset). SHA continues to
develop vulnerability assessments
that utilize tools from the pilot
study to further analyze additional
counties vulnerable to intense storms
or sea-level rise. The vulnerability
assessments are very detailed and
require time to develop. Completion
of a vulnerability assessment for all
tidal counties is anticipated in 2017.
Maryland Port
Administration (MPA)
Climate Change
Vulnerability Assessment
and Recommendations
As a component of the overall
Maryland Transportation Initiative
described above, the Maryland Port
Administration prepared the report,
“Climate Change Vulnerability
Assessment and Recommendations”
in 2010. The report provides
recommendations for future capital
investments based on the findings
of the vulnerability assessment, and
identifies the need for the MPA to
make infrastructure and facility
improvement decisions that consider
climate change and sea level rise. In
response, the MPA implemented
a policy of migrating facilities out
of the flood plain if possible, or
elevating in place if relocation is not
possible, or mitigating for saltwater
inundation if the facility cannot be
relocated or elevated for operational
reasons (i.e. build stronger to
withstand wave action, and with
corrosion resistant material, etc.).
As the MPA reviews its Dredged
Material Management Plan and
Marine Terminal Development
Plans, it plans to factor sea level
rise and potential storm surge
inundation into its evaluation of
proposed projects. Additionally,
the MPA works with its partners in
the Maryland and Federal Dredge

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

25

Material Management Programs
to incorporate climate change
vulnerability analysis into decisionmaking processes.
Maryland Transit
Administration (MTA)
Climate Change
Vulnerability Assessment
The MTA Climate Change
Vulnerability Assessment is being
developed in response to Maryland’s
Climate Action Plan, produced by the
Maryland Climate Change Commission,
and to the Climate Change and Coast
Smart Construction Executive Order
(2012) as well as MTA’s climate change
policy. The purpose of the study is to
identify MTA assets that are vulnerable
to three expected results of global climate
change: sea level rise; storm surge; and
flooding due to major rain events. MTA
has completed the vulnerability mapping
and are currently underway with the
risk assessment. The risk assessment,
scheduled to be completed in December
2015, will evaluate the likelihood
and consequences of climate-related
impacts on MTA assets and identify
adaptation strategies for priority assets. A
stakeholder meeting is scheduled for July
2015 with a follow-up workshop in Fall
2015.
Maryland Aviation
Administration (MAA)
Airport Layout Plan
Vulnerability Assessments
The MAA conducted a review of
the Airport Layout Plans (ALPs) for
five airports that were identified to
be potentially affected by projected
sea level rise/inundation. The ALP
is a Plan that shows all existing and
planned airport improvements,
including runways, taxiways,
terminals, and other structures. The
airports in the State of Maryland that
are potentially affected by projected
sea level rise/inundation are Martin
State Airport, Bay Bridge Airport,
26

Maryland Department of the Environment

Essex Skypark, Ocean City Municipal
Airport, and Crisfield Airport. The
projected 2-foot, 5-foot, and 10-foot
sea level rise contours, as developed
by Maryland Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) were overlaid onto
the ALPs of each of the five airports.
At Martin State Airport (MTN),
planned future improvements were
eliminated from the projected sea
level rise contour areas, resulting
in a reduction in potential adverse
effects of inundation, and a
lessening of potential conflicts
with emerging Maryland “Coast
Smart” construction policies. The
MAA Office of Regional Aviation
Assistance is working with the other
four airports in an advisory role to
support continued airport layout
planning to reduce or eliminate
potential conflicts to aviation
facilities from projected sea level rise/
inundation effects.
Historical, Archaeological,
and Cultural Resources
Vulnerability Study
Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP)
Maryland Historical Trust
(MHT)
Rising sea levels, erosion, and major
storms all pose a significant threat
to historic and archeological sites,
districts, and landscapes. In 2010,
the MHT completed a preliminary
vulnerability assessment of historical
and cultural resources in Maryland.
The study was completed using
inundation level data from the DNR.
Sea-level rise was raised by local
governments and advocates through
the PreserveMaryland planning
process and included as a regional
issue of concern in the statewide
preservation plan for 2014-2018.
As a first step, MDP produced an
interactive online map, based on data
used in the preliminary vulnerability
assessment, to help local preservation

planners and raise public awareness.
In 2011-2012, MHT was awarded
a Coastal Zone Management Grant,
through DNR, to complete a pilot
project focusing on the Choptank
River watershed in Dorchester
County to develop a methodology
for an in-depth analysis of vulnerable
sites that provides details for
management prioritization. In the
first phase, sea level rise layers and
additional shoreline data from DNR
and their partners were incorporated,
including erosion rates and other
shoreline risk data. These layers were
used to construct a general model of
areas within the pilot project zone,
which are subject to various levels
of impact from coastal hazards and
sea level rise. MHT then analyzed
the recorded historic buildings and
districts located in the pilot area
impact zone.
A methodology was developed to
characterize each resource according
to its level of recordation, extent
of survey, extent and nature of
potential impact, and the property’s
significance. This analysis allowed
MHT to identify and prioritize
high-value historic resources that are
most threatened in the pilot area for
documentation and/or mitigation.
During the second phase of
the project, MHT undertook
documentation of 35 endangered
sites within the watershed, including
fieldwork, documentary research
and Maryland Inventory of Historic
Properties forms.

Cultural Resources
Hazard Mitigation
Planning Program
With funding from the National
Park Service, MHT has launched a
two-year Cultural Resources Hazard
Mitigation Planning Program
aimed at protecting historic places,
archeological sites, and cultural
landscapes from the effects of natural
hazards, such as flooding, wind and
coastal erosion. Partnering with
MEMA, DNR, MDE and others,
MHT is currently developing
trainings, model guidance and
educational materials to help
local governments create hazard
mitigation plans for their cultural
resources. MHT promotes a planning
framework based on FEMA’s
Integrating Historic Property and
Cultural Resources Considerations
into Hazard Mitigation Planning,
which is currently being tested in
Annapolis. MHT also offers one-onone technical assistance to aid local
governments in plan development
and mitigation projects involving
cultural resources.
Local Government Technical and Financial Assistance:
Greater Crisfield Long-Term
Recovery Project
The Greater Crisfield Long-Term
Recovery Project primarily focuses
on rehabilitation of homes and
infrastructure damaged by Hurricane
Sandy, along with economic
development and some limited new
home construction. In addition to
serving as a State climate change and
technical/financial assistance liaison
to the local Somerset County Long
Term Recovery Committee (LTRC),
which provides new housing and
housing rehabilitation services,
MDP leads the interagency State
Recovery Committee, which has
worked to determine how best to

assist the Greater Crisfield area while
also implementing State climate
change adaptation strategies. This
has included the use of federal
community development block
grant (CDBG) disaster recovery
funds available for Sandy recovery,
as well as planning and community
visioning assistance. One such
visioning project, The Smith Island
Vision Plan, jointly funded by
DHCD and DNR, committed grant
funds to Somerset County to work
with a local citizens group, Smith
Island United, to develop a Vision
Plan for Smith Island. Members of
the State Recovery Committee have
served on the Steering Committee
for this year-long process, which
was just recently endorsed by Smith
Island in the summer of 2015. The
Smith Island Vision Plan will be
adopted as an addendum to the
Somerset County Comprehensive
Plan and will serve as a key
document for future infrastructure
projects, as well as climate change
adaptation strategies. The Greater
Crisfield Project can serve as a model
to improve Maryland’s short-term
and long-term hazard response
approach.
Pre-Planning Assistance to
Local Governments
MDP offers assistance to local
governments prior to the beginning
of the local comprehensive planning
process. This includes facilitating
access to DNR maps of areas
vulnerable to coastal hazards to
inform local government decisionmaking related to land use and
infrastructure.

Climate Change Insurance
Advisory Committee
In the fall of 2008, the Maryland
Insurance Commissioner convened a
Climate Change Insurance Advisory
Committee. The committee was
charged with:
➢➢ Reviewing the adequacy of
the data available to insurers
to assess the risk imposed by
climate change;
➢➢ Examining whether adaptive
options are available to help
mitigate losses and whether
rating can be structured
to provide an incentive for
these options; and
➢➢ Reviewing ways to promote
partnerships with
policyholders for
loss mitigation.
The committee released its final
report in December 2010.
Living Shoreline
Regulation Development
In 2008, the Maryland legislature
enacted the Living Shoreline
Protection Act. The Act requires
riparian property owners to rely
upon “living shorelines” defined as
nonstructural shoreline stabilization
measures such as marsh creation,
whenever feasible, to protect
shorelines from erosion while also
providing critical wildlife habitat. A
variety of state agencies are involved
in implementing the program
and related efforts. MDE issued
draft implementing regulations on
November 7, 2012. Final regulations
went into effect in February 2013.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

27

Higher Regulatory
Standards for
Floodplain Management
Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) are being updated
throughout Maryland by the
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Part of this
process requires communities that
currently participate in the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
to update their local floodplain
management regulations by the map
effective date. At a minimum, these
regulations must be consistent with
federal regulatory requirements, but
communities can choose to adopt
higher regulatory standards. As the
State Coordinating Office for the
NFIP, MDE is assisting communities
with this by providing a Maryland
Model Floodplain Management
Ordinance as a template containing
higher regulatory standards such as a
2’ freeboard requirement. Freeboard
can be a community tool to respond
to sea level rise, and to achieve
lower flood insurance premiums for
property owners. Many communities
are implementing these higher
regulatory standards in order
to gain additional points for the
Community Rating System (CRS),
a flood insurance discount program
for communities that go beyond the
minimum NFIP requirements.
Review of Current Statewide
Building Codes and
Recommendations
for Enhancement in Coastal
Regions of Maryland
As required under Section 2 of
the Omnibus Coastal Property
Insurance Reform Act of 2009 (Act),
Chapter 540 (House Bill 1353),
the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD)
conducted reviews and prepared
a report to members of the Senate
28

Maryland Department of the Environment

Finance Committee and House
Economic Matters Committee on “…
enhanced building codes for coastal
regions of the State that promote
disaster-resistant construction in the
coastal regions of the State...”. The
report was delivered to Members in
October 2010. The report was also
provided to planning boards of the
counties in the coastal areas of the
State.
State Hazard Mitigation Plan
Maryland’s 2011 State Hazard
Mitigation Plan was approved in
September 2011. Vulnerability to
climate change, coastal hazards and
sea level rise issues was evaluated as
part of the State risk assessment and
specific adaptation strategies were
included in the overall mitigation
plan. The 2016 update of the State
Hazard Mitigation Plan are expected
to include risks associated with noncoastal impacts of climate change
as prioritized in the mitigation
plan, the 2015 DNR Coast Smart
Construction guidelines and the
results Maryland Coastal Resilience
Assessment.
State Disaster Recovery
Operations Plan (SDROP)
The Maryland SDROP has been
developed by the Recovery Support
Function Leadership Group in
order to ensure the ability of the
State of Maryland to recover
from a catastrophic incident that
overwhelms the State or any local
jurisdictions by coordinating
support and engaging all necessary
State, local, federal, private
sector, voluntary, faith-based,
and nongovernmental agencies
to address the needs of Maryland
residents, visitors, and communities
following a disaster. The SDROP is an
all-hazards, capabilities based, statelevel plan that outlines how agencies
will coordinate support to and

interact with local and community
constructs during the recovery
process. The first final draft was
completed in June 2015. A statewide
tabletop exercise to test the plan was
held in July 2014.
HUMAN HEALTH

C

limate change poses serious health risks to people in
Maryland, including increases in
heat-related injuries, cardiovascular
mortality and morbidity, respiratory illness, changes in infectious
disease patterns (vector-borne,
food-borne, and water-borne
diseases), impacts to water supply
and quality, and both direct and
stress-related injuries from extreme
storm events and flooding. The role
of the public health system is to
anticipate and manage these risks,
in partnership with other agencies
and institutions.
The health impacts of climate
change will be influenced by other
societal changes, including changes
in health care and health care
delivery, public health capacity, and
many other factors. One challenge
will be to focus the attention of
institutions and agencies used to
planning cycles of months to a year,
on climate forecasts of fifteen to
thirty years. However, the public
health strategy for climate change in
Maryland has been developing tools
and case studies to assist local health
departments and other agencies in
considering health impacts in their
planning processes.

Maryland Public Health
Climate Change Strategy
Maryland
Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene

Local
health department

University of Maryland
School of Public Health

Regional Climate
Change Forecast
Intervention
option 1

Vulnerability
assessment

Disease burden
projections

Intervention
option 2
Intervention
option 2

Evaluation

Adaptation plan
development and
implementation

State Climate Change Environmental Health Capacity Building
To ensure that risks, costs, and benefits are evaluated in a systematic manner, Maryland successfully competed for
and was awarded a 2012 capacity building cooperative agreement from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Climate Ready Cities and States Initiative. The cooperative agreement, “Building Resilience
Against Climate Effects (BRACE),” was implemented in Maryland as the Maryland Public Health Strategy for Climate
Change. The four-year award is enabling DHMH to identify and address needs in the areas of: (1) epidemiologic
capacity in injuries/disasters and vector-borne disease; (2) short, intermediate, and long-term climate change
modeling and integration capacity; (3) training in health impact assessment (HIA); and (4) integration of information
management tools related to disasters with routine DHMH functions. The strategy is outlined in the illustration
above.
Enhanced Environmental Public Health Tracking infrastructure
A combined effort is needed in order to minimize the public health risks of climate change. Through continued
coordination between the DHMH and other state agencies, preemptive measures can be taken to both prevent and
minimize the impact of climate change on public health. In 2002, the DHMH received Center for Disease Control
funding to plan for a statewide Environmental Public Health Tracking Network that will be part of the national
tracking network. Maryland used the funding to build capacity and enhance infrastructure. The results range from
starting or improving surveillance to enabling faster responses to environmental public health questions and faster
action to prevent disease. These enhancements will be achieved through the CDC project on capacity building,
integrating them with the environmental public health tracking project.
Development of Climate Health Indicators
The DHMH is working with the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities, the MDE,
and the MDP on the selection of health indicators that could be used by the MDP and other agencies to evaluate the
potential impacts of climate change adaptation or mitigation strategies, as well as the potential health consequences
of projects related to adaptation to sea level rise. The DHMH has strengthened its coordination with the DNR and
the MDE related to monitoring and reporting of ChesapeakeBay-related health concerns, specifically with respect to
harmful algal blooms.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

29

State Heat Plan
In May, 2012, DHMH released the Maryland State Heat Emergency Plan which guides state actions during an
Extreme Heat Event: a weather condition with excessive heat and/or humidity that has the potential to cause heatrelated illnesses. An Extreme Heat Event is defined as a day or series of days when:
➢➢ The heat index is forecasted to be approximately 105 degrees or higher, or;
➢➢ The National Weather Service has issued a Heat Advisory, or;
➢➢ Weather or environmental conditions are such that a high incidence of heat-related illnesses can
reasonably be expected.
DHMH has also activated the State Heat Emergency web site (http://dhmh.maryland.gov/extremeheat), which
includes links to the State Heat Plan, Facts about Heat Related Illness, and weekly Heat Reports that provide guidance
and information about deaths and illness caused by extreme heat in the region.

Code Red Heat Alert — WBAL TV

30

Maryland Department of the Environment

Farm in Frederick County, Maryland — Frederick County, Maryland Government

AGRICULTURE

A

griculture is the largest commercial industry in Maryland, employing about 350,000 people, primarily in
the north-central and Eastern Shore regions. Farms occupy about two million acres, or about one-third of
the State’s land, though individually the farms are, on average, much smaller than those in other states. Maryland’s agriculture is diverse, including nursery plants, dairy products, beef cattle, vegetables, wheat, horses, and
fruit. Poultry, fed by largely locally produced corn and soybeans, represents the largest market value. Projected
increases in temperature, precipitation variability, and frequency of extreme events associated with climate
change are likely to affect the conditions upon which farming has been established. Many of the stressors farms
already face are likely to intensify or become less predictable: drought frequency, winter flooding, pests and
disease, and ozone levels. These changes occur in the current context of the high economic uncertainty and small
profit margins, and are likely to result in increased costs to both farmers and consumers.
To adapt to a changing climate, farmers will require guidance on climate smart crop species and strategies to reduce
poultry and livestock loss and stress associated with heat. More intense water management will be needed to offset the
impacts of growth and uncertainty in water supplies on agricultural production and water resources.
It is the broad goal of these strategies to help reduce stress on agricultural operations and to build the resilience of
Maryland farms, despite changes they may face in the future, and to improve the quality of the Chesapeake Bay and its
watershed. As climate change may affect the intensity of how farmers manage, alter effectiveness of agricultural BMPs,
and affect the implementation of relevant regulations, farmers need to be prepared and supported for adjustments that
may be required.
Exposure To And Spread Of Damaging Insects and Disease, Especially Invasive Species
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) conducts regulatory and integrated pest management programs
to help prevent the introduction and mitigate the impacts of invasive species in Maryland. A list of pests of concern,
including the Emerald Ash Borer, which is an exotic currently under quarantine in Maryland, can be found on MDA’s
website. Maryland’s Invasive Plant Advisory Committee (IPAC) was established by legislative mandate in October
2011. The IPAC’s primary responsibility is to advise the Secretary of Agriculture on regulating the sale of invasive
plants, and preventing them from entering Maryland or from spreading further in the state. Using a scientific weed
risk assessment protocol, IPAC will classify invasive plants as Tier 1 or Tier 2 and recommend regulations to reduce
the risk of invasive plants in Maryland. Initial regulations were promulgated in January of 2013. The remaining
regulations, including proposed Tier 1 and Tier 2 plant lists were written in May of 2015 and are in the process of
being finalized. There are currently six weed assessments available online.
Vector-Borne Disease Surveillance and Control
Maryland State officials continue to track the spread of WNV and other arboviral activity in the State in vector
species, host animals, and humans. This allows for ongoing enhancement and deployment of effective tools to
support surveillance, prevention, and control of West Nile virus and other arthropod-borne viruses, including
novel or emerging pathogens that threaten the health of Maryland residents. In addition, the Mid-Atlantic Zoonotic
and Vector Borne Disease Inter-Agency Workgroup (MAZV), a collaboration between DHMH, DNR, MDA, and
researchers, practitioners, and federal agency partners meets regularly to monitor and discuss vector-borne disease
activities in Maryland and the surrounding regions.

32

Maryland Department of the Environment

Fawn — Maryland Department of Natural Resources

FORESTS AND
TERRESTRIAL
ECOSYSTEMS

T

he diversity of Maryland’s
forests and terrestrial ecosystems reflects the wide variety of
environmental conditions found
across the State’s five major physiographic provinces. Not only do
forested systems regulate climate
and sequester carbon, but they
play a major role in any adaptation plan to reduce the impacts
of urban heat, enhance migration corridors, mitigate flooding,
protect drinking water supplies,
and reduce nutrient and sediment
runoff. From the mountains to the
sea, one can hike through western
Maryland’s thick groves of hemlock
lining deep gorges, across grassy
serpentine barrens supporting the
unique purple-flowered fringed
gentian, by vernal pools inhabited
by salamanders, and through the
pine forests and hardwood swamps
of the Eastern Shore. The State’s
forests are mostly privately owned
and only 27% are permanently
protected from development. These
habitats and their plant and animal

Eric Kelly — Baltimore Sun / Kenneth K. Lam

communities are shaped mainly
by geology, climate, and interactions with other species. They
also are subject to many existing
stressors such as development,
pests, and pollution, limiting
their capacity to adapt.
Forests and terrestrial ecosystems
contribute an estimated $2.2
billion to Maryland’s economy and
$24 billion in ecological services.
The condition of these ecosystems
and the services they provide
is likely to be altered by climate
change. Climate change will
alter distributions of species and
habitats and exacerbate existing
stressors at an uncertain rate and
degree. Native species populations
may decline, increase, or migrate
from the State while new species
may migrate in due to habitat
shifts. Services provided by forests
such as temperature regulation,
water filtration, aesthetic value,
and habitat may be altered.
Existing stressors on species and
habitats may be exacerbated by
climate change.

GreenPrint Update
Maryland’s GreenPrint initiative
identifies the most ecologically
valuable areas in the State and
designates these lands and waters as
“Targeted Ecological Areas (TEAs)”.
TEAs are the “best of the best”
natural resources across the State.
TEAs were first defined in 2008
and included the most ecologically
important large blocks of forests and
wetlands; wildlife and rare species
habitats; aquatic biodiversity areas;
and forests for protecting water
quality. In 2011, DNR updated the
TEA designations to include coastal
ecosystems; habitats for climate
change adaptation and marsh
migration, and areas for supporting
commercial and recreational
fisheries. Together, these areas are
identified as conservation priorities
for natural resources protection.
DNR is now using these updated
conservation priorities to target
Stateside Program Open Space land
conservation projects.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

33

Urban Forestry Renewal —
US Department of Agriculture / US Forest Service

Wildlife Vulnerability
Assessment
The DNR has conducted a
vulnerability assessment of GCN
species using Nature Serve’s Climate
Change Vulnerability Index. The
DNR is also participating in an
expert panel effort in the northeast
headed by the Manomet Center
for Conservation Science to assess
the likely impacts of climate
change on northeastern fish and
wildlife habitats and species of
greatest conservation need. All
of this information is planned for
incorporation into the next version
of the Maryland’s State Wildlife
Action Plan. The DNR’s Natural
Heritage Program is currently
updating the State Wildlife Action
Plan, which includes Maryland’s
analysis of selected Species of
Greatest Conservation Need and
their vulnerability to climate change.
This report will be published in
October 2015.

34

Maryland Department of the Environment

Red Tailed Hawk in Carroll County — Bill Hubick

Forest Management Plans
In 2011 DNR’s Forest Service
included climate change and
adaptation information as a required
element in forest management plans.
These plans are required by any forest
landowner who participates in State
property tax abatement programs or
USDA forestry programs and thus
will reach a wide audience.
Maryland Forest Resource
Assessment and Strategy
The DNR Forest Service has
incorporated climate change
into their 2010 Forest Resource
Assessments as an additional
stressor. Climate change was also
identified as one of the top five areas
for action in their five-year strategy.
As part of this, the Forest Service
is working with other local, state,
and federal agencies to incorporate
adaptation into existing forestry
programs.

Urban Tree Canopy
Assessment
The DNR is currently working to
maintain and improve the health
and longevity of trees in urban areas
and increase the urban tree canopy
cover throughout Maryland. Urban
trees shield buildings from cold
winds, lower ambient summertime
temperatures, reduce heating and
cooling costs, decrease the demand
for energy production and reduce
vulnerability to the effects of heat
waves on at risk populations.
Reduced heat slows the formation
of ground level ozone as well as the
evaporation of fuel from motor
vehicles. Thirty-seven communities
in Maryland have committed to
participation in the UTC Goal effort
to date. Baltimore City, Annapolis,
and the Frederick County Board
of Education have already adopted
goals; the other communities are in
the process of assessing their existing
and potential UTC. Communities
like Baltimore City have also begun
to prioritize plantings for urban
heat reduction and water quality
improvement.

BAY AND AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS

T

he Chesapeake Bay is the largest estuary in the United States, fed by a watershed that stretches from mountains to sea, across 64,000 square miles (166,000 square kilometers), spanning six states – Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, and the District of Columbia. Within its watersheds
and oceanfront, Maryland’s extensive aquatic ecosystems range from freshwater swamps and bogs, tidal and
non-tidal freshwater rivers and marshes, tidal brackish and saline rivers and marshes, and coastal bays. These
ecosystems are influenced by precipitation, temperature, tropical storms, and human activity. Currently, the services provided by the Bay are estimated to be approximately $1 trillion, annually. However, human development
and pollution have degraded their natural resilience, leaving them more vulnerable to extreme events. Climate
change will likely exacerbate this problem, creating a greater threat to these ecosystems. The Bay has already
warmed by 3 degrees Fahrenheit and additional temperature increases could change the composition of commercial fisheries and increase anoxia in the Bay (Prasad et al 2011). To protect its marine, estuarine and aquatic
ecosystems against future damage, the action is needed to alleviate existing stressors and to strategically conserve
and restore critical bay and aquatic habitats.
Climate Change Criteria for Conservation
The DNR completed a project, “Coastal Land Conservation in Maryland: Targeting Tools and Techniques for Sea
Level Rise Adaptation and Response.” The purpose of the project was to develop new conservation criteria to identify
coastal habitats that may help Maryland proactively adapt to sea level rise and increased storm events associated with
climate change. Climate change targeting criteria resulting from this project was used to develop new conservation
areas for “GreenPrint” and a parcel-level scorecard used to review land acquisition projects. Trainings have been held
with state land managers and conservation planners to share the new tools and datasets, and to implement them into
current land conservation targeting and review processes.
Coastal Resilience Conservation Easements
The DNR has developed a new conservation easement focused on increasing the resilience of coastal ecosystems
and reducing the vulnerability of landowners to climate change. This tool has been shared with county conservation
planners, local land trusts, the Maryland Department of Agriculture, and other conservation partners.
Temperature Sensitive Stream Regulations
In 2011, the DNR and the MDE collaborated to create an update to Use Class III (naturally-reproducing trout)
streams. Future coldwater protections are being assessed for contributing watersheds to these streams and for the
protection of streams that harbor coldwater dependent invertebrate species. Future models may address those streams
that will be most sensitive to climate change and those that will remain coldwater systems.
Guidelines and Mapping for Vulnerable Ephemeral and Headwater Systems
The DNR has identified ephemeral and intermittent freshwater habitats that are highly sensitive to changes in
precipitation regimes and ultimately climate change. These habitats include ephemeral, intermittent, and headwater
stream systems and vernal pools. Headwater streams support rare and endangered species, serve as migratory
corridors, and process and store proportionally larger amounts of nutrients and sediment than larger streams.
Mechanisms are now being explored to increase mapping of these systems, to develop model ordinances, and develop
model field protocol for their identification and protection by local governments and organizations.

36

Maryland Department of the Environment

Bay Acidification Task Force
The Maryland General Assembly passed House Bill 118 creating a Task Force to Study the Impact of Ocean
Acidification on State Waters during the 2014 legislative session. The Task Force issued a report in January 2015
calling for monitoring, industry partnerships and collaboration with federal agencies. Maryland is one of the first
East Coast states to take action on ocean acidification, and these proactive efforts will help the state reduce potential
impacts and its coastal businesses prepare for a changing ocean. The report is a much-needed first step to protect
Maryland’s $1.65 billion blue crab, oyster and striped bass seafood industry.
Key findings from Maryland’s Task Force focus on seven areas that should be addressed in order to enhance
acidification understanding, recognize its impacts on Maryland aquatic industries, and leverage resources to
capitalize on federal and other state acidification research and monitoring programs. These areas include:
➢➢ Enhancing monitoring of State waters to quantify scale
➢➢ Patterns and trends of ocean acidification
➢➢ Establishing additional research priorities in estuarine and coastal waters
➢➢ Improving coordination with other state and federal resource managers
➢➢ Focusing on impacts to key species and associated activities
➢➢ Providing direct support to affected industries
➢➢ Pursuing legislative action
➢➢ Improving communications and outreach
Addressing the above seven issue areas identified by the Task Force will position Maryland in both the short – and
long-term to leverage existing monitoring, research and programmatic assets; collect the information necessary to
assess the impacts of acidification on our aquatic resources; communicate the results to various stakeholders to meet
the demands of our expanding aquatic industries; and mitigate the impacts of rising CO2 emissions.
DNR Stream Restoration Policy
In June 2015, the DNR developed criteria to guide its actions to review, support, fund and/or construct stream
restoration projects in order to evaluate the merits of proposed stream restoration actions using the best available
science to support recommendations from the Department’s review of porposals and projects. The policy requires
the assessment of long-term benefits, which, in many cases, includes adaptation to climate change. Stream restoration
projects can lessen the impacts of climate change by improving resilience of streams to flooding, protecting and
restoring aquatic habatits and preventing degradation.
Chesapeake Bay Agreement – Climate Resiliency Management Strategy
In June 2014, representatives from across the region signed the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Agreement, with the
vision of fostering an environmentally and economically sustainible watershed with clean water, abundant life,
conserved lands and access to the water, a vibrant cultural heritage and a diversity of engaged participants. This
agreement marked the first time a climate resiliency goal and associated outcomes were included in the guiding
principles. To guide implementation of the Agreement, the Chesapeake Bay Program Partnership formally released a
Climate Resiliency Management Strategy in July 2015. The strategy lays out the management approach for assessing
climate impacts and vulnerabilities, increasing the capacity of the Bay Program to prepare for and respond to climate
change, implementing adaptation projects and tracking the effectiveness of ane ecologiecal response to adaptation
efforts. A biennial work plan for the Management Strategy will be developed by the Bay Program’s Climate Resilency
Work Group in 2016.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

37

WATER RESOURCES

M

aryland is fortunate to have an abundance of water sources that have historically been adequate for meeting the drinking water needs, as well as the needs for commercial, industrial, and agricultural use. However, during recent droughts, many of the previously believed reliable sources have experienced difficulties
impacting a number of users who are dependent on them. The vulnerability of our resources due to variability in
weather patterns combined with population growth, development, and pollution from manmade contaminants,
pose a risk to sustainability of our water resources as well as Maryland’s future economy and
public health.
In the past 30 years, Maryland’s climate has become wetter and hotter, resulting in more runoff and longer heat
waves. Variability in weather patterns can cause either drought or flooding, threatening the reliability of our
State’s water resources. As a continued consequence of climate change, every area of Maryland could be impacted
by increased flooding, more frequent and longer droughts, more intense storms and greater water demand. The
Chesapeake Bay region is ranked the third most vulnerable area to sea level rise in the nation behind Louisiana and
southern Florida. Current projections indicate that flooding will increase: 100-year floods will increase by 10-20 %
and 10-year storms will increase by 16-30%. There is a greater likelihood that more powerful rain and windstorms will
strike Maryland as ocean waters warm, accompanied by higher storm surges and rainfall. These variations in weather
patterns and sea level rise have the potential to cause water infrastructure damage, flooding of water supply wells and
salt water intrusion, bacteriological and chemical contamination of water sources, algal blooms, increased demand
for irrigation and ultimately decrease in availability of water for Marylanders. Our water resources are finite, and we
should be aware of the fragility of our State’s water resources, and challenges that threatens their sustainability. We
must develop and implement plans to meet the upcoming challenges.
Coastal Plain and Fractured Rock Studies
The MDE has two long-term water supply studies that have been initiated in partnership with the Maryland
Geological Survey, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the DNR Monitoring and Non-Tidal Assessment Division. The
Coastal Plain and Fractured Rock studies were initiated in 2006 and 2009, respectively. These studies will develop
information and tools to help the MDE make sound science-based decisions about water allocations, ensure ongoing
sustainability of the resource, and evaluate the potential impacts of withdrawals on aquatic habitat. In addition, the
studies will provide valuable information to assist local governments as they plan for future growth and water use
needs.
The Coastal Plain study involves a complex aquifer model, which will be capable of modeling various management
scenarios as well as potential impacts of climate change. The MDE is already using two important tools developed
as part of these studies known as the Coastal Plain and Fractured Rock Aquifer Information Systems. These
geographically-referenced tools provide MDE’s permit project managers with up-to-date and easily accessible data,
including geophysical logs, aquifer test information, water levels, well locations, and selected water quality data.
Funding to continue the studies beyond SFY 2012 has not been identified to date.
Developing Source Water Protection Implementation Measures For
Vulnerable Communities
The MDE has delineated areas around each public water supply well or intake where measures should be taken to
protect the water supplies from water quality impacts. More than three hundred communities around the State have
adopted land use ordinances or other measures to protect their water sources. In 2011, MDE contracted with two
private consultants to assist twenty vulnerable groundwater communities in developing and implementing protection
measures. This project was completed in 2013.

38

Maryland Department of the Environment

Tools for Water Utilities
The MDE has produced a publication for public drinking water systems that provides the systems with information
about the possible impacts of climate change on utilities and recommends a variety of adaptation measures to help
water systems prepare for and/or avoid these impacts. The publication has been distributed by mail to all community
water systems in the State.

Easton Utilities Waste Water Treatment Plant — City of Easton

Environmental Site Design
Current Maryland law and regulations require that Environmental Site Design (ESD) be used to the maximum
extent practicable (MEP) to control stormwater from new development and redevelopment. The goal is that ESD
planning techniques and practices are to be implemented to replicate runoff characteristics similar to “woods in good
condition.” These practices reduce runoff and improve water quality and ultimately help buffer communities from the
impacts of rain events.

The Bay Ecosystem - Chesapeake Bay Program — Illustration by Greg Harlin, Wood Ronsaville Harlin, Inc.

POPULATION GROWTH AND INFRASTRUCTURE

M

aryland’s growing population lives and works primarily in a built environment and is reliant on transportation, water, and communication and energy networks, spanning a wide range of landscapes, from
cooler Appalachian Mountains in the west, to low-lying areas of the Eastern Shore. These systems are regulated
in part at the state level, but are more directly influenced by local decision-making. The systems are subject to the
pressures of shifting population and often have unreliable sources of funding required for needed main tenance,
planning and upgrades. The projected effects of climate change, including increases in precipitation variability
and extremes, and winter precipitation and temperature, are likely to affect the frequency, severity and timing of
many existing problems, such as stormwater overflows, buckling of roads, andmalfunctioning train systems due
to heat waves. Historical and current climate conditions will no longer be adequate to guide planning, design,
operation and maintenance decisions.
For sustainable development, planning efforts must reflect and address projections for both population growth and
the effects of climate change. Many areas in Maryland are expected to experience increased growth and development.
Decisions about growth need to factor in climate impact projections. Temperature and precipitation extremes will
likely harm infrastructure and affect human health. Increases in precipitation and the intensity of storm events will
likely exacerbate existing problems, particularly in urban areas. Problems associated with stormwater, flooding, heat
stress and air quality will likely worsen. Building codes, infrastructure design, emergency management and planned
development should be oriented to reduce impacts caused by increased climate variability and extremes. Maryland’s
built environment needs to be reinforced to prepare for new temperature and precipitation regimes. Over time,
changes to the system including the operation, maintenance, design and management of much of the State’s built
infrastructure may become necessary.
Local & State Targeted Growth and Conservation Areas
Climate Change Impact Areas were identified as one of the Local and State Targeted Growth and Conservation
Areas that warrant special attention. Climate Change Impact Areas include: projected 50 and 100-year Sea Level Rise
Inundation Zones, 50-Year Erosion Vulnerable Zones, Category 2 Storm Surge Inundation Zones, Marsh Transition
Zones, Temperature Sensitive Streams, Drought Hazard, and Wildfire Risk Areas. The intent of identifying these areas
is to ensure that the State and local governments make wise decisions about how to protect our natural resources,
and where and how to develop and redevelop in light of climate change induced hazards and risks. State capital
investments consider Climate Impact Areas during the identification of potential sites and the scope of the work
associated with the capital investment. Local governments also are educated on how to use the maps and encouraged
to utilize them in capital improvement planning.

40

Maryland Department of the Environment

Guidelines for reducing climate
change impacts within these areas
include:
➢➢ Promoting the safety and
well-being of Maryland’s
citizens by avoiding
infrastructure capacity
improvements that
increase human exposure
to natural disasters;
➢➢ Avoiding assumption of the
financial risk of development
and redevelopment in
vulnerable or hazardous
coastal areas;
➢➢ Ensuring wise and sound
public investments in
Maryland’s sea level rise
inundation zone. Appropriate
conservation efforts along
Maryland’s shorelines
should not preclude important
investment in the State’s waterdependent infrastructure, such
as our seaports;
➢➢ Analyzing climate change
impacts on historical and
cultural resources and
prioritizing necessary
recovery, documentation, and
protection efforts; and
➢➢ Protecting critical natural
environments from impacts of
climate change (i.e., sea level
rise, temperature increase,
precipitation change) and
climate-induced natural
hazards.

Community Connections
Protocol Development
The DNR has developed an
additional protocol for assessing
land conservation projects based
on their value and ability to connect
people to the land. The assessment
includes a Climate Change
Resilience component, which
considers on-site adaptation benefits
including community storm surge
protection, shoreline stabilization
and restoration, urban tree canopy
protection, and future planned
abandonment and relocation
facilitation. The community
connections protocol and scorecard
will be used for appropriate proposed
projects to be funded by Program
Open Space.
State-wide Land
Preservation and
Recreation Plan
The DNR developed the 2014
State-wide Land Preservation
and Recreation Plan (LPRP) in
coordination with the Maryland
Department of Planning, local
governments, a wide range of
stakeholders, and public input. This
was the first iteration of the LPRP to
provide an analysis of how climate
change may impact Maryland’s
natural and cultural resources, open
space, recreation and tourism, as well
as provide strategies for ensuring
sustainability and increasing
resilience. The LPRP is a working
resource and tool for Statewide
outdoor recreation and open space
planning.

Girl on Chesapeake Bay Tributory —
Maryland State Archive

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

41

TOOLS, RESEARCH AND EDUCATION TO INFORM SOUND DECISIONS

M

aryland managers and decision-makers need the right tools to anticipate and plan for climate change.
Long-term monitoring and research efforts are critical. As Maryland experiences new hydrologic and
temperature conditions, the State will need to gain a better understanding of these conditions. Financial, educational, scientific and political support will also be necessary in order to assess conditions and to research new
ways to build up the resilience of natural and built infrastructure to the impending impacts of climate change.
Investment in education is also essential to teach public officials, planners, and other decision makers how to use
the tools to formulate and implement specific actions. Coordination with the public is necessary, particularly those
most vulnerable and without the necessary resources to respond. In the short-term, there is a critical need to establish
and disseminate state-specific climate data and information in order to develop a common understanding of future
planning needs at both state and local scales. This is an important first step to ensure climate issues are considered
during infrastructure planning, design, construction, and budget processes.
Information Dissemination
Information on the Phase I and II adaptation strategies have been widely disseminated and presented at a variety
of conferences, workshop and stakeholder events. Topic and sector-based fact sheets have been developed and are
available online (http://www.dnr.maryland.gov/climatechange/). DNR and UMCES are both working to widely
disseminate climate change-related data and information to agencies, stakeholders, and the public via existing
networks and social media outlets.
MADE-CLEAR
The recently funded Maryland and Delaware Climate Change Education, Assessment and Research (MADE
CLEAR) program will bring together university faculty, middle school and high school teachers and informal
educators to develop training opportunities in climate education across Maryland and Delaware. The goal will be to
ensure that students graduating from Maryland schools understand the science behind climate change, the choices
available to mitigate and adapt to a changing climate, and professional opportunities related to the green job market.
For more information on MADE-CLEAR, visit: http://www.madeclear.org/
Incorporation of Climate Change Into Education Initiatives
In 2011, the DNR assembled a series of talking points on climate impacts in Maryland to be utilized by its education
staff. As a next step, DNR is including K12 teacher and informal science educator professional development that
incorporates climate change into existing education and outreach programs. DNR is also supporting climate change
interpretation and communication at Maryland State Parks through park ranger and seasonal staff professional
development in climate change comunication techniques. Messages of most relevance to citizens will be used as
appropriate in outreach programs aiming to encourage stewardship actions; while more direct coastal education
programs and materials are being developed for use in classroom settings.
Climate Change Adaptation Needs Assessment, Training and Technical Assistance
The Maryland Chesapeake and Coastal Service (CoastSmart Communities Program & the Coastal Training
Program) and its Partners continue to use the outcomes of the formal needs assessment conducted in 2012 to
guide programming and routinely conduct informal need assessments of local government staff to continue to
understand the evolving needs. Since 2012 there has been a series of targeted trainings and courses offered through
the Chesapeake and Coastal Service and Partners. A sample of courses offered includes: Introduction to the
Community Rating System Part I & II, Climate Adaptation for Coastal Communities, CoastSmart Communities
Scorecard Facilitation, Be Flood Read, Conducting Local Governments to Share Ideas to Reduce Flooding, and
FEMA’s Managing Floodplain Development through the National Flood Insurance Program, in addition to others.
An updated needs assessment is being considered in 2016 to further understand the information/technical assistance
needs so that CCS and its partners can meet those in the most efficient way possible.

42

Maryland Department of the Environment

STRENGTHENING CLIMATE ACTION IN MARYLAND

O

n November 19, 2014, Executive Order 01.01.2014.14 (EO) was issued to expand the membership, mission and work of the Maryland Commission on Climate Change (MCCC). As one of four working groups
organized under the MCCC, the EO establishes the following charge for the Adaptation and Response Working
Group (ARWG):
➢➢ Strengthen and maintain existing State action plans to further address, prepare for and adapt to
the consequences of climate change;
➢➢ Reestablish the Adaptation and Response Working Group, as needed;
➢➢ Convene regular Working Group meetings to ensure that sufficient progress is being made
across all sectors and communities in Maryland; and
➢➢ Establish a comprehensive and accountable annual work plan that set annual goals and
performance benchmarks, and prioritizes new and existing climate change adaptation actions
and initiatives.

Under the umbrella of the MCCC, the efforts of the ARWG will be undertaken in conjunction with the efforts of
the MCCC’s Mitigation (MWG), Scientific and Technical (STWG), and Education, Communication and Outreach
(ECO) Working Groups.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

43

Boats at the dock — Jane Hawkey, IAN Image Library (www.ian.umces.edu/imagelibrary/)

PRIORITIZING NEW AND EXISTING CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION ACTIONS AND INITIATIVES
Sea Level Rise and Coastal Storms

Priority
Recommendations

Lead Agency
(suggested)

Key Partners
(suggested)

Implementation
Priority

Implementation
Timeframe

Strongly encourage the integration
of coastal erosion, coastal storm,
and sea level rise adaptation and
response strategies into existing
state and local
policies and programs.

DNR/MDP

MDA, MDE,
MDOT, DHCD,
local governments

High

Ongoing

Develop and implement State
and local adaptation policies (i.e.,
protect, retreat, abandon) for
vulnerable public and private sector
infrastructure.

DNR

MDP, MDE, MDOT,
local governments

High

Ongoing

DHCD/DNR

MDP, MDOT, MDE,
local governments

High

Ongoing

Develop and implement long-range
plans to minimize the economic
impacts of sea level rise to natural
resource-based industries.

COMMERCE

DNR

Medium

Long

Establish an independent Blue Ribbon Advisory Committee to advise
the State of the risks that climate
change poses to the availability and
affordability of insurance.

MIA

DNR

High

Complete

Recruit, foster, and promote market
opportunities related to climate
change adaptation and response.

COMMERCE

DNR

Low

Long

Action Strategies

Reduce Impact to Existing and Future Growth and Development

Take action now to protect human habitat and infrastructure
from future risks

Strengthen building codes and
construction techniques for new
infrastructure and buildings in
vulnerable coastal areas.

Financial and Economic Well-Being

Minimize risks and shift to
sustainable
economies
and investments

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

45

Priority
Recommendations

Lead Agency
(suggested)

Key Partners
(suggested)

Implementation
Priority

Implementation
Timeframe

Strengthen coordination and management across Agencies responsible for human and animal health
and safety.

DHMH

MDA/DNR

High

Ongoing

Conduct Health Impact Assessments to evaluate the public health
consequences of climate change
and sea level rise-related projects
and/or policies.

DHMH

High

Medium

DNR/MDE

High

Medium

Action Strategies

Protection of Human Health, Safety and Welfare

Maximize the safety and wellbeing of Maryland’s citizens in
times of
foreseen and
unforeseen risk

Develop a coordinated plan to
assure adequacy of Vector-borne
Surveillance and Control Programs.

DHMH/
MDA

MDA/MDE
DNR/MDP

Natural Resource Protection

Retain and expand forests, wetlands and beaches for protection against coastal flooding

46

Identify high priority protection
areas and strategically and costeffectively direct protection and
restoration actions.

DNR

MDE

High

Ongoing

Develop and implement a package
of appropriate regulations, financial
incentives, educational, outreach,
and enforcement approaches to
retain and expand forests and wetlands in areas suitable for long-term
survival.

DNR

MDE/MDA

High

Ongoing

Promote and support sustainable
shoreline and buffer area management practices.

DNR

MDE/MDA

High

Ongoing

Maryland Department of the Environment

Priority
Recommendations

Lead Agency
(suggested)

Key Partners
(suggested)

Implementation
Priority

Implementation
Timeframe

Strengthen federal, state, local, and
regional observation systems to
improve the detection of biological,
physical, and chemical responses to
climate change and sea level rise.

DNR/UMD

NOAA/EPA

High

Ongoing

Update and maintain state-wide sea
level rise mapping, modeling, and
monitoring products.

DNR

NOAA

High

Ongoing

Utilize new and existing educational, outreach, training and capacity
building programs to disseminate
information and resources related
to climate change and sea level rise.

DNR/UMD

MDE/MDP

High

Ongoing

Develop state-wide sea level rise
planning guidance to advise adaptation and response planning at the
local level.

DNR

MDP,
local governments

High

Ongoing

Develop and implement a system
of performance measures to track
Maryland’s success at reducing its
vulnerability to climate change and
sea level rise.

DNR

Other State agencies

Medium

Ongoing

Pursue the development of adaptation strategies to reduce climate
change vulnerability among affected sectors, including agriculture,
forestry, water resources, aquatic
and terrestrial ecosystems, and human health.

DNR/UMD

Other State agencies

High

Ongoing

Action Strategies

Adaptation and Response Toolbox

Provide State and local governments the tools to anticipate
and plan for sea level rise and
climate change

Future Steps and Directions

State and local governments’
commitment of resources and
time to assure progress

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

47

PHASE II: BUILDING SOCIETAL, ECONOMIC AND ECOLOGICAL RESILIANCE IMPLEMENTATION GUIDANCE

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Human Health

Conduct vulnerability assessments to gain a better understanding of risk and inform
preventative measures.

Assess potential health threats and
the sufficiency of Maryland’s
response capacity.

DHMH

MEMA

TBD

TBD

TBD

Evaluate impacts to food safety
and availability.

DHMH

MDA

Medium

Medium-Term

TBD

Assess the vulnerability of Maryland’s populations and communities to changing health
threats.

DHMH

MDP, MDE

Medium

Long-Term

TBD

Identify potential barriers to effective emergency response.

DHMH

MEMA

High

Medium-Term

TBD

Improve response capacity through the development of new or expanded programs.

DHMH

MEMA

Medium

Long-Term

High

DHMH

MEMA

Medium

TBD

TBD

DHMH

MEMA

Medium

Long-Term

TBD

Pursue opportunities to enhance protection
of Maryland’s “green infrastructure.”

DNR

DHMH, MDP

TBD

TBD

TBD

Improve the resolution and availability of
health and population data.

DHMH

UMD, MDP, CDC, EPA

High

Ongoing

High

Analyze health and population data along
with other spatially explicit information (e.g.,
land use, air quality, water quality).

DHMH

DNR, MDP, MDE, EPA,
CDC

High

Ongoing

High

Address climate-related health risks in hazard
Integrate impact reduction strate- mitigation and emergency response plans.
gies into State and local planning
Support community engagement in planning
practices.
and emergency response decisions.

Streamline and revise data collection and information dissemination channels.

48

Maryland Department of the Environment

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Agriculture

Increase crop diversity, protect
against pests and disease, and
intensify water management.

Strengthen applied research, risk
communication and technical
support.

Enhance existing Best Management Practices and land conservation targets.

Promote diversification of crop species and
varieties.

MDA

UMD – Extension
(UME), Local Agricultural Producers

Low

Ongoing

TBD

Intensify water management and conservation through research, funding and incentives.

MDA

UME, MDE, DNR, USDA,
EPA, Bay Trust

High

Ongoing

High

Protect against incoming pests, weeds and
disease.

MDA

UME

Low

Ongoing

TBD

Support innovative solutions that foster
adaptation and also reduce energy costs and
carbon footprints.

MDA

UME, MEA

Medium

Ongoing

TBD

Enhance dissemination channels to improve
the relay of climate information.

MDA

UME, SCDs, NRCS,
NGOs, commodity orgs.

Low

Ongoing

TBD

Identify opportunities to support the transition of farm and agricultural practices.

MDA

UME, NRCS, Farm Credit, Insurance Industry

Low

Long-Term

TBD

Enhance emergency response and risk management.

MDA

UME, Farm Credit,
Insurance Industry

Low

Ongoing

TBD

Evaluate the effectiveness of BMPs under
future climate change scenarios

MDA

UMD, DNR, MDE

Medium

Ongoing

TBD

Assess and revise targets for agricultural land
preservation.

MDA

Local and Regional
Land Trusts

Low

Ongoing

TBD

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

49

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

High

Medium-Term

Medium

High

Medium-Term

Low

Medium

Medium-Term

Low

High

Ongoing

Low

High

Ongoing

Medium

Forests & Terrestrial Ecosystems
DNR
Integrate climate data and models into existing resource assessments and spatial planning frameworks.

EPA, CBP, USDOI, USFWS, NGOs
NASA
NOAA

DNR
Incorporate climate change adaptation strategies into state resource management plans.

MDP, EPA, CBP, USDOI,
USFWS,
NOAA
USFS
NGOs

DNR
Expand land protection and
restoration and revise
targeting priorities.

Collaborate with federal partners
to support regional and national
adaptation planning.

EPA, CBP, USDOI,
USFWS,
NOAA
USFS
NGOs

Update existing land protection
targeting programs and project
evaluation protocols.

EPA, CBP, USDOI,
USFWS,
DNR

NOAA
USFS
NGOs

Develop climate change adaptation guidance
and technical tools that local
governments could consider as part of
its local planning.

50

Maryland Department of the Environment

DNR

MDP, UMD
Cooperative
Extension

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

High

Ongoing

Medium

Forests & Terrestrial Ecosystems (Continued)
MDP,

Adjust management practices
and reduce existing stressors.

Adjust management practices
and reduce existing stressors
(Continued)

MDE

Strengthen State and local programs to slow
the loss and fragmentation of forest and terrestrial ecosystems to new development.

DNR

Review and revise best forestry management
practices.

DNR

UMD – Cooperative
Extension

Medium

Medium-Term

Medium

Continue to support incorporation of the
policies and strategies of Maryland’s Sustainable Forestry Act of 2009 into state and local
planning decisions.

DNR

State Forest Conservancy District Boards

High

Ongoing

Low

Medium

Medium-Term

Medium

Medium

Short-Term

High

Evaluate sustainable forestry certification programs for opportunities to enhance climate
resiliency.

Improve capacity to manage and respond to
stressors exacerbated by climate change.

MDOT
USFWS, USFS, EPA, CBP,
NGOs

Sustainable Forestry
Initiative,
DNR

Forestry Boards,
Forest Stewardship
Councils

DNR

MDA, Maryland Invasive Species Council,
Forest Health Emergency Contingency
Program

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

51

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Forests & Terrestrial Ecosystems (Continued)

Foster stewardship on
private lands.

Develop new tools to guide adaptation stewardship activities on private lands.

DNR

Forest Stewardship
Councils, UMD Cooperative Extension

High

Short-Term

Medium

Integrate adaptation strategies into
existing programs.

DNR

USFS, Forest Stewardship Councils, UMD
Cooperative Extension

High

Short-Term

Medium

High

Short-Term

Medium

Develop new conservation easement mechanisms to promote adaptation
stewardship activities on private lands.

52

Maryland Department of the Environment

DNR

USFS, Forest Stewardship Councils, UMD
Cooperative Extension
MDA

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

High

Ongoing

Low

Medium

Medium-Term

Medium

High

Ongoing

Medium

High

Medium-Term

Low

High

Long-Term

High

Medium

Short-Term

Low

High

Short-Term

High

Bay & Aquatic Ecosystems

Advance protection
of at-risk species
and habitats.

Restore critical bay & aquatic
habitats to enhance resilience.

Revise state-level protection targeting programs to reflect climate change adaptation
priorities.

DNR

Develop new protection and conservation
mechanisms to promote adaptation stewardship activities on private lands.

DNR

Amend legal mechanisms to designate and
protect temperature-sensitive streams.

DNR

Implement an adaptive management approach.

DNR

Proactively pursue, design and construct
habitat restoration projects to enhance
the resilience of bay, aquatic and terrestrial
ecosystems.

DNR

Conduct an audit of state-owned lands to
identify habitat restoration potential for enhancing ecosystem resilience and increasing
on-site carbon sequestration.

DNR

Increase on-the-ground implementation of
existing stream restoration practices.

DNR

UMD, USACE, USGS,
USFWS, NOAA, NGO’s
UMD, USACE, USGS,
USDOI
USFWS, NOAA, NGOs
MDE,EPA
MDE, MDOT,
MDA, MDP, Federal
Partners, NGOs
USACE, USGS, USFWS,
NOAA, EPA, CBP, NGOs

USGS, EPA, CBP, USFWS

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

53

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Bay & Aquatic Ecosystems (Continued)
Remove barriers to habitat connectivity.
Reduce existing
stressors.

Foster a collective response to
climate change.

54

DNR

MDE, USFWS, NOAA

High

Ongoing

High

DNR, MDE

MDP

High

Ongoing

High

Prepare for new or expanding ranges of
invasive species.

DNR

MDA, Maryland Invasive Species Council,
USFWS

High

Ongoing

Medium

Adjust bay and watershed restoration priorities in light of a changing climate.

DNR

MDE, UMD, NOAA,
USGS, EPA, Penn State,
USFWS

Medium

Ongoing in
Coastal Plain

Medium

Integrate both adaptation and mitigation
reduction strategies into natural resource
management plans and programs.

DNR

USFWS, NOAA, NGOs

High

Short-Term

Low

Revise fishery and wildlife management to
build climate resilient safeguards.

DNR

USFWS, NOAA, NGOs

High

Long-Term

Medium

Increase collaboration between federal, state,
local and regional climate change adaptation
partners.

DNR

UMD, NOAA, USGS,
EPA, NGOs

High

Short-Term

Low

Explore ways to reduce impervious
surface cover.

Maryland Department of the Environment

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Water Resources

Ensure long-term safe and adequate water supply for humans
and ecosystems.

Pursue examination and implementation of
the recommendations of the 2008 “Wolman
Committee” report.

MDE

DNR, MDP, local govts.,
federal partners

High

Ongoing

High

Manage water supply, considering future
climate and population.

MDE

MDP, DNR, local govts.

High

Ongoing

TBD

Enhance planning and coordination within
the water resource community.

MDE

MDP, local govts.

High

Long-Term

TBD

Encourage water suppliers to evaluate and
improve their resilience.

MDE

Water utilities, Local
govts., MEMA, EPA

High

Long-Term

TBD

Promote demand management and water
conservation practices.

MDE

Local govts., MDA, Business community

Medium

Ongoing

TBD

Assess, target and protect high-quality water
recharge areas.

MDE

DNR, MDP

Medium

Long-Term

TBD

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

55

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Low

Long-Term

TBD

Medium

Long-Term

TBD

Low

Short-Term

Low

Medium

Long-Term

TBD

Water Resources (Continued)

Reduce the impacts of flooding
and stormwater.

56

Encourage the removal of vulnerable or
high-hazard water supply and treatment
infrastructure.

MDE

Prevent inundation and overflow of on-site
disposal systems.

MDE

Revise Clean Water Revolving Fund criteria.

MDE

Invest in an improved understanding and
communication of flood probabilities and
hazards.

MDE

Maryland Department of the Environment

Water utilities,
local govts.
Local govts.

DNR

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Population Growth & Infrastructure

Ensure safety, clean water, clean
air and sufficient infrastructure.

Determine funding needed for future infrastructure needs.

MDOT, MDE

MEMA, DGS, Utilities,
Local Govts.

Medium

Ongoing

TBD

Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the
vulnerability of Maryland’s infrastructure.

MDOT, MDE

MEMA, DGS, Utilities,
Local Govts.

Medium

Ongoing

High

Develop a “lead by example” investment
policy to guide state investments.

DNR

All State Agencies

High

Short-Term

Low

Reduce regional air quality impacts in Maryland.

MDE

MDOT, EPA, MPOs,
Other states

High

Medium-Term

High

MEA,

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

57

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

Low

TBD

TBD

Population Growth & Infrastructure (Continued)

Plan for precipitation-related
weather extremes and
increase resilience to rising temperatures.

58

DHMH

Assess the economic costs resulting from
severe weather events.

MDOT, MEMA

Identify state investment needs to prepare for
future weather emergencies.

MDOT, MEMA

Utility Providers, Local
Govts.

Low

TBD

TBD

Accelerate use of improved stormwater management strategies and environmental site
design (ESD).

MDE

DGS, DNR, MDOT, UMD,
Local Govts.

High

Ongoing

High

Enhance the preparedness of transportation
system and utility providers.

MDOT, MEMA

PSC, MEA, Utility Providers, MPOs,

Low

TBD

TBD

Develop operation contingency plans for
critical infrastructure.

MDOT, MEMA

Utility Providers

Medium

Ongoing

TBD

Increase urban tree canopy.

DNR

Local Govts.

High

Ongoing

High

Strengthen building and infrastructure design
standards.

DHCD

Local Govts., MDOT,
MEA, MDE, MEMA

High

Ongoing

TBD

Maryland Department of the Environment

Utility Providers, Local
Govts.

Implementation

Priority
Recommendations

Action
Strategies

Lead
Agency
(suggested)

Key
Partners
(suggested)

Priority

Timeframe

Potential
Cost

High

Long-term

Medium

Population Growth & Infrastructure (Continued)

Institutionalize consideration of
climate change.

Support the integration of climate change
adaptation strategies into state and local policies and programs.

MDP

Provide technical assistance to jurisdictions
that want to integrate climate vulnerability
data into state and local spatial planning
frameworks.

MDP

DNR

High

Long-term

Medium

Assist local governments considering climate
change issues in combination with ongoing
growth and development planning efforts.

MDP

Sustainable Growth
Commission, Local
Govts.

High

Short-term

Low

Explore incentives to promote sound planning practices

MDP

MEA, UMD

High

Medium-term

TBD

Investigate the impacts of climate change on
future energy needs.

DNR

MDE, MEA, MDA, COMMERCE, MDP, MDOT

High

Ongoing

Medium

DNR, MEA

MDE, MDA, COMMERCE, MDP, MDOT,
Critical Area Commission, UMD

High

Ongoing

Medium

Create a framework and standards for the
placement and use of alternative energy.

59

Maryland Department of the Environment

DNR, MEMA
MDE

RECOMMENDING SHORT – AND LONGER-TERM STRATEGIES AND INITIATIVES TO
BETTER ADDRESS THE CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Developing Broader Public / Private and Federal, State and Local Partnerships
From 2007-2014, the ARWG has primarily been comprised of representatives of the following state agencies: DNR,
MDE, MDP, MHT, DHCD, DoIT, MES, MEMA, DBM, DHMH, MDOT, MPA, SHA, MDA, MIA, MEA, DGS and
the University System of Maryland. The ARWG has also formed a number of sector-based working groups to assist
with implementation of specific action items, including the development of the Phase I and II Adaptation Strategies.
Both state agency and stakeholder representatives have participated on each of the ARWG’s underlying working
groups. ARWG members will engage in broadening stakeholder representation to include business and industry
representatives with specific expertise in the areas of the ARWG.
Addressing The Challenge That Low Income and Otherwise Vulnerable Communities Will
Likely Be Disproportionally Impacted By Climate Change (EO Task E(3)C)
Climate change poses unique and often more devastating impacts to vulnerable and low-income communities.
These communities already face challenges such as outdated infrastructure, poor healthcare, and lack of resources,
which are then exacerbated by the effects of climate change. The ARWG will work with vulnerable and low-income
communities in Maryland, the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities, and the
Education and Outreach Working Group to help these communities better adapt to the impacts of climate change.
Assessing The Impacts That Climate Change Will Likely Have On The State’s Economy, Revenues and Investment Decisions (EO Task E(3) D)
The ARWG will work to explore what impacts that climate change will likely have on the State’s economy, revenues,
and investment decisions (EO Task E(3)d) by utilizing Maryland’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act Plan Report
(2013), which addresses the cost of inaction. The report focuses on five major areas of economic loss if no climate
measures are implemented: 1) coastal lands, infrastructures and ecosystems, 2) tourism, 3) agriculture, 4) public
health and 5) energy. Additionally, the ARWG will look to integrate, where appropriate, topics or concepts from other
states’ reports (i.e., New York, Florida, and Washington) into Maryland’s purview.
Delivering Tools and Assistance For Local Governments (EO Task E(3)(F))
ARWG members will assess the delivery of tools and assistance to local governments to support communityscale climate vulnerability assessments and the development and integration of specific strategies for enhancing
resilience to the impacts of climate change into local plans and ordinances. The ARWG will explore introducing
programs, similar to CoastSmart, to non-coastal communities to address issues such as the intersection of climate and
stormwater, as well as riverine and nuisance flooding.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

60

STATE ENHANCEMENT ACTIONS
Maryland Environmental Policy Act Guidelines
In November 2014, Executive Order 01.01.2014.14 tasked the DNR to issue Maryland Environmental Policy Act
(MEPA) guidelines that require the consideration of climate change factors, including both mitigation and adaptation.
DNR is working to incorporate these changes into the MEPA guidelines by integrating climate change mitigation
and adaptation into the consideration of environmental effects and alternatives of proposed state actions. In addition
to revising the guidelines, DNR will consider adding adaptation and mitigation questions to the Environmental
Assessment Form for proposed state actions.
State Planning, Regulatory and Fiscal Program Analysis
Executive Order 01.01.2014.14 tasked all state agencies to “review State planning, regulatory and fiscal programs to
identify and recommend actions to more fully integrate the consideration of Maryland’s GHG reduction goal and
the impacts of climate change.” State agencies will analyze state funded programs to determine whether additional
executive, legislative or administrative requirements will be necessary to incorporate consideration of climate change
adaptation measures.
CONCLUSIONS

T

he information presented in this chapter is not intended to be a final work product or strategy on climate
change adaptation for the State of Maryland. It should be viewed as “living document” that provides a
snapshot of where the State currently stands in terms of implementing its broad scale climate change adaptation planning efforts. The chapter is intended to provide the basis for guiding and prioritizing future state-level
activities with respect to both climate science and adaptation policy within short to medium-term timeframes
(i.e., 1 – 5 years). It is envisioned that the information in this chapter will also serve as a framework not only to
direct state-action, but also to engage policy-makers and stakeholders, and facilitate collaboration among federal,
regional and
local partners.
Adaptation planning efforts at the state-level will be routinely reviewed and updated as new climate science and
information becomes available and we gain a better understanding of how to adapt to climate change. State agencies
leads, as well as internal and external partners, will remain a key part of advancing climate change adaptation planning
in Maryland. In closing, it goes without saying that further detailed planning, stakeholder engagement, and funding
will be required to build Maryland’s ecological, societal and economic resilience to the impacts of climate change.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

61

Highways in Baltimore — Jane Thomas, IAN Image Library

4
Inventory &
Forecast

THE INVENTORY AND
FORECAST
PROCESS OVERVIEW

T

he Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act of 2009
(GGRA) required the State to
develop and implement the 2012
GGRA Plan to achieve a 25 percent
reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions from a 2006 baseline by
the year 2020. The GGRA specifically requires the development of
a baseline inventory for 2006. This
inventory was developed based
on six categories of heat retaining
gases: carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride,
hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbon. Collectively, these gases
are referred to as carbon dioxide
equivalent, or CO2e. The 25 percent
reduction is subtracted from the
baseline to create a target level of
emissions for 2020.

To calculate the reductions needed
to achieve the target, a projected
inventory for the year 2020 was
developed to estimate emissions due
to growth from “business-as-usual”
activities (i.e. estimated emissions
in the absence of any climate control
programs). The growth emissions
added to the emissions needed to
achieve the 25 percent reduction are
the total emission reductions needed
for success of the 2012 GGRA
Plan. The emissions estimates,
assumptions, and methodologies are
explained further in this chapter. The
full report and emissions inventory,is
located on the MDE web page at:
http://www.mde.state.md.us/
programs/Air/ClimateChange/
Pages/GreenhouseGasInventory.
aspx
Emissions inventories are the
foundation of air quality decisions;
it is essential the data be as accurate
as possible. Inventory quality is

critical since the inventory assists
decision makers in defining realistic
regulations and reduction strategies.
GHG Emissions Reporting
Requirements in Maryland
Federal regulations established
under the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA) Acid
Rain program require large sources
of air pollutants to report carbon
dioxide emissions data quarterly
to EPA’s Clean Air Markets
Division (CAMD) public access
database. These sources are mainly
electric generating units. The data
reported is obtained through direct
measurement of carbon dioxide
emissions by monitors located in
the exhaust stacks of the sources.
These instruments collect data
continuously. In the absence of a
monitoring system, sources calculate
the amount of carbon dioxide using
an accepted methodology and

then report this into CAMD. These
regulations include standards for
monitoring, recordkeeping, and
reporting.
The GHG Inventory
and Forecast
Emissions inventories are essential
to developing environmental
policies. The quality of a statespecific inventory is vital to the
process if Maryland expects to
set and achieve realistic pollution
reduction goals. A baseline GHG
inventory will pinpoint the business
sectors that contribute to Maryland’s
GHG emissions, identifying where
priorities should be placed in the
development of climate policies. It
also is necessary to determine what
Maryland’s future GHG emissions
will be through the use of a forecast
and modeling. Since GHG emissions
may increase in the future, Maryland
can take advantage of any costeffective opportunities for early GHG
reductions that may exist.
The Maryland General Assembly
passed the GGRA in 2009.1 The
GGRA requires MDE to prepare
and publish an updated inventory
of statewide GHG emissions for
calendar year 2006 and develop
a projected business-as-usual
inventory for calendar year 2020 on
or before June 1, 2011.2 This GGRA
requirement was met and can be
found on the MDE web page. The
GGRA also requires an updated
inventory every three years, starting
in 2011. These periodic inventories
are the primary tool that MDE will
use to track emission reduction
progress.

1

Environment Article, Title 2, Subtitle 12,
“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions”, §§21201 – 2-1211, Annotated Code of Maryland
2
Id., §2-1203.

MDE will complete the 2014
inventory by the end of this year.
The GGRA identified 2006 as the
base year for Maryland’s process and
as the year for the first compliancequality inventory. Since Maryland
GHG data existed for 2006, using
2006 as the base year for Maryland’s
GHG inventory made sense from a
resource perspective
Steps to Conducting a
GHG Inventory
To comply with this mandate, MDE
prepared a report that estimates the
statewide emissions of GHGs for
calendar year 2006 and a business–
as-usual projected inventory for
calendar year 2020. The report and
the emissions inventory is divided
into seven major source categories
that contribute to GHGs emissions
in Maryland and can be found in its
entirety on the MDE web page. The
seven major source categories are:
➢➢ Electricity use and supply
➢➢ Residential, commercial and
industrial buildings fossil fuel
combustion (RCI)
➢➢ Transportation
➢➢ Industrial processes
➢➢ Fossil fuel industry, including
fugitive emissions from GHGs
released from leakage
➢➢ Waste management
➢➢ Agriculture
The inventory also includes forestry
and land use as a “sink” category
based on its carbon sequestration.3
3

As defined by EPA, terrestrial carbon sequestrations is “... the process through which CO2
from the atmosphere is absorbed by trees,
plants and crops through photosynthesis,
and stored as carbon in biomass (tree trunks,
branches, foliage and roots) and soils. The
term ‘sinks’ is also used to refer to forests,
croplands, and grazing lands and their ability
to sequester carbon. Agriculture and forestry
activities can also release CO2 to the atmosphere. A carbon sink, therefore, occurs when

Maryland’s man-made GHG
emissions and terrestrial sinks for
carbon storage were estimated for
the base year 2006 using a set of
generally accepted principles and
guidelines for State GHG emissions,
relying to the extent possible on
Maryland-specific input data.
The projections are based on the
application of appropriate growth
factors to the base year GHG
emission inventory. Growth factors
associated with the emissions
projections are described in detail in
the report. The projected inventories
were based on a business-as-usual
forecast as required in GGRA;
therefore, to the extent possible,
no control or reduction programs
were taken into consideration in the
estimation. Programs like RGGI and
EmPOWER Maryland that were
implemented after the 2006 base year
are credited toward the 25 percent
reduction requirement.
The inventory and forecast cover
the six types of gases included in
the U.S. Greenhouse Gas Inventory
for 2006: carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons, and sulfur
hexafluoride. A scale has been
developed to allow the comparison of
all the GHGs on an equivalent basis.
Carbon dioxide was selected as the
compound to which all others would
be equated since carbon dioxide is by
far the most prevalent GHG and has
been identified as having the Global
Warming Potential of 1. The goals,
inventory and reductions in the 2012
GGRA Plan are expressed as CO2e
based on the conversions below.

carbon sequestration is greater than carbon
releases over some time period.” www.epa.
gov/sequestration/faq.html

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

65

Global Warming Potentials of Greenhouse Gases
Global Warming
Potential

GHG Pollutant
Carbon Dioxide

1

Methane

21

Nitrous Oxide

310

Sulfur Hexafluoride

23,900

Perfluorocarbons

9,200

Hydrochlorofluorocarbons

11,700

Maryland has used the global warming potentials for the GHG pollutants
established by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

The following figure provides a graphic representation of the relative proportions of the major sectors of the GHG
inventory for the 2006 base year and the 2020 projection year respectively. The following chart provides a summary
of the base year and projection year GHG emissions for Maryland for the years 2006, 2010, 2015, and 2020. Activities
in Maryland accounted for approximately 107.2 million metric tons of gross4 CO2e emissions (consumption basis) in
2006, an amount equal to about 1.5 percent of total U.S. gross GHG emissions (7,054.2 million metric tons of CO2e).5
CO2 Emissions by Activity
2006 Baseline and 2020 Projected Business-As-Usual (BAU)

135.7
MMtCO2e
(Gross)

150

120

107.2
MMtCO2e
(Gross)

28%

Transportation Onroad
RCI Fuel Use

90

28%

Electricity Use

14%

Waste Management
16%

Agriculture

60

40%

Industrial Processes

39%

Fossil Fuel Industry

30

0

7%
5%

2006
Baseline

4

2% 2%
1%

2% 1%
8%
6%

Transportation Nonroad

1%

2020
Projected
Business as Usual

Excluding GHG emissions removed due to forestry and other land uses
The national emissions used for these comparisoons are based on 2006 emissions from Inventory of US Greebhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks:
1990-2006, April 15, 2008, US EPA #430-R-08-005, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html
5

66

Maryland Department of the Environment

Maryland 2006 Base Year and Projected 2020 GHG Emissions, by Sector
MMtCO2e

2006

2010

2011

2015

2020

Energy Use (CO2, CH4, N2O)

Explanatory Notes for
Projections

95.76

103.35

90.97

111.78

120.97

Electricity Use (Consumption)

42.48

46.63

37.86

50.16

54.42

PSC Projections

Electricity Production (in-state)

32.16

34.04

24.55

35.91

37.78

MEA Statistical Analysis

Coal

28.28

28.85

21.93

29.57

30.29

MEA Statistical Analysis

Natural Gas

3.65

4.55

2.42

5.70

6.85

Output Optimization.

Oil

0.24

0.64

0.20

0.64

0.64

Output Optimization.

Wood

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Population growth

MSW / LFG

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Population growth

Net Imported Electricity

10.31

12.59

13.31

14.25

16.85

Power Balance

Residential/Commercial/Industrial (RCI)
Fuel Use

16.87

17.24

17.00

18.07

18.84

Coal

3.00

3.17

2.96

3.68

4.20

Household growth

Natural Gas & LPG

9.21

9.42

9.98

9.72

10.00

Household growth

Petroleum

4.58

4.57

3.95

4.57

4.56

Household growth
Household growth

Wood

0.09

0.09

0.11

0.09

0.09

Transportation

35.47

38.66

35.27

42.68

46.78

Onroad Gasoline

23.76

25.75

22.53

28.23

30.71

MOVES Modeling

Nonroad Gasoline

1.04

1.05

2.74

1.06

1.06

Various

Onroad Diesel

5.91

6.47

5.72

7.18

7.88

MOVES Modeling

Nonroad Diesel

1.50

1.60

2.16

1.73

1.85

Various

Rail

0.24

0.25

0.19

0.27

0.30

EPA RIA

Marine Vessels (Gas & Oil)

1.00

1.21

0.35

1.48

1.75

EPA RIA

Lubricants, Natural Gas, and LPG

0.30

0.34

0.46

0.40

0.47

Industrial Employment

Jet Fuel and Aviation Gasoline

1.72

1.98

1.13

2.34

2.76

Aircraft Operations

0.94

0.82

0.84

0.87

0.92

Fossil Fuel Industry
Natural Gas Industry

0.81

0.69

0.69

0.74

0.79

Industrial Employment

Oil Industry

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Industrial Employment

Coal Mining

0.13

0.13

0.14

0.13

0.13

Production Growth

Industrial Processes

7.44

8.21

4.40

9.21

10.24

Cement Manufacture

1.48

1.57

0.92

1.83

2.09

Production Growth

Limestone and Dolomite

0.11

0.15

0.09

0.18

0.21

Production Growth

Soda Ash

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.05

0.05

Production Growth

Iron and Steel

3.60

3.65

0.91

3.75

3.85

Production Growth

ODS Substitutes

1.97

2.65

2.28

3.35

4.04

Population Growth

Electricity Transmission and Dist.

0.23

0.14

0.17

0.05

0.00

Population Growth

Semiconductor Manufacturing

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Industrial Employment

Ammonia and Urea Production

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Industrial Employment

Aluminum Production

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Industrial Employment

1.77

1.85

1.66

1.79

1.86

Enteric Fermentation

0.42

0.44

0.37

0.42

0.51

Population Growth

Manure Management

0.32

0.32

0.32

0.30

0.29

Population Growth

1.02

1.08

0.95

1.06

1.05

Population Growth

Agricultural Burning

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

Population Growth

Urea Fertilizer Usage

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

No Growth

Agriculture

Agricultural Soils

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

67

MMtCO2e

Explanatory Notes for
Projections

2006

2010

2011

2015

2020

Waste Management

2.26

2.34

2.26

2.48

2.60

Waste Combustion

1.29

1.34

1.43

1.42

1.49

Population Growth

Landfills

0.39

0.40

0.56

0.43

0.45

Population Growth

Wastewater Management

0.54

0.56

0.56

0.59

0.62

Population Growth

Residential Open Burning

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.04

0.04

Household Growth

107.23

115.75

99.28

125.26

135.68

7.95%

-7.41%

16.82%

26.53%

-11.79

-11.8

-11.85

-11.8

-11.8

Gross Emissions
(Consumption Basis,
Excludes Sinks)
Increase gross emissions relative to 2006

Emissions Sinks
Forested Landscape

-10.45

-10.45

-10.45

-10.45

-10.45

Urban Forestry and Land Use

-1.33

-1.33

-1.43

-1.33

-1.33

Agricultural Soils (Cultivation Practices)

-0.05

-0.05

-0.02

-0.05

-0.05

Forest Fires

0.05

0.04

0.05

0.04

0.04

95.44

104.00

87.44

113.51

123.93

8.97%

-8.38%

18.94%

29.85%

Net Emissions (Consumption Basis)
(Including forestry, land use &
agricultural sinks)
Increase net emissions relative to 2006

Estimates of carbon sinks within Maryland’s forests, including urban forests and land use changes, are also included
in the inventory and projection. Current estimates indicate that about 11.8 million metric tons of CO2e were stored in
Maryland forest biomass and agricultural soils in 2006. This leads to net emissions of 95.4 million metric tons of CO2e
in Maryland in 2006.
There were three principal sources of GHG emissions in Maryland in 2006: electricity consumption, transportation,
and RCI fossil fuel use. Electricity consumption accounted for 43 percent of gross GHG emissions, transportation for
30 percent and RCI fuel use accounted for 17 percent.
Under the reference case projections, Maryland’s gross GHG emissions continue to grow and are projected to climb
to about 135 million metric tons of CO2e by 2020. This is approximately 27 percent above 2006 levels.6 Maryland’s
electricity consumption sector is projected to be the largest contributor to future GHG emissions growth in Maryland,
followed by the transportation sector and RCI fossil fuel use.
Some data gaps exist in this analysis, particularly for the reference case projections. Key refinements include review
and revision of key emissions drivers that will be major determinants of Maryland’s future GHG emissions (such as
the growth rate assumptions for electricity generation and consumption, transportation fuel use, and RCI fuel use).
The full report provides the detailed methods, data sources, and assumptions for each GHG sector. Also included are
descriptions of significant uncertainties in emission estimates or methods, and suggested next steps for refinement of
the inventory.
Source and Sink Categories
The full inventory and forecast report describes the inventory procedures MDE used to compile the 2006 base year
emissions inventory of the six GHG pollutants. The emission sources are divided into the following seven source
categories:
➢➢ Electricity Supply
➢➢ Residential, Commercial, and Industrial Buildings (RCI) Fuel Combustion
➢➢ Transportation Energy Use
➢➢ Industrial Processes
6
Note that electricity sector emission reductions attributable to the Maryland CO2 Budget Trading Program are not included in the reference case
emissisons inventory.

68

Maryland Department of the Environment

➢➢ Fossil Fuel Production Industry
➢➢ Agriculture
➢➢ Waste Management
As noted earlier, the inventory also includes forestry and land use as a sink category based on its carbon
sequestration.The inventory has been calculated on a statewide basis and has not been allocated to the county level
unless otherwise stated. Brief descriptions of each emission source and sink category are presented in the following
paragraphs:
Electricity Supply
The electricity supply sector accounts for GHG emissions occurring as a result of the combustion of fossil fuel at
electricity-generating facilities located both in and outside of the State. Carbon dioxide represented more than 99.5
percent of total sector emissions, with methane and nitrous oxide CO2e emissions comprising the balance.
Maryland is a net importer of electricity, meaning that the State consumes more electricity than is produced
here.7 For this analysis, it was assumed that all power generated in Maryland was consumed in Maryland, and that
remaining electricity demand was met by imported power. Sales associated with imported power accounted for 28
percent of the electricity consumed in Maryland in 2006. 8 GHG emissions from electricity produced in-state are
dominated by the combustion of coal, followed by emissions from the use of oil and natural gas. As shown previously,
electricity consumption accounted for about 39 percent of Maryland’s gross GHG emissions in 2006 (about 43 million
metric tons of CO2e ), which was higher than the national average share of emissions from electricity consumption
(34 percent).9 Nuclear energy is also a significant contributor to Maryland’s power supply system at 38% of Maryland’s
overall in state generation, second only to coal. Nuclear energy is a carbon neutral energy source.
In 2006, emissions associated with Maryland’s electricity consumption (43 million metric tons of CO2e) were about
10 million metric tons of CO2e higher than those associated with electricity production (32 million metric tons of
CO2e). In 2011, emissions associated with Maryland’s electricity consumption (38 million metric tons of CO2e) were
about 13 million metric tons of CO2e higher than those associated with electricity production (25 million metric tons
of CO2e). The higher level for consumption-based emissions reflects GHG emissions associated with net imports
of electricity to meet Maryland’s electricity demand.10 Projections of electricity sales for 2006 through 2020 indicate
that Maryland will remain a net importer of electricity. The 2020 business-as-usual forecast assumes that in-state
production-based emissions will increase by about 10 million metric tons of CO2e. In addition, consumption-based
emissions associated with imported electricity will increase by about 6 million metric tons of CO2e.
The consumption-based approach better reflects GHG emissions and emissions reductions occurring in Maryland,
particularly with respect to electricity use and energy efficiency improvements. This is particularly useful for policymaking.

7

The geographic boundary of the inventory is identical with the borders of Maryland except for a singel category: electricity consumption. As
part of the 2006 baseline, the GGRA requires Maryland to include GHG emissions from electricity consumed by its citizens whether that electricity is generated within Maryland or imported into Maryland from othside the state. Several factors contributed to the decision to use a consumption-based approach to electricity emissions rather than just imclude emissions from electricity generated in Maryland. Data is available to
extimate both categories of emissions with reasonable accuracy. Historically 30 percent of the electricity consumed by Marylanders is generated
outside Maryland. Since electricity consumption is a very large portion of the GHG emissions generated by Marylanders, excluding 30 percent
of those emissions would reduce the effectiveness of the 2012 GGRA Plan. Some of the early reduction strategies, like the EmPOWER Maryland
goals, are based on consumption of electricity not generation of electricity. While other sectors such as transportation also produce emissions
from GHG sources originating outside Maryland (e.e. ot-of-state vehicles traveling through Maryland), these emissions are not included in the
inventory. This is in part because these emissions are quite variable and also because a good source of accurate data for these emissions is not
avaialble.
8
In 2006, total Maryland retail sales were 63,173 gigawatt-hours, of which 17,643 (i.e. 28 percent) were estimated to be from imports.
9
For the U.S. as a whole, there is relatively little difference between the emissions from electricity use and emissions from electricity production, as the U.S. imports only about 1 percent of its electricity and exports even less. Maryland’s situation is different, since it is a net electricity
importer.
10
Estimating the emissions associated with electricity use requires an understanding of the electricity sources (both in-state and out-of-state)
used by utilities to meet consumer demand

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

69

RCI Fuel Combustion
The full report and inventory discusses emissions associated with direct fossil fuel used in the residential, commercial
and the industrial buildings sector to provide space and process heating. In 2011, emissions associated with
Maryland’s RCI fuel combustion were 17 million metric tons of CO2e.
Transportation Energy Use
Emissions estimated for this business sector are the result of the combustion of fossil-fuel primarily for
transportation purposes. Sources include:
➢➢ Cars
➢➢ Light-duty trucks
➢➢ Vans
➢➢ Buses
➢➢ Other diesel vehicles
The majority of CO2e emissions in the transportation sector relate to onroad gasoline, with onroad diesel accounting
for a significant percentage.
Other modes of transportation, such as airplanes, trains and commercial marine vessels are included under the
general category of nonroad mobile sources. It is often difficult identifying the actual end-use for nonroad gasoline
and diesel fuels (other than marine use). Natural gas and liquified petroleum gas used as transportation fuel are easily
broken out. Also, jet fuel and aviation gasoline are discrete products that are treated as a separate sector.
Nonroad mobile sources are motorized vehicles and equipment not normally operated on public roadways. These
include:
➢➢ Lawn and garden equipment
➢➢ Agricultural or farm equipment
➢➢ Logging equipment
➢➢ Industrial equipment
➢➢ Construction equipment
➢➢ Airport service equipment
➢➢ Recreational land vehicles or equipment
➢➢ Recreational marine equipment
➢➢ Locomotives
➢➢ Commercial aviation
➢➢ Air taxis
➢➢ General aviation
➢➢ Military aviation
➢➢ Commercial Marine Vessels
The transportation sector accounted for about 33 percent of Maryland’s gross GHG emissions in 2006 (about 35.5
million metric tons of CO2e), which was higher than the national average share of emissions from transportation fuel
consumption (27 percent). In 2011, Maryland’s gross GHG emissions were about 35.3 million metric tons of CO2e.
For 2006, onroad gasoline vehicles accounted for about 65 percent of transportation GHG emissions. Onroad diesel
vehicles accounted for another 17 percent of emissions, and air travel for roughly 6 percent. Marine vessels, rail,
and other sources, such as natural gas – and liquefied petroleum gas-fueled vehicles used in transport applications
accounted for the remaining 12 percent of transportation emissions.
70

Maryland Department of the Environment

In 2011, onroad gasoline vehicles accounted for about 64 percent of transportation GHG emissions. Onroad diesel
vehicles accounted for another 16 percent of emissions, and air travel for roughly 3 percent. Marine vessels, rail,
and other sources, such as natural gas – and liquefied petroleum gas-fueled vehicles used in transport applications
accounted for the remaining 17 percent of transportation emissions.
Industrial Processes
Emissions estimated in the industrial sector account for process-related GHG emissions resulting from the four main
industrial processes that occurs in the State:
➢➢ Carbon dioxide emissions from cement production, soda ash, dolomite and lime/limestone
consumption;
➢➢ Carbon dioxide emissions from iron and steel production;
➢➢ Sulfur hexafluoride emissions from electric power transmission and distribution system
transformer use; and
➢➢ Hydrofluorocarbon and perfluorocarbon emissions resulting from the consumption of substitutes
for ozone-depleting substances used in cooling and refrigeration equipment.
Industrial process CO2e emissions are estimated to increase in the projected 2020 business-as-usual forecast,
although not uniformly across sectors. Several sectors have values that are not visible due to the scale of the
chart, but the GHG emissions have been calculated and do change between the 2006 baseline and 2020 business-asusual forecast.
In 2006, the GHG emissions from industrial processes were about 7 million metric tons of CO2e. In the 2020
business-as-usual forecast, the GHG emissions from industrial processes are projected to be about 10 million metric
tons of CO2e. In the 2011 inventory, the GHG emissions from industrial processes showed a decrease to about 4
million metric tons of CO2e.
Fossil Fuel Production Industry
This section reports GHG emissions that are released during the production, processing, transmission, and
distribution of fossil fuels (primarily natural gas and coal) in the State. Methane emissions released via leakage and
venting from oil and gas fields, processing facilities and natural gas pipelines, and fugitive methane emissions during
coal mining,
are estimated in this section, as well as carbon dioxide emissions associated with the combustion of natural gas in
compressor engines.
Fossil fuel production emissions are projected to drop in the 2020 business-as-usual forecast. In 2006, GHG
emissions from the fossil fuel production industry were about 0.94 million metric tons of CO2e. In the 2020 businessas-usual forecast, GHG emissions from the fossil fuel production industry are projected to be about 0.92 million
metric tons of CO2e. In the 2011 inventory, GHG emissions from the fossil fuel production industry decreased to
about 0.84 million metric tons of CO2e. This is attributable to a decrease in emissions in the fossil fuel and natural gas
industries.
Coal mining emissions are expected to remain constant between the 2006 baseline and the 2020 “Business-As-Usual”
forecast.
Agriculture
The emissions estimated in this section refer to non-energy generating methane and nitrous oxide emissions from
enteric fermentation, manure management, and agricultural soils. Emissions and sinks of carbon in agricultural soils
also are estimated in this section. Energy emissions, such as combustion of fossil fuels in agricultural equipment, are
not included in this section, but are already accounted for under the RCI and nonroad transportation sectors.
Agriculture CO2e emissions are projected to increase from the 2006 baseline under the 2020 business-as-usual
forecast. The growth is different by type of emission source, some going down and some going up at different rates.
Enteric fermentation shows the largest percentage of growth. However, the 2011 inventory shows a decrease in
agriculture CO2e emissions from the 2006 baseline. In 2006, GHG emissions from agriculture were about
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

71

1.77 million metric tons of CO2e. In 2011, GHG emissions from agriculture were about 1.66 million metric
tons of CO2e.
Waste Management
This section estimates all GHG emissions from Maryland’s waste management practices based on the three main
classes of waste management in the state:
➢➢ Solid waste management
➢➢ Wastewater management
➢➢ Solid municipal waste incinerations
➢➢ Waste CO2e emissions are projected to increase from the 2006 baseline.
➢➢ Waste To Energy (WTE) Emissions and Biomass
MDE chose to include WTE biogenic emissions in the GHG emissions inventory because the inventory is
combustion-based, the carbon released from combusted biogenic materials is occurring now over a much
shorter period of time and some portion of the emissions are not carbon neutral. Moreover, EPA is commencing
a comprehensive review of how biomass emissions should be treated in conjunction with development of GHG
emissions inventories. Maryland is continuing to review the science with interested parties and may make different
recommendations in the future.
Forestry and Land Use
This section provides an assessment of the net GHG flux resulting from land uses, land-use changes, and forest
management activities in Maryland. The balance between the emission and uptake of GHGs is known as GHG flux.11
The GHG emissions estimated in this section include carbon dioxide emissions from urea fertilizer use, methane
and nitrous oxide emissions from wildfires and prescribed forest burns, and nitrous oxide emissions from synthetic
fertilizers application to settlement soils. Carbon sequestration pathways estimated in this section include:
➢➢ Above and below ground biomass
➢➢ Dead wood and forest litters
➢➢ Landfilled yard trimmings and food scraps
➢➢ Harvested wood product
➢➢ Wood products in landfills
➢➢ Urban trees
Net forestry emissions remain basically constant from the 2006 baseline to the forecasted 2020 business-as-usual.

11

The term “flux” is used here to encompass both emissions of GHGs to the atmosphere and removal, or “uptake”, of carbon from the atmosphere
(carbon sequestration)

72

Maryland Department of the Environment

HYDRAULIC FRACTURING IN MARYLAND

T

he recent increase of hydraulic fracturing “fracking” drilling operations in the United States has fundamentally changed the fossil fuel markets. The subsequent decrease in natural gas prices has lead natural gas to be
the current fuel of choice for electrical generation units (EGUs). Current research seems to suggest that fracking
produces more emissions than conventional natural gas drilling techniques. This is especially important because
these emissions are predominately Methane (CH4), which has a higher GWP potential than CO2. MDE recognizes that methane emissions are something that needs to be studied further.
2020 GOAL: HOW MUCH DO WE NEED TO REDUCE?

T

o calculate a specific 2020 emissions reduction goal for Maryland, two key pieces of information are needed:
the 2006 statewide GHG emissions baseline and the 2020 statewide business-as-usual forecast (anticipated
emissions in the absence of any climate control programs). The growth in emissions is the difference between
these two numbers. The total GHG emissions reduction needed under GGRA must not only offset this growth; it
must also reduce emissions 25 percent below the 2006 baseline. This is the same methodology that MDE uses for
reduction efforts for criteria pollutants, such as precursors of ozone.
Maryland’s 2006 baseline GHG emissions are confirmed at 107.23 million metric tons of CO2e. A 25 percent
reduction from this equals 80.42 million metric tons of CO2e (a reduction of 26.81 million metric tons). Another
way to think about this is that the GGRA climate strategies should lead Maryland down to a 2020 actual statewide
emissions profile of 80.42 million metric tons of CO2e (107.23 minus 26.81).

Maryland’s 2020 business-as-usual GHG emissions forecast is 135.68 million metric tons of CO2e. This represents
a 27 percent increase over the 2006 actual baseline. This forecast does not include any measures to reduce GHG
emissions that were implemented after 2006.
The 2020 GHG reduction target is calculated by subtracting where we need to be in 2020 (25 percent below the 2006
baseline, or 80.42 million metric tons of CO2e) from the 2020 business-as-usual forecast (135.68 million metric tons
of CO2e). Therefore, the 2020 reduction target required under GGRA and as outlined in the 2012 GGRA Plan is 55.26
million metric tons of CO2e.
2020 Goal Revision
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update quantifies and includes reductions attributable to market forces. These nonprogrammatic reductions include six sources of emissions that are constantly fluctuating (Table 4-3). Since the 2006
baseline year, CO2 emissions in Maryland have decreased because electricity generation and industrial sources
are using more natural gas instead of coal (natural gas emits half the amount of CO2 as coal when used to make
electricity). The sluggish U.S. economy also contributed to the decline in CO2 emissions from transportation,
manufacturing, and electricity generation. Further, predictions of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) for Marylanders
corrected through the use of the updated Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator (MOVES) modeling tool, and the
forecasted per-capita waste generation rate was determined to be over-estimated in 2012, with the emissions benefits
from increased recycling and reuse being adjusted for 2015.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

73

Market Force Reductions.
Potential GHG Emission Reductions (MMtCO2e) Revised
for 2015

Market Force
PJM Fuel Mix Changes

3.06

Other Electricity Sales Reductions

4.59

New Maryland Natural Gas Plants

4.04

Maryland Coal Retirements

2.19

Source (Solid Waste) Reductions

3.60

Forecasted VMT Related Reduction (True-Up)

3.12

Total

20.60

In accounting for these market force reductions, the 2020 GGRA goal has been revised for the 2015 GGRA Plan
Update to be 34.66 MMtCO2e as described in the following table.

2020 GGRA Goal Revision.
Potential GHG
Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
Revised for 2015
2020 Goal described in 2012 GGRA Plan

55.26

Market Force Reductions described in 2015 GGRA Plan Update

Revised 2020 Goal

74

Maryland Department of the Environment

20.60

34.66

Maryland State House Dome — Wikimedia Commons

5
Summary of
Reduction
Programs

Open Floodgates in 2005 — Baltimore Sun image by David Hobby

Strategies, Policies,
Programs and Initiatives
This chapter summarizes the
various strategies, programs
and initiatives that the State is
developing and implementing to
meet the GGRA’s GHG emissions
reductions and economic benefits
goals. Some of the 2015 GGRA
Plan Update’s strategies are already
being implemented in full, while
others are in an earlier phase of
the implementation process. The
suite of programs encompass eight
sectors and each program has been
updated for 2015 to include any
enhancements from the 2012 GGRA
Plan that have been achieved, revised
estimated emissions reductions,
revised estimated economic and
job benefits, summaries of progress
including current implementation
efforts and concerns, and, where
applicable, recommendations for
additional enhancements to the

program by the lead agency.
Through the emissions inventory
and forecast analysis, the 25 percent
reduction in Statewide GHG
emissions from 2006 levels by
2020 goal of the GGRA has been
calculated to be 34.66 MMtCO2e.
The combined emissions reductions
of all programs in the 2015 GGRA
Plan Update will yield a total of 38.37
MMtCO2e in emissions reductions.
This will exceed the GGRA 2020 goal
by 3.71 MMtCO2e.
Notes on Specific Facets of
the 2015 GGRA Plan Update
In determining the estimated
emissions reduction benefit of
each of the programs in this report,
overlap of program reductions and
emission quantification uncertainties
were taken into consideration. For
example, the benefits of a recycling
program overlap with the benefits
of a heavy-duty truck program as

both programs have an impact on
truck traffic. As an example of other
uncertainties, the report estimates
how natural resources such as forests,
other vegetation and geological
formations act as sinks. Several ideas
were considered in estimating the
emission reduction potential from
the geological opportunities to store
carbon in Maryland. Analyzing the
uncertainly of carbon sinks on GHG
concentrations included a close look
at the location and size of forested
properties, species composition,
forest age, estimates of forest cover;
and any forest management practices
currently employed. Given that this
emerging practice has no formal
guidelines, best practices were used.
A detailed inventory of forested
land in Maryland was used along
with current sequestration rates
and emission sinks calculations.
For these reasons, 30 percent of the
emission reduction benefits from

many of the programs in this plan have been discounted or removed to ensure double counting did not occur and that
uncertainties in emission reduction quantification are considered.
GGRA Programs and 2020 Emission Reductions.

Lead
Agency

Potential GHG
Emission
Reductions (MMtCO2e)
Revised for 2015

-

7.24

A.1 EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in the Residential Sector

MEA

Included in A

A.2 EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in the Commercial and
Industrial Sectors

MEA

A.3 EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in Appliances and Other Products

MEA

Included in A

A.4 EmPOWER Maryland: Utility Responsibility

MEA

Included in A

A.5 Combined Heat and Power

MEA

Included in A

-

4.13

Program

A. EmPOWER Maryland

Energy

B. Maryland Renewable Energy Programs
B.1 Maryland Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) Program

MEA

4.13

B.2 Fuel Switching

MEA

Included in B

B.3 Incentives and Grant Programs to Support Renewable Energy

MEA

Included in B

B.4 Offshore Wind Initiatives to Support Renewable Energy

MEA

Included in B

MDE

3.60

D. Other Energy Programs

-

0.14

D.1 GHG Power Plant Emission Reductions from Federal Programs

-

-

D.1.A Boiler Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT)

MDE

0.07

D.1.B GHG New Source Performance Standard

MDE

Included in D.1

D.1.C GHG Prevention of Significant Deterioration Permitting Program

MDE

Included in D.1

D.2 Main Street Initiatives

DHCD

0.05

D.3 Energy Efficiency for Affordable Housing

DHCD

0.02

E. Transportation Technologies

-

6.88

E.1 Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards

-

5.57

E.1.A Maryland Clean Cars Program

MDE

Included in E.1

E.1.B Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFÉ): MY 2008 – 2011

MDOT

Included in E.1

E.1.C National Fuel Efficiency and Emission Standards for
Medium and Heavy-Duty Trucks

MDE

Included in E.1

E.1.D Federal Renewable Fuels Standards

MDOT

Included in E.1

-

1.06

E.2.A On Road Technology

MDOT

Included in E.2

E.2.B Airport Initiatives

MDOT

Included in E.2

E.2.C Port Initiatives

MDOT

Included in E.2

E.2.D Freight and Freight Rail Programs

MDOT

Included in E.2

MDOT/MEA

0.25

C. The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)

Transportation

Included in A

E.2 On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives

E.3 Electric and Low Emitting Vehicle Initiatives

F. Public Transportation

-

1.85

F.1 Public Transportation Initiatives

MDOT

1.85

F.2 Intercity Transportation Initiatives

MDOT

Included in F.1

G. Pricing Initiatives

MDOT

1.99

-

Included in F.1

MDE

Included in F.1

MDOT

Included in F.1

H. Other Innovative Transportation Strategies/Programs
H.1 Evaluating the GHG Emissions Impact of Major New
H.2 Transportation Projects
H.2 Bike and Pedestrian Initiatives

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

79

Lead
Agency

Potential GHG
Emission
Reductions (MMtCO2e)
Revised for 2015

-

4.55

I.1 Managing Forests to Capture Carbon

DNR

1.80

I.2 Planting Forests in Maryland

DNR

1.79

I.3 Creating and Protecting Wetlands and Waterway Borders to
Capture Carbon

DNR

0.43

I.4 Biomass for Energy Production

DNR

0.33

I.5 Conservation of Agricultural Land for GHG Benefits

MDA

0.18

I.6 Increasing Urban Trees to Capture Carbon

DNR

0.02

I.7 Geological Opportunities to Store Carbon

DNR

Included in I

Program

AGRICULTURE

I. Forestry and Sequestration

INNOVATION

J. Ecosystems Markets

-

0.68

J.1 Creating Ecosystems Markets to Encourage GHG Emission Reductions

DNR

0.11

J.2 Nutrient Trading for GHG Benefits

MDA

0.57

K. Building – Building and Trade Codes in Maryland

DHCD

3.15

L. Recycling – Zero Waste

MDE

1.48

M. Leadership-By-Example

-

1.78

M.1 Leadership-By-Example: State of Maryland Initiatives

DGS

0.56

M.2 Leadership-By-Example: Maryland Colleges and Universities

MDE

0.56

M.3 Leadership-By-Example: Federal Government

MDE

0.41

M.4 Leadership-By-Example: Local Government

MDE

0.25

-

0.21

N.1 Voluntary Stationary Source Reductions

MDE

0.17

N.2 Buy Local for GHG Benefits

MDA

0.02

N.3 Pay-As-You-Drive® Insurance in Maryland

MIA

0.02

Commerce

Included in N

-

0.02

MDE/MDOT

0.02

MDE

0.00

N. Maryland’s Innovative Initiatives

N.4 Job Creation and Economic Development Initiatives
Related to Climate Change

O. Future or Developing Programs
O.1 The Transportation and Climate Initiative
O.2 Clean Fuels Standard

P. Land Use – Land Use Programs

-

0.64

P.1 Reducing Emissions through Smart Growth and
Land Use/Location Efficiency

MDP

Included in P

P.2 Priority Funding Area (Growth Boundary) Related Benefits

MDP

Included in P

Q. Public – Outreach and Public Education

MDE

0.03

Note: Only bolded numbers are used in the calculation of totals.

Total Emissions Reductions

80

Maryland Department of the Environment

Total Reductions

38.37

GGRA 2020 Goal

34.66

2020 Reductions Over GGRA Goal

3.71

KEY STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS
A handful of key strategies and programs will drive the majority of Maryland’s GHG emissions reductions:
1. EmPOWER Maryland
Enacted in 2008, the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act (EmPOWER) set a target to reduce both
Maryland’s per capita total electricity consumption and peak load demand by 15 percent below 2007 levels by 2015.
EmPOWER includes numerous State and utility managed energy efficiency and conservations programs. By 2020,
EmPOWER programs should contribute 7.24 MMtCO2e in emissions reductions.
2. Maryland Clean Cars Program
Enacted into law on November 19, 2007, the Maryland Clean Cars Program adopted California’s stricter vehicle
emission standards, the first program in the nation to directly regulate CO2 emissions from motor vehicles. These
standards became effective in Maryland for model year 2011 vehicles, significantly reducing a number of emissions
including volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitrogen oxides (NOX). By adopting the more stringent California
standards, significant reductions in both localized Pollution and greenhouse gases will be achieved. GHG emissions
from the Maryland Clean Cars Program have been aggregated with the calculations for the Motor Vehicle Emission
and Fuel Standards program group, which should reduce the State’s GHG emissions by 5.57 MMtCO2e by 2020.
3. Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards, Model Years 2008-2011
First enacted by Congress in 1975, the purpose of the CAFE standard is to reduce energy consumption by increasing
the fuel economy of cars and light trucks. Since introduction in 1975, CAFE standards have increased from the initial
18 miles per gallon standard to 35 miles per gallon by 2020, as established in the federal Energy Independence and
Security Act of 2007. GHG emissions reductions from projected CAFE increases have been aggregated with the
calculations for the Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards program group, which should reduce the State’s GHG
emissions by 5.57 MMtCO2e by 2020.
4. The Maryland Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) Program
Maryland became one of the first states to adopt a Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) in 2004. Requiring
that power providers buy a growing portion of electricity supplied from renewable sources, the intent of this law is to
establish a market for new sources of mostly in-state renewable electricity generation and to recognize the economic,
environmental, fuel diversity, and security benefits of renewable energy resources. In 2020 the law requires that
Maryland attain 18 percent of its electricity from renewable sources, increasing to 20 percent renewables by 2022. By
2020, Maryland’s RPS program should contribute 4.13 MMtCO2e in emissions reductions.
5. The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) is a cooperative effort by nine Northeast and Mid-Atlantic States to
design and implement a regional cap-and-trade program to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from power plants in
the region. RGGI serves as the framework program by which the EmPOWER and RPS programs are implemented.
With efforts to strengthen RGGI already implemented, the RGGI program should reduce Maryland’s GHG emissions
by 3.60 MMtCO2e by 2020.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

81

6. Building and Trade Codes in Maryland
Given the long life of most buildings, upgrading State and local building codes to include minimum energy efficiency
requirements provides long-term GHG savings. Maryland’s Building Performance Standards are updated by
regulation every three years following the three-year cycle of the International Code Council. Progressive building
and trade codes adjustment in Maryland should contribute to a 3.15 MMtCO2e reduction in the State’s GHG
emissions by 2020.
7. Public Transportation Initiatives
For several decades, vehicle miles traveled has risen faster than the increase in population in Maryland and
nationwide, and land use development over the past 40 to 50 years has put more people living beyond the reach of easy
access to transit facilities. By 2020, public transportation initiatives in Maryland should contribute 1.85 MMtCO2e in
emissions reductions.
8. Managing Forests to Capture Carbon
Managing forests to capture carbon will promote sustainable forestry management practices in existing Maryland
forests on both public and private lands. The enhanced productivity resulting from enrolling unmanaged forests
into management regimes will increase rates of carbon dioxide sequestration in forest biomass, increase amounts of
carbon stored in harvested, durable wood products which will result in economic benefits, and increased availability
of renewable biomass for energy production. Enhanced forestry management in Maryland should contribute to a 1.80
MMtCO2e reduction in the State’s GHG emissions by 2020.
9. Planting Forests in Maryland
Planting trees expands forest cover and associated carbon stocks by regenerating or establishing healthy, functional
forests through practices such as soil preparation, erosion control, and supplemental planting, to ensure optimum
conditions to support forest growth. By 2020, the implementation goal is to achieve the afforestation and/or
reforestation of 43,030 acres in Maryland by 2020. Achieving the 43,030 acre target should reduce GHG emissions in
the State by 1.79 MMtCO2e
by 2020.
10. Zero Waste
Zero Waste is a concept that calls for the near complete elimination of solid waste sent to landfills or incinerators for
disposal, and where, instead, the vast majority of Maryland’s solid waste is reused, recycled, composted, or prevented
through source reduction. By 2020, Maryland’s zero waste efforts should contribute 1.48 MMtCO2e in emissions
reductions.

82

Maryland Department of the Environment

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

83

Potential GHG Emission
Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Program

ENERGY

A. EmPOWER Maryland

7.24

B. Maryland Renewable Energy
Portfolio Standard (RPS)

4.13

C. The Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative (RGGI)

3.60

D. Other Energy Programs

0.14

Total

15.11

A. EMPOWER MARYLAND

C

reated by a 2007 Executive Order and codified by the General Assembly during the 2008 Session,
EmPOWER Maryland is designed to reduce per capita electricity consumption and peak demand by Maryland consumers by 15 percent by 2015. While the EmPOWER Maryland suite of energy efficiency programs is
funded in part with revenue paid into the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF)1 from the auction of RGGI
allowances, the vast majority of programmatic savings and revenues come from monies collected by the utilities
on ratepayers’ bills.
Maryland’s EmPOWER statute requires that at least 10 percent of the 2015 consumption target come from utility
programs, which must be approved in advance by the Public Service Commission (PSC). In addition to these utility
managed programs, MEA’s programs and other State efforts are intended to close the gap towards the overall program
goal. MEA works closely with the State’s electric utilities and the PSC in program design. While MEA is the lead State
agency responsible for non-utility EmPOWER programs, the PSC is responsible for ensuring the utilities meet their
goal.
In July 2015, the PSC issued an order directing the continuation of utility programs supporting EmPOWER
Maryland energy reduction policy and set new savings targets that will extend beyond the original 2015goals in the
EmPOWER Maryland statute. In its order, the PSC directed utilities to ramp up electricity savings to 2% of gross
sales2 for as long as cost-effective savings continue to be available. The PSC also directed workgroups to recommend
by February 1, 2016, separate goals for natural gas savings and limited-income programs savings. Savings can come
from a variety of sources, including traditional equipment-based measures, “smart meter” enabled analytics, and
more efficient distribution grid hardware. Utilities will be reviewing their current plans and proposing modifications
as needed to meet the new goals.
While the PSC order does not specifically contemplate a separate savings goal for non-utility entities, MEA and other
state agencies will continue to work closely with the PSC and Maryland utilities to ensure that programs are effectively
designed and implemented. Additionally, MEA and DGS continue to work on efforts to reduce energy use in State
buildings.
More detail on EmPOWER Maryland’s programs is provided below. The methodology for estimating the reduction
in GHG emissions from the programs is in Appendix C .
1

The SEIF fund was created by legislative act of the General Assembly, “Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative – Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program”, Public Utility Companies Article, § 7-701 et seq., Annotated Code of Maryland (Senate Bill 268/House Bill 368, General Assembly
2008). A portion of the fund is allocated to the MEA to administer programs in the residential, commercial and industrial sectors to reduce consumer demand for electricity and natural gas by five percent by 2015 through energy efficiency measures. The utility-run EmPOWER programs
are mandated by “EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act of 2008”, Public Utility Companies Article, § 7-211, Annotated Code of Maryland
(House Bill 374, General Assembly 2008). The law requires utilities to reduce per capita electricity consumption in Maryland by 10 percent by
2015 and per capita peak demand by 15 percent by 2015 by implementing energy efficiency programs targeted to consumers. Together, the
EmPOWER Maryland law and the law creating the SEIF fund target a 15 percent reduction in per capita electricity consumption and per capita
peak demand by 2015.
2
This is not equivalent to requiring that total electricity sales decrease by 2% a year. Instead, it requires verified savings to be equivalent to 2% of
the most recent baseline year’s weather-normalized gross sales. For example, if a utility’s most recently baseline year’s weather-normalized gross
sales were 1,000,000 MWh, their electricity savings target would be 20,000 MWh (2% of 1,000,000).

84

Maryland Department of the Environment

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020
The potential emission reductions from the EmPOWER programs in 2020 are estimated to be 7.24 MMtCO2e.
Because these programs are all related, MEA has aggregated the potential emission reductions from the full set of
programs. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits
RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the EmPOWER Maryland programs, once fully operational, would support
an aggregated total of 7,551 to 7,666 jobs by 2020, $5,646,584,190 to $6,217,799,076 in net economic output and
$2,673,446,659 to $2,697,771,512 in wages over the lifetime of the programs. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more
detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with the EmPOWER Maryland
programs.
Implementation
The underlying authority for the PSC to order cost-effective and appropriate energy efficiency and conservation
programs is found in Public Utilities Article §7-211 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Additionally, SEIF funding
for energy efficiency programs is mandated in State law, specifically State Government Article, §9-20B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
As of the end of 2014, programs supporting energy efficiency and demand response in Maryland have
resulted in:
➢➢ 4.4 million MWh of annual savings
➢➢ 1,700 MW of demand reduction capability
➢➢ Over 1.7 million measures for residential customers (excluding light bulbs)
➢➢ 34 million energy-efficient light bulbs rebated

EmPOWER MARYLAND — Maryland Institute College of Art

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

85

Opportunities:
➢➢ Commercial and Industrial performance has historically lagged residential performance, but a renewed
focus by utilities provides a good opportunity for highly cost-effective savings
➢➢ Financing programs that allow customers to pay back over time are showing early promise
➢➢ Natural gas programs are still in very early stages and have greater potential in the future
➢➢ 2015-2017 programs continue to be very highly cost effective, indicating that considerable
		 future savings exist
➢➢ Delivering lifecycle savings at around 3.5-4.5 cents/kWh, compared to supply costs in the
8.0-10.0 cents/kWh range
✼✼ Total resource cost in the 1.7-1.9 range
✼✼ Advanced metering infrastructure will enable new, data-driven savings programs
✼✼ Building analytics, new behavioral programs, etc.
Challenges:
➢➢ The bulk of program savings are driven by the efficacy of utility implementation and are subject to PSC
budget approval
➢➢ While programs are required to be collectively cost-effective, the EmPOWER surcharge has increased
over time. Rate impacts and bill impacts are not equivalent and both need to be monitored closely
➢➢ Stricter federal standards erode attributable savings in the cost effectiveness testing methodology
➢➢ Efficient Lighting (CFL/LED) saturation is increasing
➢➢ Electrification of transportation may provide headwind
➢➢ GHG savings offset in Transportation module, and effect likely small in the near term

86

Maryland Department of the Environment

A.1. EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in the Residential Sector
Lead Agency: MEA
The State’s residential energy efficiency initiatives are part of the EmPOWER Maryland suite of energy efficiency
programs and are administered primarily by MEA using SEIF revenues. Programs funded and administered through
other State agencies, including the DHCD, and federally-funded energy efficiency programs contribute to the 2015
EmPOWER goal. Together with programs implemented by the utilities, the State’s programs in all sectors, including
residential, commercial and industrial, are intended to help achieve the EmPOWER Maryland goal of a 15 percent
reduction in per capita energy use by 2015 and to contribute to continued reductions in energy use and GHG beyond
2015. More information about these programs can be found at: http://energy.maryland.gov/Residential/index.html.
A.2. EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in the Commercial and Industrial Sectors
Lead Agency: MEA
MEA’s commercial and industrial energy efficiency programs support or compliment the EmPOWER Maryland
suite of energy efficiency programs. MEA administers four programs that target energy efficiency improvements
in the commercial and industrial sectors, which represent approximately 58 percent of electricity consumption in
Maryland. These programs offer incentives for energy audits and funding for upgrades. The four programs are: 1)
DOE Save Energy Now; 2) the Lawton Loan Program; 3) C/I Deep Retrofits; and 4) the State Agencies
Loan Program.
A.3. EmPOWER Maryland: Energy Efficiency in Appliances and Other Products
Lead Agency: MEA
While MEA no longer runs appliance and equipment rebate programs for homeowners, it does administer lowinterest loans for residential and commercial energy efficiency improvements, which may include appliances,
equipment and lighting.
A.4. EmPOWER Maryland: Utility Responsibility
Lead Agency: MEA
EmPOWER Maryland mandated that the PSC require each utility to propose cost-effective energy efficiency,
conservation, and demand response programs designed to achieve targeted per capita energy reductions of at least
five percent by the end of 2011 and at least 10 percent by the end of 2015, in addition to a 15 percent per capita peak
demand reduction.
In July 2015, the PSC issued an order directing the continuation of utility programs supporting EmPOWER
Maryland and set new savings targets that will extend beyond the original 2015 goals in the EmPOWER Maryland
statute. In its order, the PSC directed utilities to ramp up electricity savings to 2% of gross sales as long as cost-effective
savings continue to be available. The PSC also directed workgroups to recommend by February 1, 2016, separate goals
for natural gas savings and low – and moderate-income sector savings. Savings can come from a variety of sources,
including traditional equipment-based measures, “smart meter” enabled analytics, and more efficient distribution
grid hardware. Utilities will be reviewing their current plans and proposing modifications as needed to meet the new
goals.
The six participating utilities are Potomac Edison (formerly known as Allegheny Power); Baltimore Gas and Electric
(BGE); Delmarva Power and Light; Potomac Electric Power Company (Pepco); and Southern Maryland Electric
Cooperative (SMECO). These utilities are responsible for two thirds of the 2015 EmPOWER 15 percent energy
consumption reduction goal and all of the peak demand reduction goal, as well as the total post-2015 goals established
by the PSC in July 2015. Energy savings targets are spread among all customers.
A.5. Combined Heat and Power
Lead Agencies: MEA and MDE, in coordination with other State agencies
Combined heat and power, also called co-generation, is a technology designed to generate both power and thermal
energy from a single fuel source. A combined heat and power system recovers waste heat from thermal energy used in
industrial processes and electricity generation and uses it for heating or cooling, achieving thermal efficiency levels of
up to 80 percent. The increased efficiency means more useful energy is generated from a single fuel source. Therefore,
GHG emissions from a combined heat and power system are less than from a typical system which produces electric
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

87

and thermal energy separately. Expanding the use of these systems can greatly increase a facility’s level of energy
efficiency and decrease energy costs. Moreover, combined heat and power is an efficient, clean, and reliable approach
to generating power while also reducing GHG emissions. The five EmPOWER utilities received approval from the
PSC to run combined heat and power programs in the spring of 2012. Several new projects are underway and efforts
continue to recruit new potential customers. This is a voluntary program.
B. THE MARYLAND RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD (RPS)

T

he Maryland Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) is a law that requires Maryland to obtain 20
percent of its electricity from renewable sources, as defined by statute, by 2022, with a solar carve-out which
requires that two percent be obtained from solar energy generation by 2020. The RPS incentivizes the development of renewable energy by requiring electricity suppliers to meet a prescribed portion of their energy supply
needs using renewable energy sources. Energy suppliers are required to purchase Renewable Energy Credits
(RECs) to demonstrate compliance with the RPS. The State also runs a number of other incentive programs to
support renewable energy and achieve the RPS goal. Collectively, the RPS compliance program and the State
incentive programs constitute the RPS bundle of programs. The State recognizes the significant environmental
and consumer benefits associated with renewable energy and is facilitating development of a diversity of renewable energy sources. The original RPS legislation was adopted in 2004 and has been amended in 2007, 2008,
2010, 2011 and 2012.

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020
The potential emission reductions from the current RPS programs in 2020 are estimated to be 4.13 MMtCO2e.
Because these programs are all related, MEA has aggregated the potential emission reductions from the full set of
programs. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits
RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Maryland RPS programs, once fully operational, would support an aggregated
total of 3,549 to 3,642 jobs by 2020, $6,427,048,459 to $6,588,698,029 in net economic output and $4,236,359,157 to
$4,340,264,666 in wages over the lifetime of the programs. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with the Maryland RPS programs.
Implementation
The RPS is mandated by §§7-701 through §7-713 of the Public Utilities Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
MEA is the lead State agency on implementation of RPS programs.
As of the end of 2014:
➢➢ 7.8 million RECs retired (12.8% of sales)
➢➢ 240 MW of solar in Maryland

88

Maryland Department of the Environment

Opportunities:
➢➢ GHG emission reductions will need to be updated if REC purchases exceed imported electricity
and should reflect the contractual rather than physical nature of RECs
➢➢ Wind and solar continue to come down in overall price
✼✼ New wind turbine technology is better suited to lower wind areas, expanding the potential sites
that could be developed economically
✼✼ Solar prices continue to fall at rapid pace, and consumers continue to show growing interest in
local solar electricity
➢➢ Oversupply of PJM RECs is being absorbed, so the increase in Maryland’s RPS is driving new projects
and affecting CO2 intensity in PJM
➢➢ EPA’s Clean Power Plan 111(d) is likely to be an additional driver of renewable energy in Maryland
and beyond
Challenges:
➢➢ RPS GHG reduction is a function of quantity (% of sales) and composition (carbon intensity of RECs)
✼✼ Changes in either would require legislation
➢➢ EPA Biogenic Carbon Accounting Framework not finalized
✼✼ Considerable debate amongst academics/policy makers how to treat biomass emissions
✼✼ Agreed that timescale of emissions source/sink is critical
✼✼ MDE has chosen to include biogenic emissions at point of consumption
➢➢ Expiration of federal PTC for wind and reduction of ITC for solar may present short-term obstacles for the
continued deployment of new facilities
➢➢ Integrating increasing penetration of solar becomes more technically challenging
Statutory RPS Obligation

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

89

Carbon Intensity of Electricity Sources

Maryland has substantial coal generation, but market factors have affected how they are dispatched. PJM intensity
declined even as more coal-intense areas added (Ohio, Kentucky). RPS calculation based on retired REC mix
(includes emissions for biomass and WTE). Maryland Generation from EIA/EPA with WTE emissions added and
does not reflect formal GGRA methodology. PJM and RPS from PJM-GATS with EPA emission factors and updated
heat rates from prior analysis.
GGRA Plan Projections – RPS

Carbon Intensity (Lbs CO2/
MWh)

2,200

1,650

1,100

449

550

135

90

Maryland Department of the Environment

20

19

GGRA Final

20

18

20

17

20

16

20

15

GGRA Draft

20

14

20

13

20

12

Tier 1 RPS

20

11

20

10

20

09

PJM

20

08

20

07

MD

20

20

20

06

0

B.3. Incentives and Grant
Programs to Support Renewable Energy
Lead Agency: MEA
MEA administers incentives and
grant programs to promote and
accelerate the development of
renewable energy production in
Maryland, from utility scale facilities
to on-site distributed generation.
These are voluntary incentive-based
programs. Funding for the incentive
and grant programs comes from the
Strategic Energy Investment Fund.

B.1. The Maryland Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) Program
Lead Agency: MEA
The RPS is implemented through
the creation, sale and transfer of
RECs. Each REC represents one
megawatt of renewably generated
electricity. Electricity suppliers
are required to purchase RECs to
demonstrate they have obtained
specified percentages of their energy
supply from renewable resources.
Sources are classified as Tier 1 and
Tier 2. Tier 1 sources consist of:
solar, wind, qualifying biomass,
qualifying methane, geothermal,
ocean, qualifying fuel cell, qualifying
hydroelectric power, poultry litterto-energy, waste-to-energy, and
refuse-derived fuel. Non-solar Tier
1 requirements gradually increase
to 18 percent in 2020, and then
peak in 2022 at 20 percent and are
subsequently maintained at that
level. Tier 1 includes a solar set-aside
requirement that gradually increases
until it peaks at 2 percent in 2020.
Maryland’s Tier 2 source (eligible
hydroelectric power) requirement
remains constant at 2.5 percent

through 2018, after which it sunsets.
The development of renewable
energy sources is further promoted
by requiring electricity suppliers to
pay a financial penalty for failing to
acquire sufficient RECs to satisfy the
RPS. The penalty is used to support
the development of new Tier 1
renewable sources in the State.
The RPS is designed to create a
stable and predictable market for
renewable energy and to foster
additional development and growth
in the renewable energy industry.
B.2. Fuel Switching
Lead Agency: MEA
For more information on fuel
switching, please refer to the
introductory section of this chapter.
In state fuel switching GHG
emissions reductions have been
accounted for through Maryland’s
New Source Performance Standard
program, Boiler Maximum
Available Control Technology
program, and GHG Prevention
of Significant Deterioration
Permitting Program. Out of state fuel
switching GHG emission reductions
have been estimated to account
for approximately 1 MMtCO2e.

B.4. Offshore Wind Initiatives
to Support Renewable Energy
Lead Agency: MEA
Maryland waters are part of the
Mid-Atlantic Bight region, a coastal
area spanning from North Carolina
to Massachusetts with substantial
wind resources located in close
proximity to coastal population
centers. This area has the greatest
renewable energy potential relative
to other U.S. offshore regions in
the Gulf of Mexico, Pacific, and
Alaska. Research indicates that the
potential power supply available
from offshore wind substantially
exceeds the region’s current energy
use. Maryland, therefore, has the
potential to access large energy
resources off the coast that could
contribute to meeting future energy
demands while simultaneously
displacing fossil fuel generation.
Maryland has taken a lead among
Mid-Atlantic States working to
harness offshore wind resources.
The State is moving forward
expeditiously to put in place financial
support, regulatory parameters,
lease conditions, and data-gathering
initiatives to support the deployment
of a first-phase major offshore wind
project in the Maryland Wind
Energy Area (WEA).

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

91

C. THE REGIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INITIATIVE
(RGGI)
LEAD AGENCY: MDE

M

aryland is one of nine Northeast and Mid-Atlantic States
that participate in the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)
– a regional market-based cap-andtrade program to reduce CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel fired power
plants in the region.1 RGGI reduces
emissions through an emissions cap
applied to the nine-state geographic
region. Under the initiative, the
participating states issue “allowances” equal to the number of tons
of CO2 emissions allowed under
the regional cap. A single allowance
permits a source to emit one ton
of carbon dioxide.The enhancement to the RGGI program that
was proposed in the 2012 GGRA
Plan is now fully adopted as part of
the implementing regulations for
RGGI.
GHG Emission Reductions in
2020
RGGI provides a framework by
which emission reductions are
implemented under the EmPOWER
and RPS programs. The potential
emission reductions from the RGGI
program in 2020 are estimated to be
3.60 MMtCO2e.

Job Creation and Economic
Benefits
RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that
RGGI, once fully operational,
would support a total of 96 to
1,015 jobs by 2020, $94,970,706 to
$322,862,295 in net economic output
and $117,721,558 to $770,226,749
in wages over the lifetime of the
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix
K provide more detail on the RESI
1

Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York,
Rhode Island and Vermont currently participate in RGGI.

92

Maryland Department of the Environment

Offshore Wind in Maryland — Maryland Climate Coalition

studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with
this program.
Implementation
The RGGI program is mandated by
State law and is fully implemented
and enforceable through regulations
(COMAR 26.09) adopted and
enforced by MDE.

RGGI Participating States

D. OTHER ENERGY
PROGRAMS

T

his policy contains various other
energy programs which, when
fully implemented, will provide further potential emissions reductions
by 2020 and will create and retain
jobs and increase the State gross
domestic product.
D.1. GHG Power Plant
Emission Reductions from
Federal Programs
GHG emissions from the energy
supply sector in Maryland include
emissions from fossil fuel-fired
electricity generation and represent
a substantial portion of the State’s
overall GHG emissions. Electricity
demand in Maryland is expected
to increase over time and thus,
if unmitigated, GHG emissions
will also likely increase. Because
a pproximately 40 percent of
electricity consumption in Maryland
is generated out-of-state in the
surrounding Pennsylvania Jersey
Maryland Interconnection LLC
(PJM) electricity grid region, State
programs alone cannot effectively
control GHG emissions from power
consumed in Maryland.
Existing and proposed federal rules
summarized in this section (D.1.A.
GHG New Source Performance
Standard; D.1.B. Boiler Maximum
Achievable Control Technology;
and D.1.C GHG Prevention of
Significant Deterioration Permitting
Program) are expected to reduce
GHG emissions from Maryland and
out-of-state power generators.

BrandonShoresScrubber—http://www.voanews.com/content/us-power-plants-ordered-to-reduce-pollution-/163619.html

D.1.A. Boiler Maximum
Achievable Control
Technology (MACT)
Lead Agency: MDE
EPA has adopted new air emissions
requirements for industrial,
commercial, and institutional boilers

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

93

under two separate rulemakings.1
The first, which took effect January
31, 2013, establishes national
emission standards for Hazardous
Air Pollutants (HAPs) for major
sources. 2 The rule affects thousands
of boilers and process heaters at
facilities nationwide which are
considered as major sources of HAPs.
These facilities also emit GHGs.

MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides
a more detailed description of the
process used to quantify GHG
reductions.
Job Creation and
Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the
Boiler MACT program, once fully
operational, would support a total of
89 jobs by 2020, $76,106,574 in net
economic output and $86,578,365
The Boiler MACT rule applies to
in wages over the lifetime of the
any stationary source with a boiler
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix
or group of stationary sources with
K provide more detail on the RESI
boilers that emit 10 tons per year of
any single HAP or 25 tons per year of studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with
any combination of HAPs. The rule
requires each boiler to meet pollution this program.
emission limits on an annual and
MDE will adopt State regulations to
continuous basis.
implement the federal requirements.
EPA also issued a Boiler MACT rule
for smaller “area sources”, which took
effect February 1, 2013.3
Among other things, the Boiler
MACT rules require operators
to conduct a boiler tune-up to
improve efficiency, minimize fuel
consumption and reduce emissions.
EPA estimates there will be a one
percent fuel savings due to the tuneups, which equates to an equivalent
one percent reduction in
GHG emissions.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions
from the Boiler MACT program
in 2020 are estimated to be 0.07
1

Boilers burn fuel, including natural gas, fuel
oil, coal, biomass (e.g., wood), or other gas
to produce steam or hot water. The steam is
used to produce electricity, drive an industrial process, or provide heat. Emissions from
burning the fuel can include toxic air pollutants like mercury, lead and particle pollution.
2
National Emission Standards for Hazardous
Air Pollutants for Major sources: Industrial,
Commercial, and Institutional Boilers and
Process Heaters”, 78 Fed. Reg. 7138 (January
31, 2103).
3
“National Emission Standards for Hazardous
Air Pollutants for Area Sources: Industrial,
commercial, and Institutional Boilers”. 78 Fed.
Reg. 7488 (February 1, 2013).

94

Maryland Department of the Environment

D.1.B. GHG New Source
Performance Standard
Lead Agency: MDE
The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) is using the New
Source Performance Standard
authority under the federal Clean Air
Act to promulgate new regulations
to reduce GHG emissions from
fossil fuel-fired power plants. The
performance standards, which
are expected to become final
in early 2013, will apply to new
electric generating units and will
be based on existing technologies.
EPA is coordinating this action
on GHGs with a number of other
required regulatory actions for
other pollutants, thereby enabling
electric generating units to develop
multi-pollutant strategies to reduce
pollutants in a more efficient and
cost-effective way than would be
possible by addressing multiple
pollutants separately.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions
from the GHG New Source
Performance Standard program has
been aggregated with the estimated

emission reductions from the GHG
Power Plant Emissions Reductions
Federal Programs bundle.
Job Creation and
Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that
the GHG New Source Performance
Standard program, once fully
operational, would support a total of
40 jobs by 2020, $33,142,090 in net
economic output and $13,839,722
in wages over the lifetime of the
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix
K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with
this program Implementation
After EPA adopts the new federal
GHG New Source Performance
Standard, MDE and other State
agencies will implement the federal
standard through State regulations.
EPA is required to implement and
enforce the new requirements in any
state that does not implement the
federal standards.
D.1.C. GHG Prevention of
Significant Deterioration
Permitting Program
Lead Agency: MDE
The Prevention of Significant
Deterioration (PSD) program is a
federal preconstruction review and
permitting program applicable to
new major stationary sources and
major modifications at existing
major stationary sources. It requires
the application of Best Available
Control Technology (BACT)
to control emissions of certain
pollutants, which now include
GHGs. A BACT determination is
based on consideration of a number
of factors, including the costeffectiveness of the controls and the
energy and environmental impacts.
The BACT requirements apply
to all new major sources of GHG
emissions and major modifications at

GHG emitting facilities. This means that GHG sources subject to the requirements must evaluate and apply currently
available measures (and later technology as it develops) to reduce GHG emissions.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the GHG New Source Performance Standard program has been aggregated
with the estimated emission reductions from the GHG Power Plant Emissions Reductions Federal Programs bundle.
Job Creation and
Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the GHG Prevention of Significant Deterioration Permitting Program, once fully
operational, would support a total of 3 jobs by 2020, $4,669,183 in net economic output and $4,455,563 in wages over
the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation
and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

MDE has adopted regulations to implement and enforce the federal PSD program in Maryland, and has issued
several PSD approvals requiring the regulated sources to implements BACTs for GHGs.
D.2. Main Street Initiatives
Lead Agency: DHCD
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) has pursued new opportunities to help people
and communities through energy efficiency retrofits for homes and small businesses. With a “Main Street” approach,
DHCD competed for and won an award of $20 million from the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Better Buildings/
EECBG program. This Recovery Act-funded award was a three-year commitment that funded energy efficiency
retrofits through a new DHCD program called BeSMART. The BeSMART investments and initiatives subsequently
provided the foundation for DHCD’s newly created Housing and Building Energy Programs (HBEP) unit, which was
launched in 2012.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Main Street Initiatives program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.05
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and
Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Main Street Initiatives/ BeSMART program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 690 to 1,323 jobs by 2020, $1,234,313,963 to $2,008,178,709 in net economic output and
$646,003,722 to $1,060,707,094 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more
detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This program was established as a result of a competitive grant award, from U.S. Department of Energy. It is an
incentive based voluntary program.
Recommendations for Future
Actions and Reporting:

➢➢ Increase energy efficiency resources for residents, especially low – to middle- income households
➢➢ Reduced energy usage mitigates GHGs
➢➢ Reduced costs for homeowners and multifamily residents/projects
➢➢ Less risk for mortgage lenders; fewer defaults
➢➢ Independent analyses demonstrate high environmental and economic returns

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

95

Success Metrics – U.S. DOE BeSMART (ARRA)
Units
Dollars (1)

CY 2009

CY 2010

CY 2011

CY 2012

CY 2013

CY 2014

CY 2015

250

3,349

5,087

3,262

94

9

N/A

$1,071,127

$18,010,674

$20,887,258

$14,440,208

$369,963

$47,481

N/A

274

N/A

Savings (2)
7,625
102,144
155,153
99,491
2,867
(1) Program dollars are benefit only and do not include administrative costs.
(2) Savings for DOE WAP ARRA are estimates based on DOE’s calculation for energy savings in MMBtu.

96

Maryland Department of the Environment

D.3. Energy Efficiency for Affordable Housing
Lead Agency: DHCD
Since inception of the federally-funded Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) in the seventies, more than seven
million homes have been weatherized across the nation. Scientific Studies and the energy industry recognize that
energy efficiency is among the most viable options for decreasing fossil fuel consumption and consequently reducing
GHG emissions. Energy-efficiency is cost-effective and can be implemented quickly. A weatherized household can
realize up to $400 in first-year energy savings and an annual CO2 reduction of 2.65 metric tons on average.4 WAP is
designed to help eligible low-income households with the installation of energy conservation materials to reduce the
consumption of energy and the cost of maintenance. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has funded WAP since
1976, with major funding increases to the program under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. As
noted previously, DHCD now delivers energy efficiency programs through a new unit named Housing & Building
Energy Programs (HBEP).
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Energy Efficiency for Affordable Housing program in 2020 are
estimated to be 0.02 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Energy Efficiency for Affordable Housing program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 141 to 268 jobs by 2020, $272,216,797 to $437,927,248 in net economic output and
$172,016,143 to $280,906,676 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more
detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This initiative is a voluntary incentive based program. It receives funding from State and federal sources, including
MEA and U.S. Department of Energy.
➢➢ Recommendations for Future Actions and Reporting:
➢➢ Revise DHCD action items to reflect operation categories
➢➢ Multifamily, Single Family, Small Business
➢➢ Coordinate and standardize energy metrics, factors, and assumptions across all energy efficiency programs
➢➢ Improve reporting on local economic impacts and ROI to State
Success Metrics – Energy Efficiency for Affordable Housing

Units
Dollars (1)

CY 2009

CY 2010

CY 2011

CY 2012

CY 2013

CY 2014

Jan-Mar
2015

250

3,349

5,087

3,562

3,058

5,704

658

$1,071,127

$18,010,672

$20,887,258

$14,835,107

$20,393,164

$29,994,017

$2,710,647

14,687

1,646

Savings (2)
1,485
15,833
(1) Funding sources for this program include U.S. DOE WAP, EmPOWER LIEEP and MEEHA, RGGI and MEAP.
(2) Savings reported are for EmPOWER, LIEEP and MEEHA only and are calculated using MWhs.

4

U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, “Weatherization Assistance Program Technical Memorandum Background Data and
Statistics,” http://energy.gov, March 2010

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

97

Energ y Eff icient Hou sing in Pr ince G eorge’s C ount y, Mar yland — Mar yland D epar tme nt of Hou sing and C ommunity D e velopment

TRANSPORTATION
Potential GHG Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Program
E. Transportation Technologies

6.88

F. Public Transportation

1.85

G. Pricing Initiatives

1.99

Total

10.72

E. TRANSPORTATION TECHNOLOGIES

T

ransportation technologies reduce GHG emissions and other tailpipe pollutants through three primary
strategies: (1) cleaner fuels; (2) vehicle emissions technology; and (3) system efficiencies. Maryland’s transportation technologies programs employ all three strategies and encompass passenger travel and freight movement for both on road vehicles and off road transportation modes (air, ship and rail transport). Continued technology advancements and innovations will be needed to achieve deeper reductions in the State’s transportation
sector emissions by 2020 and in later years.

Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that programs under the Transportation Technologies group, once fully operational,
would support an aggregated total of 1,031 to 1,134 jobs by 2020, $1,112,700,515 to $1,223,970,569 in net economic
output and $541,055,221 to $595,160,748 in wages over the lifetime of the programs. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
E.1. Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards
This suite of programs reduces GHG emissions in several ways. “Upstream” fuel standards, such as the federal
Renewable Fuels Standard, require transportation fuel producers to blend renewable fuels into their petroleum
products. Depending on fuel producers’ choices of renewable fuels, this program has the potential to reduce the
per unit carbon intensity of their product inventory over time. The Maryland Clean Cars Program requires car
manufacturers to meet a fleet-wide average GHG emissions standard for vehicles sold in the State. The national
CAFE standards for light-duty vehicles and efficiency and emission standards for medium and heavy-duty vehicles
require car and truck manufacturers to both reduce GHG emissions and increase the fuel efficiency (i.e., more miles
per gallon) of their vehicle fleets over time. Maryland, California and other leadership states have played a key role in
advancing more stringent national standards. In addition to achieving significant GHG reductions over time, these
programs will produce public health, air quality, water quality and economic benefits for Marylanders.
100

Maryland Department of the Environment

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards program group in 2020
are estimated to be 5.57 MMtCO2e. Appendices C and J provide a more detailed description of the process used to
quantify GHG reductions.
E.1.A. Maryland Clean Cars Program
Lead Agency: MDE
The Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 required MDE to adopt regulations implementing the California Clean Car
Program. This program establishes a GHG emission standard based on fleet-wide averages; it does not set specific
standards for individual vehicles. It is the responsibility of the manufacturers to demonstrate compliance with the
required fleet averages for each model year. The fleet GHG standard under the Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007
began with model year 2011 vehicles.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Maryland Clean Cars Program in 2020 have been aggregated with the
estimated emission reductions from the Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Maryland Clean Cars Program have been aggregated with the job
creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This program is mandated by the Maryland Clean Cars Act of 2007 and has been fully implemented
through regulations codified in COMAR 26.11.34, the Low Emissions Vehicle Program, adopted
and enforced by MDE.
E.1.B. Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE): Model Years 2008-2011
Lead Agency: MDOT
Since introduction of the federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards in 1975, the standards have
increased gradually from the initial standard of 18 miles per gallon. Each year the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), charged with promulgating the standards, has analyzed the effect of its proposed annual
standard on the environment as well as the U.S. economy.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE): Model Years
2008 – 2011 program in 2020 have been aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Motor Vehicle
Emission and Fuel Standards program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE): Model Years
2008 – 2011 program have been aggregated with the job creation and economic benefits from the Transportation
Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation
and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This program was initially implemented through federal regulations adopted by NHTSA, which remains responsible
for its enforcement. In 2010, the program was superseded by new, more rigorous national GHG and fuel economy
standards for vehicles beginning in model year 2012, adopted through joint agency rulemaking by NHTSA and EPA.
NHTSA’s pre-existing standards for model years 2008-2011 will still be producing benefits in 2020 for those earlier
year vehicles that remain in the fleet.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

101

E.1.C. National Fuel Efficiency and Emission Standards for Medium and Heavy – Duty Trucks
Lead Agency: MDOT
Medium and heavy-duty vehicles are the transportation sector’s second largest contributor to fossil fuel consumption
and GHG emissions. In 2011, the National Fuel Efficiency & Emission Standards for Medium and Heavy-Duty Trucks
was adopted, the first national program designed to reduce GHG emissions and improve fuel efficiency for this class
of on road vehicles. The program is implemented through a joint rule issued by EPA and NHTSA. The joint rule is
comprised of complementary standards developed by the agencies under their respective authorities and covers
model years 2014-2018. Under the rule, EPA’s emission standards for CO2 and NHTSA’s fuel consumption standards
cover the following regulatory categories: combination tractors, heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans, and vocational
vehicles. EPA’s standards also cover recreational on road vehicles. The heavy-duty fleet subject to the rule includes all
on road vehicles rated at 8,500 lbs or more, except those covered by the current GHG emissions and federal Corporate
Average Fuel Economy standards for model years 2012-2016.
On June 19, 2015, EPA and NHTSA, on behalf of the Department of Transportation, each proposed rules to establish
a comprehensive Phase 2 Heavy-Duty National Program that will reduce GHG emissions and fuel consumption for
new on-road medium and heavy-duty vehicles. This technology-advancing program would phase in over the longterm, beginning in the 2018 model year and culminating in standards for model year 2027.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the National Fuel Efficiency and Emission Standards for Medium and
Heavy-Duty Trucks program in 2020 have been aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Motor
Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the National Fuel Efficiency and Emission Standards for Medium
and Heavy-Duty Trucks program have been aggregated with the job creation and economic benefits from the
Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and
the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

The federal regulations implementing this program were finalized in August 2011. The program will be federally
enforced jointly by EPA and NHTSA.
E.1.D. Federal Renewable Fuels Standard
Lead Agency: MDOT
Under the Clean Air Act, as amended by the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, EPA is required to set
annual standards under the Renewable Fuel Standard program (RFS) based on gasoline and diesel projections from
the U.S Department of Energy’s Energy Information Administration (EIA). EPA is also required to set the cellulosic
biofuel standard each year based on the volume projected to be available during the following year, using EIA
projections and assessments of production capability from industry.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Federal Renewable Fuels Standard program in 2020 have been
aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards
Program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Federal Renewable Fuels Standard program have been aggregated
with the job creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and
Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this
program.
Implementation

This federal program has been implemented through regulations adopted by EPA.
102

Maryland Department of the Environment

E.2. On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives
program group in 2020 are estimated to be 1.06 MMtCO2e. Appendices C and J provide a more detailed description of
the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Implementation

➢➢ Ongoing Coordinated Highway Action Response Team (CHART) operations and expansion of service
➢➢ Congestion relief strategies including low-cost/short-term operational improvements such
as signal timing and optimization and ITS, study of BRT corridors, and targeted capacity
enhancements to relieve bottlenecks
➢➢ Telework/Employer Outreach Programs
➢➢ BWI Thurgood Marshall, and MARC/MTA station and park-and-ride lot charging stations
➢➢ BWI Thurgood Marshall Utility Master Plan
➢➢ Dray Truck Replacement (Port of Baltimore) – Over 100 trucks replaced to date, with 30 more
funded in 2015APUs for existing locomotives
➢➢ APUs for existing locomotives
➢➢ Installation of 10 virtual truck weigh stations
E.2.A. On Road Technology
Lead Agency: MDOT
Transportation technology initiatives are significant contributors to on road mobile emissions reductions and
are an important element of the State’s efforts to reduce GHGs. Projects under this program include intelligent
transportation systems, traffic operational improvements, teleworking and engine replacements.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the On Road Technology program in 2020 have been aggregated with the
estimated emission reductions from the On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives
program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the On Road Technology program have been aggregated with the job
creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

Projects that contribute to a change in vehicle miles traveled growth and/or improve system efficiency are a subset of
the State’s complete Consolidated Transportation Program (CTP).
➢➢ Enhance Coordinated Highways Action Response Team (CHART) – The FY2015-2020 CTP
includes $113.8 million to continue to expand and enhance CHART.
➢➢ Provide Real Time Transit Information – MTA and WMATA have implemented real-time
technologies. These are being expanded to some Local Operating Transit Systems (LOTS).
➢➢ Incentivize Truck Fleet Turnover – MDE, MDOT and MPA are working together to retire old dray
trucks through grant programs.
➢➢ Promote Driver Education and Training (ECO-Driving) – Baltimore and Washington Metropolitan
Planning Organizations (MPOs) promote ECO-driving. The I-95 Corridor Coalition also promotes
ECO-driving.
➢➢ Promote Black Carbon Reductions – The diesel vehicle emissions control program specifically
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

103

targets the vehicles most likely to emit black carbon. The program affects any diesel-powered
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of over 10,000 pounds traveling on Maryland’s
highways. Enforcement is carried out by the Maryland State Police and the Maryland
Transportation Authority Police (MTAP), who can require any heavy-duty diesel vehicle to submit
to a smoke emissions test at any time or place.
E.2.B. Airport Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
A 2011 energy audit conducted for the Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) evaluated the potential emissions
impact of reductions in consumption of electricity and conventional vehicle fuel at the Baltimore/Washington
International Airport (BWI Thurgood Marshall). These reductions would result in lower GHG emissions through the
utilization of more energy efficient technologies and fuel conservation measures.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Airport Initiatives program in 2020 have been aggregated with the
estimated emission reductions from the On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives
program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Airport Initiatives program have been aggregated with the job
creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

Some of the existing initiatives are voluntary; others are required to support the Environmental Impact Statement
process mandated by the National Environmental Policy Act for major projects.
➢➢ BWI Thurgood Marshall’s periodic air quality assessments are required to support the Maryland
State Implementation Plan under the Clean Air Act.
➢➢ Increase Alternative Fueled Ground Support Vehicles – 30% of MAA vehicles use alternative
fuels.
➢➢ Promote Preferential Parking – Preferential Parking exists in both the daily and hourly garages
at BWI Thurgood Marshall.
➢➢ Promote Reforestation and Afforestation at BWI Thurgood Marshall – MAA maintains a Refores
tation Master Plan and Forestry Management Plan that comply with multi – agency regulations
and specify areas set aside for forest conservation and retention.
➢➢ Promote Hybrid Car Rentals and Satellite Lot Shuttle Vehicles – Many car rental companies offer
hybrid or “green” rental options, which are available at BWI Thurgood Marshall.
➢➢ Promote More Transit Connections – RTA, ICC Bus, MTA Bus and WMATA Bus service are
available at BWI Thurgood Marshall. In addition, travelers can access MARC, AMTRAK and
Light Rail trains.
E.2.C. Port Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
The Maryland Port Administration (MPA) has implemented an Environmental Management System, as well as
other initiatives to reduce the environmental footprint associated with Maryland’s deepwater seaport in Baltimore.
The MPA’s emission reduction strategies for GHGs and other air pollutants includes use of cleaner diesel fuel port fleet
vehicles, use of electric operated equipment, reduced truck emissions through turn time efficiency improvements, idle
reductions/requirements, and dray truck replacements.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Port Initiatives program in 2020 have been aggregated with the estimated
emission reductions from the On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives program group.
104

Maryland Department of the Environment

Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Port Initiatives program have been aggregated with the job creation
and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide
more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This is a voluntary program. MPA has ongoing and planned administrative, management, maintenance, and
operations strategies that will reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions from its transportation sector.
Additional environmental information may be found at: http://www.mpa.maryland.gov/content/green-port.php
➢➢ Electrification of Power for Docked Ships – MPA is conducting feasibility studies of this
technology. The Port of Los Angeles and Port of Long Beach are good examples of recent
successful implementation.
➢➢ Electrification of Ground Support Equipment – The Port continues to use grant and other funds
to update equipment including engine repowers, anti-idling devises, vehicle replacements and
electrification of gantries.
➢➢ Implementation of Marine Highways Corridors Program and Barge Subsidies – On behalf of its
member and affiliate agencies, the I-95 Corridor Coalition submitted a successful application to
USDOT and has attained designation of the M-95 Marine Highway Corridor. The corridor
includes a series of waterways/crossings/connections within the Coalition’s region, which
includes the Port of Baltimore.
E.2.D. Freight & Freight Rail Programs
Lead Agency: MDOT
The State is implementing initiatives to encourage and improve rail and freight transport. These initiatives focus on
improving the efficiency of freight transportation to help reduce emissions of GHGs and other pollutants from the
transportation sector. These efforts enhance connectivity and reliability of multimodal freight through infrastructure
and technology investments, such as expansion and bottleneck relief on priority truck and rail corridors and
enhanced intermodal freight connections at Maryland’s intermodal terminals and ports. The following strategies are
examples of State initiatives to encourage and improve rail and freight transport throughout Maryland.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Freight and Freight Rail Programs in 2020 have been aggregated with
the estimated emission reductions from the On Road, Airport, Port and Freight/Freight Rail Technology Initiatives
program group.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Freight and Freight Rail Programs have been aggregated with the
job creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

The State will continue to expand its ongoing effort while seeking additional funding and, where necessary, State and
Federal policy adjustments. Additional information may be found at: http://www.mdot.maryland.gov/
➢➢ Evaluate Implementation of National Gateway Initiative and Multi-Modal Goods Movement
Strategy – Maryland is continuing to work with CSX (National Gateway)
and NS (Crescent Corridor).
➢➢ Accelerate Construction of High Speed Rail – MARC / Amtrak planning/engineering through
Federal grants for Howard Street Tunnel, Susquehanna River Bridge, and BWI Thurgood
Marshall Station enhancement/new track are ongoing.
➢➢ Assist CSX in Constructing a New Intermodal Container Facility to Address Howard Street
Tunnel Challenge – Parties decided not to go forward with the original location based on
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

105

public input; discussions are ongoing.
➢➢ Explore Feasibility of Replacing Long Haul Truck Freight with Rail Hauling by 2020
✼✼ Freight Plan and Rail Plan have considered some options
✼✼ Continued partnerships with CSX and NS
✼✼ Unlikely large-scale shifts in logistics patterns through 2020
Implementation

➢➢ Extend Tax Credits for EVs and EV Charging Equipment – Existing credit (up to $3,000) is
effective from July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2017.
➢➢ Extend HOV Lane Exemption – Existing HOV lane exemption is valid from October 1, 2010
through September 30, 2017.
➢➢ Provide EV Charging for State Employees
✼✼ EV charging stations are available at several State facilities including MDOT Headquarters,
MDE Headquarters, UMD, DGS and BWI Thurgood Marshall.
✼✼ 5,000 EVs on the road
✼✼ 610 EV chargers in 259 locations
✼✼ 32 chargers installed at MDOT locations since 2011
✼✼ 45 installed at University System locations since 2011
✼✼ 26 Washington D.C. Fast Charge stations in 20 locations, supplementing 10 existing
✼✼ MTA adding 17 new chargers at 8 new locations

106

Maryland Department of the Environment

E.3. Electric and Low Emitting Vehicle Initiatives
Lead Agencies: MDOT/MEA
Initiatives to encourage the use of electric and other low and zero-emitting vehicles are part of the State’s efforts to
reduce emissions of GHGs and other air pollutants from mobile sources by providing alternatives to conventional
internal combustion engine vehicles. Maryland has assumed a leadership role in facilitating the deployment of electric
vehicles (EVs) and EV charging infrastructure in the State. EVs include plug-in all-electric vehicles, called battery
electric vehicles (BEVs), and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). BEVs produce zero tailpipe emissions of
GHGs and other pollutants because they use battery power for propulsion rather than an internal combustion engine.
PHEVs reduce tailpipe emissions by using batteries in addition to fossil fuels for propulsion. The carbon intensity
of the energy used to charge the batteries from the electricity grid is decreasing over time as a result of Maryland’s
participation in RGGI, its Renewable Portfolio Standard program and fuel switching to cleaner natural gas. These
programs are described under the Energy section of this chapter. The State is also partnering with private fleets to
accelerate fleet turnover to heavy-duty hybrid vehicles. More information on the initiatives in this program can be
found at:
http://www.mdot.maryland.gov
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Electric and Low Emitting Vehicle Initiatives program in 2020 are
estimated to be 0.25 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

The job creation and economic benefits from the Electric and Low Emitting Vehicle Initiatives program have been
aggregated with the job creation and economic benefits from the Transportation Technologies program group.
Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits
associated with this program.

EV Parking at Montgome r y Park — Mar y Jane Rutkowski

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

107

F. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION

P

ublic transportation contributes to GHG emission reductions in the State’s transportation sector by providing alternatives to travel in personal vehicles, thus reducing vehicle miles traveled (VMT). The programs
in this policy area include transit initiatives with a goal of substantially increasing transit ridership by 2020 and
intercity transportation initiatives
F.1. Public Transportation Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
For several decades, VMT has risen faster than the increase in population, in Maryland and nationwide. Land
use development over the past 40 to 50 years has put more people
living beyond the reach of easy access to transit facilities, increasing
automobile driving and tailpipe emissions of GHGs and other air
pollutants. This program is designed to advance the effort to meet a
goal of substantially increasing transit ridership by 2020. In order to
achieve this growth, actions are needed to increase the availability,
attractiveness and convenience of public transportation, improve the
operational efficiency of the system, and increase system capacity.
Actions related to land use planning, pricing disincentives for
driving cars or incentives for riding transit, and bike and pedestrian
access improvements, addressed in other sections of this chapter, are
also necessary to achieve the
ridership goal.

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Public Transportation
Initiatives program in 2020 are estimated to be 1.85 MMtCO2e.
Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used
to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Public Transportation Initiatives program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 927 to 1,854 jobs by 2020, $1,172,430,639 to $2,344,861,280 in net economic output and
$559,824,099 to $1,119,648,197 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more
detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with
this program.
Implementation

➢➢ Expand Local Circulator Buses and Transit – MDOT provides funding for the LOTS program to
support fleet replacement, maintenance/operations, and capacity enhancements.
➢➢ Implemented Real-Time Transit Information Technologies – MTA and WMATA have or are in the
process of implementing real-time technologies.
➢➢ Expand Ridesharing through Apps and Social Marketing – Commuter Connections offers mobile
apps to commuters where they can access ridesharing matches with other commuters living and
working in the same area. Commuter Connections also maintains Facebook and LinkedIn pages.
➢➢ Increase Commuter Choice Employer Incentives – Commuter Connections offers a broad range
of services to employers, including consultation on many alternative modes of transportation and
telework opportunities. Maryland continues to offer tax credits for employers –
http://metroridehsare.com/employer-information/tax-credit/
➢➢ MTA Bus Replacement – 85% of MTAs fleet uses cleaner alternatives to conventional diesel.
➢➢ Transit Oriented Development – Eight sites are undergoing development.
108

Maryland Department of the Environment

F.2. Intercity Transportation Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
Traffic congestion along the I-95 corridor between the Wilmington region, Baltimore and Washington, D.C. has
been steadily increasing over the past few decades. The State is implementing strategies to reduce congestion and
mobile emissions, including GHGs, by providing alternatives to single occupant vehicle use as well as improvements
to Maryland’s transportation systems. These strategies enhance connectivity and reliability of non-automobile
intercity passenger options through infrastructure and technology investments. This includes expansion of intercity
passenger rail and bus services as well as improved connections between air, rail, intercity bus, and regional or local
transit systems. More information on this program can be found in Appendix J .
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Intercity Transportation Initiatives program in 2020 have been
aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Public Transportation Initiatives program.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Intercity Transportation Initiatives program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 102 to 127 jobs by 2020, $175,447,514 to $219,309,399 in net economic output and $85,173,952 to
$106,467,444 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ MARC Growth & Investment Plan implementation including track and signal improvements,
recent enhancements at the Halethorpe and Edgewood stations, and planned/ongoing expan
sions at the BWI Thurgood Marshall MARC/Amtrak station and the West Baltimore station
➢➢ New MARC Penn Line weekend service and additional weekday service on the MARC
Camden Line
➢➢ Long-range Northeast Corridor improvements under study including environmental and
engineering studies for the Susquehanna River Bridge and B&P Tunnel replacement projects
➢➢ MARC locomotive replacement and repowering

Riders leaving the MARC at Baltimore’s Penn Stations — Elvert Barnes on Flickr

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

109

G. Pricing Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT
This program includes transportation pricing disincentives and travel demand management incentive programs.
Projects are tied to commute alternatives and programs including ride sharing (Commuter Connections), guaranteed
ride home, transportation demand program management and marketing, outreach and education programs (Clean
Air Partners), parking cash-out subsidies, transportation information kiosks, local car sharing programs, telework
partnerships, parking fees, and vanpool programs. More information on this program can be found in Appendix J .
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Pricing Initiatives program in 2020 are estimated to be 1.99 MMtCO2e.
Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Pricing Initiatives program, once fully operational, would support a total of up
to 405 jobs by 2020, up to $1,305,838,372 in net economic output and up to $614,542,355 in wages over the lifetime of
the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ Increase Gasoline Sales Tax – 2013 General Assembly action
➢➢ Enhance Electronic Toll Collection – MDTA plans for Francis Scott Key and Hatem Bridge
conversion to AET. Ongoing statewide feasibility study by MDTA
➢➢ Explore Other Revenue Instruments – In order to create an enhanced framework for future P3s
that will attract private investment to help build new infrastructure, Maryland passed House Bill
560, which was signed into law on April 9, 2013. The new legislation provides the private sector
with a stronger, more predictable and stream lined process, protects public assets, ensures a
strong workforce, requires competitive bidding for all projects and allows the private sector to
submit new unsolicited concepts to address Maryland’s infrastructure needs:
http://www.mdta.maryland.gov/partnerships/tp3overview.html
➢➢ Strengthen Parking Programs – SHA/MTA expansion of park-and-rides, TERM funding for
Commuter Connections, Commuter Choice Maryland
➢➢ Congestion Pricing – Opening of ICC and I-95 Express Toll Lanes. Future Plans for I-95
Phase 2 ETL uncertain
➢➢ Enhanced electronic toll collection through completion of the Intercounty Connector and the
I-95 Express Toll Lanes
➢➢ Added high-speed electronic toll lanes at the Fort McHenry Tunnel and Key Bridge toll plazas
➢➢ Commuter Choice Maryland and Commuter Connections ridesharing and Guaranteed Ride
Home programs
➢➢ Park and Ride lots – Over 1,000 new spaces under construction or planned in 2015/2016
➢➢ Other local and regional transportation demand management strategies

J.M. Eddins, Jr./for The Washington Post

H. OTHER INNOVATIVE TRANSPORTATION STRATEGIES/PROGRAMS
H.1. Evaluating the GHG Emissions Impact of Major New Transportation Projects
Lead Agency: MDE
This initiative is aimed at ensuring that potential increases in GHG emissions associated with the growth and
increased vehicle miles traveled (VMT) resulting from major new transportation projects and other major new
projects are analyzed, considered and addressed during the transportation planning process. The primary goal of this
initiative is to ensure that potential “growth related” GHG emission increases (both direct and induced) are addressed
when decisions to approve and fund major projects are made.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Evaluating the GHG Emissions Impact of Major New Transportation
Projects program in 2020 were not calculated.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

A detailed economic analysis of this initiative was not conducted as it is a new effort that is still evolving.
Implementation

MDE is working with the Baltimore Regional Transportation Board (BRTB), the Metropolitan Washington Council
of Governments (COG), MDOT and other state agencies/stakeholders to implement separate but related voluntary
efforts to:
➢➢ Study the existing and future levels of greenhouse gases in multiple sectors, including the
transportation sector.
➢➢ Identify viable, implementable and, in some cases, stretch strategies for reducing GHG
emissions across key sectors, including the transportation sector, and to quantify the associated
emissions benefits.
➢➢ Analyze the co-benefits, in terms of other air pollutant reductions, from the identified strategies.
These efforts will assist the MPOs and State agencies with presenting informed positions to policy makers
in terms of when and how any future state or regional GHG emission reduction goals should be
set or reevaluated.
BRTB “How Far Can We Get?” Study

The “How Far Can We Get?” Study was initiated by the BRTB as part of the FY 2014 UPWP. The purpose of this
study was to understand the level of emission reductions that are achievable through a reasonable level of reduction
measure implementation, and to inform the region’s next long range transportation plan. This study identifies several
transportation emission reduction measures (TERMs) that members believe feasible and have potential interest in
promoting. EPA’s MOVES 2010 motor vehicle emissions model was used as one of the tools in the How Far Can We
Get Analysis. It was used to get an overall picture of the sources of greenhouse gases and nitrogen oxide emissions,
within the on-road transportation sector. The Energy and Emissions Reduction Policy Analysis Tool (EERPAT)
model was used to perform two rounds of scenario testing of different TERMs. The EERPAT model enables rapid
scenario evaluation of alternative emission reduction policy scenarios. It produces results of emission reduction and
VMT change at the county, regional, metropolitan and state level. A draft report was distributed for review on August
11, 2015 and is currently being revised in response to comments that were received by committee members.
COG “What Would It Take?” Scenario

The “What Would it Take?” scenario, completed in 2010, was the first step toward answering major questions about
transportation and climate change mitigation in the Washington metropolitan region. This study was undertaken by
the TPB and led by the TPB Scenario Study Task Force in 2007 in direct response to growing concern about climate
change and a desire to position the region for early action. The outcome of this analysi was the identification of
effective and cost-effective transportation strategies for climate change mitigation that could be adopted by state and
local jurisdictions in the region. The emissions targets used in this study were taken from the COG Climate Change
Report. These targets are to reduce annual regional CO2 emissions to 2005 levels by 2012, 20% below 2005 levels by
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

111

2020, and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050. The study used these same reduction targets, but importantly only extended
analysis out to 2030 due to travel demand modeling limitations. Therefore, the final target for this study was a 40%
reduction below 2005 levels by 2030.
A final report was released on May 18, 2010. Short-term regional actions were likely to be implementable between
2010 and 2020. This group includes twenty-seven different strategies across five categories of:
➢➢ Increased transit use
➢➢ Increased bike/pedestrian use
➢➢ Pricing
➢➢ Improve operation efficiency
➢➢ Reducing travel
COG Multi-Sector Working Group

On November 12, 2008 COG adopted voluntary goals to reduce GHG emissions 20% below 2005 levels by 2020 and
80% below 2005 levels by 2050. On January 30, 2015, COG established the Multi-Sector Working Group (MSWG).
The propose of the MSWG is to conduct a study to examine all sectors of the economy to identify potentially viable
local, regional, and state actions to significantly reduce GHG emissions in accordance with the voluntarily adopted
goals. The study identifies potentially viable, implementable, and stretch local, regional, and state strategies for
reducing GHG across key sectors, analyze the potential GHG benefits of these strategies, and identify co-benefits,
costs, and implementation timeframes. The MSWG, consists of technical and policy staff from COG’s member
jurisdictions, as well as state and regional agencies, who have expertise in one or more of the main sectors from which
the region’s GHG emissions come — energy/built environment, land use, and transportation. The MSWG released
a Draft Technical Interim Report on July 27, 2015 that examines potential emissions reductions from all considered
strategies on their own and in combination.
A Draft Technical Interim Report was released on July 27, 2015. The Draft Final Report will be presented to the COG
board in January 2016. Development of a Proposed Action Plan will begin in January 2016.
Chapter 725, “Transportation – – Consolidated Transportation Program – – Evaluation and Selection of Proposed
Capital Projects”, (HB1155, 2010 Laws of Maryland) alters the selection criteria for capital projects to be included
in the State’s annual Consolidated Transportation Plan (CTP). Under the law, MDOT must evaluate capital project
requests based on the climate goals of the GGRA and GGRA Plan (among other State goals), with input from the
counties, municipalities and other entities proposing the projects. For each capital project selected for funding in
the CTP, MDOT must provide a Purpose and Need Statement that includes a description of why the project satisfies
GGRA climate goals. The law also requires MDOT to evaluate the impact of transportation investments on GGRA
climate goals in the performance goals and benchmarks it adopts for attainment of State transportation goals. These
benchmarks are reviewed annually by the Smart Growth Subcabinet.
H.2. Bike and Pedestrian Initiatives
Lead Agency: MDOT

T

his program is part of the State’s effort to reduce GHG and other motor vehicle emissions from cars by providing alternatives to single occupant vehicle use. Building appropriate infrastructure for additional bicycle
and pedestrian travel in urban areas increases access to and use of public transit and supports the State’s goal of
increasing transit ridership.

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Bike and Pedestrian Initiatives program in 2020 have been aggregated
with the estimated emission reductions from the Public Transportation Initiatives program.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Bike and Pedestrian Initiatives program, once fully operational, would support
a total of 1,040 to 2,748 jobs by 2020, $1,057,426,231 to $3,282,996,491 in net economic output and $347,661,479 to
112

Maryland Department of the Environment

$691,442,757 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ Bike Shelters & Bike Sharing – Bike sharing program underway
➢➢ Consider Bike Accommodations for all Roadway Projects
➢➢ 77 roadway capacity or bridge upgrade projects in MDOT’s Consolidated Transportation Program
include accommodations for bicycles and pedestrians
➢➢ Bikeways Program (23 bike network projects funded in 2014) and Bikeshare Program (ongoing awards
supporting successful implementation in Baltimore City, College Park/UMD and Montgomery County)
➢➢ SHA manages the Sidewalk Construction for Pedestrian Access Program, Retrofit Bicycle Program and the
Community Safety and Enhancement Program
➢➢ Cycle Maryland
➢➢ East Coast Greenway

C har m City Bikeshare Station in B altimore ' s Inne r Harbor — Cit y of B altimore D epar tme nt of Tran spor tation

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

113

MTA Transpor ts People and Bikes — Mar yland Tran sit Admini stration

Farmland Near Antietam Battle Field — Mary Jane Rutkowski

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

115

AGRICULTURE
& FORESTRY

Potential GHG Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Program
I. Forestry and Sequestration

4.55

J. Ecosystem Markets

0.68

Total

5.23

I. FORESTRY AND SEQUESTRATION
I.1. Managing Forests to Capture Carbon
Lead Agency: DNR
Managing forests to capture carbon will promote sustainable forestry management practices in existing Maryland
forests on both public and private lands. The enhanced productivity resulting from enrolling unmanaged forests into
management regimes will increase rates of carbon sequestration in forest biomass, increase amounts of carbon stored
in harvested, durable wood products which will result in economic benefits, and increased availability of renewable
biomass for energy production. Enhanced forestry management in Maryland should contribute to a 1.8 MMtCO2e
reduction in the State’s GHG emissions by 2020.
The goals of this program are to improve sustainable forest management on 30,000 acres of private land annually and
on 100 percent of State-owned resource lands, and ensure 50 percent of State-owned forest lands will be third-party
certified as sustainably managed. This program is performing as designed.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Managing Forests to Capture Carbon program in 2020 are estimated to
be 1.80 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Managing Forests to Capture Carbon program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 268 jobs by 2020, $28,564,453 in net economic output and $28,137,209 in wages over the lifetime of
the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.

Implementation

Public Lands:
➢➢ Since 2006, 211,000 acres of State Forests have been certified with Dual Third Party
Certification for Forest Sustainability to the Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) and Forest
Sustainability Certification (FSC) standards.
➢➢ DNR is working to develop similar sustainable forest management practices on State parkland
and wildlife management areas.
➢➢ Dual Third Party Certification for Forest Sustainability on State Forests
✼✼ WMAs and Parks (e.g., early successional habitat) (Currently working with WHS on several
projects. Will begin developing Forest Stewardship plan on several Parks in 2015)
✼✼ Accelerated Pace of Silvicultural Activity (Audit Received: Savage River State Forest will
increase the number of sales from 14 to 20. DNR is working to decrease the backlog of timber sales).
✼✼ State Forest Annual Workplans
Private Lands:
➢➢ Since 2006, 160,495 acres of Stewardship Plans, 99,933 acres of Sediment Control, and
81,860 acres of forest stand improvements (“Tree Planting”, “Timber Stand Improvements”,
and “Wildlife Habitat”) for a total of 342,288 acres have been implemented on private lands. –
DNR is currently on track to meet their goal by 2020.
➢➢ Technical Assistance – Forest Stewardship Plan Preparation
➢➢ Forest Stewardship Plan Implementation – Expanded Special Rivers Project
➢➢ Financial Assistance – State and Federal Cost Sharing
✼✼ Woodland Incentive Program
✼✼ Healthy Forests/Healthy Waters (Currently working on developing the next round of projects)
✼✼ Backyard Buffer Program
✼✼ Environmental Quality Incentive Program
✼✼ Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program
✼✼ TAXMOD – expanded eligibility (as of 10/27/14, 3 applicants from the expanded eligibility)
✼✼ Forest Conservation and Management Program
✼✼ Woodland Assessment Program

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

117

Managing Forests to Capture Carbon on Private Lands.
Year

Stewardship
Plans

Sediment
Control

Tree
Planting

Timber
Stand Imp.

Wildlife
Habitat

Acres

2006

12,106

11,580

3,082

4,796

2,196

33,760

2007

13,630

9,799

2,661

3,300

2,456

61,846

2008

20,657

13,060

2,286

8,519

3,760

48,282

2009

22,228

9,037

2,234

4,188

4,327

42,014

2010

16,895

11,249

1,497

3,542

1,835

35,018

2011

14,866

10,479

2,428

2,778

3,149

33,700

2012

24,640

11,167

1,151

4,607

2,489

44,054

2013

17,822

13,252

1,166

5,171

2,627

44,038

2014

17,651

10,310

1,237

3,850

528

33,576

2015

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

2016

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

2017

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

2018

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

2019

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

2020

18,000

11,000

1,500

4,500

2,800

37,800

268,844

166,623

27,005

68,401

42,439

573,312

Average Annual

38,220

Total
Current/Recent Efforts:

➢➢ Development and application of the UMCP remote sensing capability for forest carbon
assessment – Completed
➢➢ Launch of NASA, USDA and DOE climate science project for remote sensing, modeling, and
field-based measurements to quantify the carbon consequences of alternate development and
management plans across rapidly changing forests in Maryland. – Pending funding approval
➢➢ DNR with other partners, including USFS, UMCES and UMD Extension to release topic related
fact sheets and technical guidance on woodland and climate change stewardship principles. –
Completed
Managing Forests to Capture Carbon.

DNR is promoting sustainable forestry management practices in Existing Maryland forests on Public and private
land through a suite of efforts, policies and programs.

118

Maryland Department of the Environment

I.2. Planting Forests in Maryland
Lead Agency: DNR
Planting trees expands forest cover and associated carbon stocks by regenerating or establishing healthy, functional
forests through practices such as soil preparation, erosion control, and supplemental planting, to ensure optimum
conditions to support forest growth. By 2020, the implementation goal of this program is to achieve the afforestation
and/or reforestation of 43,030 acres in Maryland. Achieving the 43,030 acre target should reduce GHG emissions in
the State by 1.79 MMtCO2e by 2020. This program is performing as designed.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Planting Forests in Maryland program in 2020 are estimated to be 1.79
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Planting Forests in Maryland program, once fully operational, would support
a total of 92 jobs by 2020, $11,077,882 in net economic output and $14,862,060 in wages over the lifetime of the
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

DNR is implementing this program through a suite of efforts, policies, and programs, including:
Public Lands:
➢➢ State Forest System Annual Workplan Implementation
Private Lands:
➢➢ Technical Assistance
✼✼ Forest Stewardship Plan Implementation
✼✼ FCA Implementation
➢➢ Financial Assistance – Rural Lands: State and Federal Cost Sharing
✼✼ Woodland Incentive Program (WIP –MD Forest Service)
✼✼ TAXMOD (MD Forest Service; as of 10/27/14, 3 applicants from the expanded eligibility)
✼✼ Environmental Quality Incentive Program (EQIP – Federal/NRCS)
✼✼ Conservation Reserve Enhancement (CREP – Federal/NRCS)
➢➢ Fiinancial Assistance – Urban Lands: Public/Private Partnerships
✼✼ Tree-Mendous/Arbor Day
✼✼ Marylanders Plant Trees/Private Nurseries (Additional $150,000 has been received from OAG)
✼✼ Lawn to Woodland (e.g. National Arbor Day Foundation, etc.) (Kicked off in spring 2014 with
4.3 acres planted. Planning for 105 acres in spring 2015 and at least 70 in 2016.)
✼✼ Small Community UTC Grants (Possibly Spring 2015)
✼✼ Maryland Urban & Community Forestry Council Grants
✼✼ Expanded eligibility for Reforestation Law funding on to private land (Initial Lawn To Woodland
plantings used this fund source.)

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

119

➢➢ Current/Recent Efforts – “Lawn to Woodland” pilot
✼✼ Program initiated in April 2014
✼✼ A total of 14.3 acres planted
✼✼ Planning for 105 acres in spring of 2015
Forest Planting and Regeneration on Private Lands
Year

Afforestation

Reforestation

Riparian
Buffers

Private
Natural

Total
(acres)

2006

558

2,104

420

1,400

4,482

2007

334

1,991

336

1,400

4,061

2008

415

1,596

275

1,400

3,686

2009

531

1,497

206

1,400

3,634

2010

566

403

528

1,400

2,897

2011

1,231

639

558

1,400

3,828

2012

330

607

214

1,400

2,551

2013

286

602

278

1,400

2,556

2014

342

544

334

1,400

2,595

2015

400

700

239

1,400

2,900

2016

400

700

400

1,400

2,900

2017

400

700

400

1,400

2,900

2018

400

700

400

1,400

2,900

2019

400

700

400

1,400

2,900

2020

Total

400

700

400

1,400

2,900

7,051

14,339

5,388

21,000

48,005

Planting Forests in Maryland

120

Maryland Department of the Environment

I.3. Creating and Protecting Wetlands and Waterway Borders to Capture Carbon
Lead Agency: DNR
In addition to forests, wetlands and marshlands are known to be very efficient at sequestering carbon. Therefore,
DNR is planting forested stream buffers and pursuing the creation, protection and restoration of wetlands to promote
carbon sequestration through several means, including undertaking on-the-ground wetland restoration projects
through its Coastal Wetlands Initiative, the development of a terrestrial carbon sequestration protocol, a DNR
Power Plant Research Project wetland study in Dorchester County, and the Sea Level Affecting Marshes Model. The
goals of this program are the restoration of 1,142 acres of wetlands on state and public land and planting 645 acres of
streamside forest buffers on state and public lands. This program is exceeding the established goals.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Creating and Protecting Wetlands and Waterway Borders to Capture
Carbon program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.43 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the
process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Creating and Protecting Wetlands and Waterway Borders to Capture Carbon
program, once fully operational, would support a total of 62 jobs by 2020, $28,717,043 in net economic output and
$15,045,166 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

To date, 1,476 acres of wetlands have been restored and 3,388 acres of streamside buffers planted.
Riparian Forest Buffers
Year

Acres

2006

420

2007

336

2008

275

2009

206

2010

528

2011

558

2012

214

2013

278

2014

334

2015

239

Total

3,388

I.4. Biomass for Energy Production
Lead Agency: DNR
Maryland is working to promote the use of locally produced woody biomass for generation of thermal energy and
electricity. Energy from forest by-products can be used to offset fossil fuel-based energy production and associated
GHG emissions. There are many end users that could potentially benefit from such a program, including Maryland’s
public schools which could enjoy wood heating and cooling; hospitals which could utilize wood as primary
heating/cooling source; municipalities which could utilize local fuel markets as key component of their urban tree
management programs; and all rural landowners which would have access to a wood fuel market.
The goal of this program is to develop policies that recognize wood as a preferred renewable energy source, recognize
wood as the largest source of energy consumption in Maryland, and offer incentives to utilize locally produced wood
to meet thermal energy needs. This program is performing as designed.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Biomass for Energy Production program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.33
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

121

Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Biomass for Energy Production program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 51 jobs by 2020, $24,871,827 in net economic output and $12,756,348 in wages over the lifetime of
the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ Working with partners MES, MEA, COMMERCE and US Forest Service to facilitate installation
of wood energy systems
➢➢ Various projects in earliest stages of investigation in Baltimore County and Baltimore City
➢➢ Both Ft. Meade and Andrews Air Force Base are evaluating the opportunities for incorporating
wood systems in their overall green energy transformations
Awareness of wood energy technology is the primary barrier to this program. Actions needed include:
➢➢ Educate State agency leadership
➢➢ Develop policy supporting THERMAL energy
➢➢ Recognize wood as a preferred renewable energy source, on par with solar, geothermal and wind
➢➢ Establish financial incentive programs
I.5. Conservation of Agricultural Land for GHG Benefits
Lead Agency: MDA
MDA is working to safeguard Maryland’s network of natural areas, agricultural lands, and coastallands through its
established conservation programs and practices. MDA will contain the conversion and development of agricultural
lands through the protection of productive farmland and will continue to pursue policies and programs that
complement those of DNR and MDP by preserving or promoting forested, grassed, and wetland areas on agricultural
land.
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF), which was established in 1977, is one of the
first and most successful programs of its kind in the country. Besides maintaining prime farmland and woodland as
a viable local base of food and fiber production in the state, the preservation of agricultural land curbs the expansion
of random urban development, safeguards wildlife habitat, and enhances the ecology of the Chesapeake Bay and its
tributaries.
The state’s forward reaching goal is to protect 962,000 acres from commercial, residential, or industrial
development by 2020. Since 1997, Maryland has partnered with the USDA in the Conservation Reserve
Enhancement Program (CREP) to offer rental payments for leased easements along with other incentives to
encourage agricultural producers to protect environmentally sensitive lands, improve wildlife habitat, and reduce
sediment and nutrient loss. If fully implemented at its authorized 100,000 acres, CREP has the potential to plant up to
16,000 acres of marginal land
into grass, shrubs, and trees, establish 77,000 acres of grassland and forest buffers and 5,000 acres
of water and wetland habitat, and restore 2,000 acres of habitat for declining, threatened, or
endangered species.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Conservation of Agricultural Land for GHG Benefits program in 2020
are estimated to be 0.18 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Conservation of Agricultural Land for GHG Benefits program, once fully
operational, would support a total of 292 jobs by 2020, $982,330,321 in net economic output and $173,229,219 in
wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job
122

Maryland Department of the Environment

creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

MALPF:
➢➢ MALPF has permanently preserved land in each of Maryland’s 23 counties. – As of
June 30, 2014, 2,154 farms had been protected, representing a cumulative public investment
of over $645 million and increasing total acres preserved to 292,357 or 30% of the ambitious
2020 goal.
➢➢ MALPF’s purchases are funded by dedicated percentages of the Real Estate Transfer Tax and
the Agricultural Transfer Tax, along with county and state allocations.
➢➢ Since 2009 the General Assembly has diverted monies from the program and partially replaced
them with bond funds.
✼✼ Because of these decreases, the program has combined its acquisition years over four cycles in order to
have enough funding in each cycle to make at least one offer in each participating county.
✼✼ For the current cycle, 2015/2016, MAPF has received 156 applications covering 21,285 acres
and expects to be able to fund about 1/3 of them.
✼✼ At the present pace, it is estimated that MALPF will reach 40% of its target by 2020.
CREP:
➢➢ The monies in CREP vary with authorized funding and participation levels.
➢➢ Currently Maryland landowners can receive five types of payments: a one-time signing bonus,
annual rental payments that include a per-acre incentive, cost-share assistance, a one-time
practice incentive payment, and maintenance payments. – USDA funds rental payments and
a percentage of cost-shares and incentives through its Farm Service Agency.
➢➢ Maryland Agricultural Water Quality Cost Share Program (MACS) grants, which are financed
by state bond funds, provide up to 87.5% of the costs to install eligible best management
practices. – Bonus payments are funded through grants from the Chesapeake and Atlantic
Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund.
➢➢ CREP enrollments have generally been declining and have averaged less than 70,000 acres for
the past five years. – Commodity prices influence participation rates, but given their recent
history and the long-term nature of program contracts, the downward trend in enrollments is
unlikely to be reversed soon, and the achievement of 69% of goal may represent a peak for
the program.
I.6. Increasing Urban Trees to Capture Carbon
Lead Agency: DNR
Trees in urban areas directly impact Maryland’s carbon budget by absorbing GHG emissions from power
production and vehicles, reducing heating and cooling costs and energy demand by moderating temperatures around
buildings, and slowing the formation of ground level ozone as well as the evaporation of fuel from motor vehicles.
Implementation is supported by several other Maryland laws and programs that include outreach and technical
assistance for municipalities to assess and valuate their urban tree canopy goals, and plant trees to meet those goals.
The goals of this program are to plant 12.5 million trees in urban areas through the Forest Conservation Act,
Marylanders Plant Trees, Tree-Mendous Maryland, and 5-103 State Highway Reforestation Act planting programs.
This program is performing as designed.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Increasing Urban Trees to Capture Carbon program in 2020 are
estimated to be 0.02 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

123

Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Increasing Urban Trees to Capture Carbon program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 375 jobs by 2020, $288,146,970 in net economic output and $93,017,577 in wages over the
lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

To date, 5,214,302 trees have been planted from 2006 to 2014.
Urban Tree Planting (number of trees)
Year

FCA

5-103

Tree-Mendous/MPT

Totals

2006

623,700

33,750

8,178

665,628

2007

473,400

27,000

6,057

506,457

2008

499,500

9,900

2,160

511,560

2009

450,900

13,950

39,020

503,870

2010

337,950

308,250

23,000

669,200

2011

481,050

15,750

17,200

514,000

2012

42,300*

68,850

21,700

132,850

2013

119,250*

23,850

23,800

166,900

2014

140,580*

24,615

21,500

186,695

3,168,630

525,915

162,615

3,857,160

Totals

Increasing Urban Trees to Capture Carbon

124

Maryland Department of the Environment

I.7. Geological Opportunities to Store Carbon
Lead Agency: DNR
Geological carbon sequestration differs from other discussed sequestration methods as it captures carbon at the
source, transports it to the sequestration site, and then sequesters it. Maryland is one of eight partner states in the
Midwest Region Carbon Sequestration Partnership whose role is to identify, locate, and characterize potential
geologic storage levels. More than 10 gigatonnes of storage capacity has been identified to be available within
Maryland (103 years of storage capacity at current CO2 estimated production rate of 97 million metric tons per year).
The goal of this program is to identify and assess geologic storage opportunities. However, no quantification target has
been assigned. This program is performing as designed.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Geological Opportunities to Store Carbon program have been
aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Forestry and Sequestration bundle. Job Creation and
Economic Benefits
RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Geological Opportunities to Store Carbon program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 217 jobs by 2020, $312,011,719 in net economic output and $62,194,826 in wages over the
lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ DNR’s Resource Assessment Service is currently evaluating total organic carbon content in
western Maryland black shales (e.g., Marcellus), in prelude of determining the viability of these
as storage units
➢➢ Characterization of potential permanent carbon storage units within different areas of the State
➢➢ Deep well study of western Maryland and deep saline aquifers in Maryland’s offshore areas
➢➢ Delineation and characterization of Maryland depleted deep gas storage fields as sites of
permanent carbon storage
➢➢ Examination of potential development of stray gas migration into potable aquifers
➢➢ Current research is assessing the CO2 adsorption capacity of power plant combustion
by-products and the organic shales and clays in the closest geologic formations
➢➢ Site testing is underway in Michigan and Ohio and completed in Kentucky. It has been proposed
to attempt a site test on the Eastern Shore of Maryland; however, this is still in discussion.
➢➢ Resource Assessment along with 4 other Mid-Atlantic States, Battelle, and DOE are assessing
the potential for permanent storage of carbon within deep saline aquifers and basalt structures in
offshore areas
➢➢ Currently the Maryland Geological Survey is identifying and characterizing geologic intervals
in western Maryland that have sequestration potential.
➢➢ Depleted gas fields present the most immediate option for permanent storage of carbon dioxide
in western Maryland. – Maryland Geological Survey is currently assessing the potential of
utilizing black shales (e.g., Marcellus) as permanent sequestration locations as a logical
reutilization of natural gas infrastructure, should it be permitted.
➢➢ Deep saline aquifers within the onshore and offshore areas of Maryland’s eastern shore
have potential for significant quantities of permanent carbon storage (current estimate
~4.4 gigatonnes).
➢➢ RAS-MGS is currently studying the possibility of stray gas migration it potential for water well
contamination within the Accident gas storage facility.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

125

J. ECOSYSTEMS MARKETS
J.1. Creating Ecosystems Markets to Encourage GHG Emission Reductions
Lead Agency: DNR
Increased attention to the benefits and cost efficiencies that ecosystem markets could provide has spurred evaluation
of the potential its programs and policies may have for fostering carbon market development. Maryland’s Forest
Conservation Act and Critical Area Act require mitigation for natural resource impacts generated through land
development, and mitigation banking is an option to address these mitigation requirements
The goal of this program is the establishment of ecosystem markets, creation of a tracking mechanism and the
development of protocols to assess/quantify GHG benefits of individual markets. However, no quantification target
has been assigned.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Creating Ecosystems Markets to Encourage GHG Emission Reductions
program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.11 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process
used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Geological Opportunities to Store Carbon program, once fully operational,
would support a total of – 1,758 jobs by 2020, $423,431,394 in net economic output and $358,169,556 in wages over
the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation
and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ DNR has initiated a study to economically value a suite of ecosystem services for select habitats
along an urban to rural gradient.
➢➢ The net effect will be conservation of natural lands and reduction of GHG emissions.
➢➢ The first phase of the study will be released in Q4 FY2015.
➢➢ 15 services that forests provide to humans have been economically quantified. – Similar assess
ments have been completed for wetlands. Additional assessments are being conducted for
stream buffers, urban forests, oyster reefs and SAV beds.
Creating Ecosystem Markets to Encourage GHG Emission Reductions Preliminary Results
(per acre of forest)

126

Maryland Department of the Environment

J.2. Nutrient Trading for GHG Benefits
Lead Agency: MDA/ MDE
Since many of the agronomic, land use, and structural practices promoted by the Maryland Nutrient Trading
Program administered by MDA also store carbon and lower other GHG emissions, the existing nutrient marketplace
could provide a platform for the addition of a voluntary carbon component. Just like the nutrient and sediment
markets, carbon trading offers entities under regulatory requirements a potentially more cost-effective means to meet
their obligations while giving farmers and landowners the opportunity to receive compensation for implementing and
maintaining conservation practices. MDA plans to add carbon credits and enhanced nutrient credits to the Maryland
Nutrient Trading Program. Carbon and enhanced nutrient credits would be “stacked” onto existing nutrient and
sediment credits as tradable commodities, thereby increasing the potential value of the total credit package and
taking another incremental step toward building a comprehensive environmental marketplace. Encouraging trades
between nonpoint sources, such as agricultural operations, and point sources, such as wastewater treatment plants,
and industrial facilities, or other nonpoint sources, such as highway contract and development projects, would not
only create new possibilities for GHG reductions, but also improve water quality, reduce fertilizer use and soil erosion,
restore wetlands and wildlife habitat, provide supplemental income for farmers and foresters, create new employment
opportunities, and promote Smart Growth goals by preserving agricultural and
forested lands.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Nutrient Trading for GHG Benefits program in 2020 are estimated to be
0.57 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Nutrient Trading for GHG Benefits program supported approximately 5 jobs,
$915,527 in net economic output and $423,432 in wages during development of web-based calculation, marketplace,
and trading registry tools through 2013, but has not estimated the potential impacts that would occur with an active
environmental market. Such a market would support employment of engineers, technical advisorys, contractors,
and other professions, in addition to providing revenue for farmers and landowners who implement conservation
practices. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Unlike many trading programs across the county which supply compliance credits for existing wastewater treatment
plants, Maryland’s program was designed to provide offsets for new growth and development.
➢➢ The lack of progress in finalizing stormwater policies and regulations has left the program without
the necessary driver for trading although several proposals to meet reduction requirements
under the Bay Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) will offer a much needed alternative.
➢➢ A public and private stakeholder advisory group started meeting in November 2009 to assess
carbon mitigation activities, determine a menu of eligible practices, and develop the policies and
guidelines to implement a carbon trading program, but that effort was discontinued in 2012 with
the worldwide collapse in carbon credit prices.
➢➢ MDA plans to re-convene the carbon advisory group when the nutrient marketplace is fully
functioning, and while the timing is uncertain, it is still possible that 10% of Maryland’s farms
could be generating nutrient, sediment, and carbon credits in an active environmental market
through either intra or inter-state trading by 2020.
➢➢ A new multi-state trading platform has been completed using the Maryland model as the
template, and this platform already has the embedded capacity to calculate carbon credits.
➢➢ Work has begun on the development of a complementary online offset assessment tool for use
by the urban sector, and a prototype should be available for testing soon.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

127

Nutr ient Management on a Mar yland Far m — Mar yland D epar tme nt of Ag r ic ulture

W. Centre St. and Saint Paul Streets — Mary Jane Rutkowski

BUILT
ENVIRONMENT
Program

Potential GHG Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

K. Building and Trade Codes in Maryland

3.15

K. BUILDING AND TRADE CODES IN MARYLAND
LEAD AGENCY: DHCD

G

iven the long lifetime of buildings, updating state and local building codes on a periodic basis will provide
long-term greenhouse gas emissions reductions. The statewide building code in Maryland is adopted by the
Maryland Codes Administration, which is within the Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD). The statewide building code is called the Maryland Building Performance Standards (MBPS) and is
updated every three years following the International Codes Council (ICC) cycle. The MBPS is based primarily
on the international codes books (I-Codes) published by the ICC; the core code books adopted by Maryland are
the International Building Code (IBC), the International Residential Code (IRC), and the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC). In January of each third year, the Maryland Codes Administration adopts the
latest codes into the MBPS, as required by law; subsequently, the local building code authorities must adopt and
implement the MBPS by July of that same year. Local code authorities may amend the MBPS to meet the specific
conditions and needs of their jurisdiction – with a few exceptions. For example, the energycode (IECC) and the
accessibility code (Maryland Accessibility Code or MAC) cannot be weakened. Other codes, such as the recently
authorized International Green Construction Code (IgCC), are a voluntary option for local jurisdictions.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Building and Trade Codes in Maryland program in 2020 are estimated to
be 3.15 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.

130

Maryland Department of the Environment

Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Building and Trade Codes in Maryland program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 727 jobs by 2020, $357,208,251 in net economic output and $64,971,923 in wages over the lifetime of
the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

Recommendations for Future Actions and Reporting:
➢➢ Consider rethinking building code action items due to changes in building technology
➢➢ Consider code changes to facilitate “Net Zero” energy buildings
➢➢ Consider code changes to make home retrofits/renovations easier and more affordable
➢➢ Improve and expand training statewide

SolarNation

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

131

SOURCE
REDUCTION
&
RECYCLING
Program

Potential GHG Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

L. Zero Waste

1.48

L. ZERO WASTE
LEAD AGENCY: MDE

W

aste diversion is defined as the volume of waste that is diverted from entering the waste stream through
recycling or source reduction activities. Source reduction activities are those that reduce or prevent the
creation of waste. Maryland estimates the source reduction rate using a checklist for counties to document their
source reduction activities, including backyard composting, reuse programs, and technical assistance. The counties’ responses are tallied and correspond with a source reduction credit, up to a maximum of 5%, which is added
to the recycling rate to produce the waste diversion rate.
Reducing the generation and disposal of waste has many benefits. It saves energy and natural resources, preserves
the capacity of existing solid waste disposal facilities and reduces greenhouse gases and other pollutants generated by
landfills and manufacturing processes.
MDE has developed a “Zero Waste” Action Plan – a comprehensive strategy comprised of short and longer term
measures designed to nearly eliminate the need for waste disposal facilities by 2030 by reducing the generation of
waste and increasing reuse and recycling. The Action Plan establishes the following future Statewide recycling and
waste diversion rate goals:
Future State-wide Recycling and Waste Diversion Rate Goals
2015

2020

2030

Waste Diversion Goal

54%

65%

85%

Recycling Goal

50%

60%

80%

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Zero Waste program in 2020 are estimated to be 1.48 MMtCO2e.
Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Recycling & Source Reduction program, once fully operational, would
132

Maryland Department of the Environment

support a total of 326 to 558 jobs by 2020, $303,588,866 to $419,730,048 in net economic output and $123,645,781 to
$175,740,920 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

➢➢ Jurisdictions with populations greater than 150,000 are required to recycle 35 percent or more of
their waste and jurisdictions with populations less than 150,000 are required to recycle 20 per
cent or more of their waste beginning December 2015. In no case is the recycling rate to be less
than 15 percent for the larger counties and 10% for smaller counties.
➢➢ State Government must reduce by recycling the amount of the solid waste stream generated for
disposal by at least 30 percent or an amount that is determined practical and economically fea
sible, but in no case may the amount to be recycled be less than 15 percent. This requirement
began in July 2014.
➢➢ A State Agency Recycling Plan was developed and implemented as a result of 2009 legislation
that requires recycling of glass, paper, metal, and plastic at State-owned or State-operated build
ings.1 Agencies are now revising their plans to meet the higher goal (30%) established in 2012
legislation.2 MDE has encouraged all agencies to strive to attain a recycling rate of 40% by 2015.
➢➢ Scrap tires are banned from disposal in a landfill.
➢➢ Counties must address the feasibility of composting mixed solid waste when developing their
10-year solid waste management plans.
➢➢ Separately collected yard waste is banned from disposal at solid waste acceptance facilities.
➢➢ Mercuric oxide battery manufacturers are responsible for the collection, transportation, and
recycling or disposal of these batteries sold or offered for promotional purposes in the State.
➢➢ State law requires a program or system for the collection, recycling, or disposal of each cell,
rechargeable battery or rechargeable product sold in the State.
➢➢ Electronics manufacturers who sell or offer for sale their product in Maryland must register
and pay a fee to MDE. Fees may be used to provide grants to counties and municipalities for
computer and video display device recycling activities.
➢➢ Electronics manufacturers are encouraged to implement takeback programs for reuse and
recycling of electronic products.
➢➢ Motor vehicle manufacturers are required to develop and submit to MDE a mercury
minimization plan that includes information on mercury switch removal from motor vehicles.
➢➢ A county is required to submit a revised recycling plan to MDE. A county’s recycling plan is
required to address the collection, processing, marketing, and disposition of recyclable materials
from county public schools. By October 1, 2013, counties must address multi-family residential
recycling in their county recycling plans. By October 1, 2014, apartments and condominiums
with 10 or more units must provide recycling opportunities for residents.
➢➢ Pursuant to 2011 legislation, MDE was required to study composting in the State and make
recommendations to the General Assembly by January 2013 on ways to promote composting.
These recommendations were to include any necessary legislative, regulatory, or programmatic
changes. MDE convened a stakeholder workgroup to develop these recommendations, which
include proposed statutory changes to provide MDE with authority to regulate composting
of source-separated organics (food scraps, yard trim, etc.) separately from the solid
waste requirements.3
1

^2009 Md. Laws ch.408
^2012 Md. Laws ch.692
3
^2011 Md. Laws ch.363
2

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

133

Long Term 2015-2016 Initiatives:

➢➢ Quantifying the extent of existing commercial recycling
➢➢ Encouraging local governments to adopt “Pay-As-You-Throw” (PAYT) Fee Systems
Long Term 2017-2018 Initiatives:

➢➢ Achieving recycling and diversion rates of 60% and 65% by 2020
➢➢ Expanding product stewardship and extended producer responsibility (EPR) in Maryland
➢➢ Considering additional product disposal bans
➢➢ Considering bans on additional products
Long Term 2018-2020 Initiatives:

➢➢ Adopting a universal recycling requirement (all residences and commercial and
institutional establishments)
➢➢ Adopt universal collection of organic materials for compostingM. LEADERSHIP-BY-EXAMPLE

134

Maryland Department of the Environment

George L. Peters

INNOVATION

Potential GHG Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Program
M. Leadership-By-Example

1.78

N. Maryland’s Innovative Initiatives

0.21

O. Future or Developing Programs

0.02

Total

2.01

M.1. Leadership-By-Example: State of Maryland Initiatives
Lead Agency: DGS
Through lead-by-example programs, state government in Maryland aims to improve energy efficiency, reduce waste,
and integrate renewable energy practices in all of its agencies’ operations and facilities, as well as their purchasing
practices. The Maryland Department of General Services manages the Maryland Green Building Council, Maryland
Green Purchasing Committee, the State Energy Database and the Renewable Energy Portfolio
GHG Emissions Reductions in 2020

The potential emissions reductions from the Leadership-By-Example: State of Maryland Initiatives program in 2020
are estimated to be 0.56 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Leadership-By-Example: State of Maryland Initiatives program, once fully
operational, would support a total of 20 to 27 jobs by 2020, $63,812,257 to $76,796,100 in net economic output and
$35,251,618 to $43,345,713 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail
on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

The State’s lead-by-example programs in high performance buildings and procurement are statutorily driven.
➢➢ DGS shares responsibility with the Board of Public Works, MDE, the Department of Budget and
Management, Maryland Green Building Council, and Maryland Green Purchasing Committee for
administering them.
➢➢ Programmatic progress is tracked in annual reports which both the Maryland Green Building
Council and the Maryland Green Purchasing Committee are required to submit to the Mayrland General
Assembly. DGS is working with the Governor’s Office on reduction goals:
136

Maryland Department of the Environment

➢➢ A schedule for the State government’s purchase of electricity from renewable sources that
meets the State’s RPS interim and final (2022 targets)
M.2. Leadership-By-Example: Maryland Colleges and Universities
Lead Agency: MDE
In Maryland, the presidents’ of 23 colleges and universities—including all USM schools, Morgan, SMCM, 4
community colleges and 4 independent institutions— have signed the American College and University Presidents
Climate Commitment, which requires each school to complete a GHG inventory, develop a climate action plan and
implement strategies to reduce GHG emissions to achieve a set target. Schools are encouraged to commit to become
climate neutral by a certain date, meaning GHG emissions sourced from the school be reduced or mitigated from a
base year, with remaining emissions offset by purchasing carbon credits or other means.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Leadership-By-Example: Maryland Colleges and Universities program
in 2020 are estimated to be 0.56 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to
quantify GHG reductions
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Leadership-By-Example: Maryland University Lead by Example Initiatives
program, once fully operational, would support a total of 182 jobs by 2020, $89,416,504 in net economic output and
$56,152,345 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI
studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with
this program.
M.3. Leadership-By-Example: Federal Government
Lead Agency: MDE
Federal agencies with facilities located in Maryland are implementing suites of lead-by-example programs to
improve efficiency, reduce waste, and integrate renewable energy and sustainable practices into their operations,
facilities and fleets. These programs include tools to benchmark and track energy use and GHG emissions in order to
report progress. Examples of programs include energy reduction in public buildings, facilities and lands, improved
efficiencies in fleet vehicles and fuels, water conservation, waste reduction and recycling, purchasing of products and
services with lower life-cycle impacts, and greater use of renewable energy.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Leadership-By-Example: Federal Government program in 2020 are
estimated to be 0.41 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Leadership-By-Example: Federal Government program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 1,347 jobs by 2020, $179,016,115 in net economic output and $121,429,442 in wages over the
lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

In 2009 the “Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance” was signed, which calls
on the federal government to reduce its GHG emissions from direct sources to 28 percent below 2008 levels by 2020
and implement aggressive energy and water efficiency programs (Executive Order 13514, issued October 8, 2009).
Federal agencies are specifically directed to set agency-wide reduction targets for Scopes 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions
and to develop and implement Strategic Sustainability Performance Plans designed to meet the targets. In July 2010
the federal government-wide target was expanded to require a 13 percent reduction by 2020 for GHG emissions from
indirect sources, such as employee travel and commuting.
Data available for FY09 shows that the federal government nationally decreased energy consumption per square
foot of building space by approximately 13.1 percent compared with FY03, surpassing the FY09 goal of 12 percent.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

137

The federal government also purchased or produced 2,331 gigawatt-hours of electricity from renewable sources –
approximately 4.2 percent of its electricity use – surpassing the goal of 3 percent for FY09. EPA continues to provide
assistance in determining the amount of federal reductions which have occurred in Maryland.
M.4. Leadership-By-Example: Local Government
Lead Agency: MDE
Maryland county and municipal governments, together with State agencies, are adopting policies and practices to
obtain high performance and energy-efficient buildings, facilities and vehicle fleets, and reduce the carbon footprint
in purchasing, procurement and other government operations. Some jurisdictions have conducted GHG inventories,
adopted climate action plans and targets, and implemented tracking protocol, such as those provided by the
International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020
The potential emission reductions from the Leadership-By-Example: Local Government program in 2020 are
estimated to be 0.25 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions
Job Creation and Economic Benefits
RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Leadership-By-Example: Local Government program, once fully operational,
would support a total of 1,982 jobs by 2020, $248,107,910 in net economic output and $187,011,716 in wages over the
lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation
This program combines both voluntary and mandatory initiatives. There are a wide range of implementation tools
being used at the local level including ordinances, resolutions, and voluntary sustainability plans.
Six counties and three cities have prepared climate plans using the methods developed by the International Council
for Local Environmental Initiatives. Part of these plans identifies emissions that result from government operations.
Using base line data in the plans, the benefits are calculated for a 25 percent reduction from the base year and 50
percent reduction from the base year.

138

Maryland Department of the Environment

Summary of Local Government Data With a 25 Percent GHG Reduction

MMtCO2e

25%
Reduction
from Base

Low
Estimate

50%
Reduction
from Base

High
Estimate

608,988

0.61

0.46

0.15

0.30

0.30

134,667

0.13

0.10

0.03

0.07

0.07

Base Year Emissions

Base
Year

MtCO2e

Baltimore City

2007

Frederick

2007

Jurisdiction

Montgomery

FY2005

0.45

0.34

0.11

0.23

0.23

Howard

2007

340,042

0.34

0.26

0.09

0.17

0.17

Prince Georges

FY2007

95,877

0.10

0.07

0.02

0.05

0.05

Baltimore County

2006

142,701

0.14

0.11

0.04

0.07

0.07

Annapolis

FY2006

11,991

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.01

Chevy Chase

2007

162

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Takoma Park

1990

1,901

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.45

0.89

N. MARYLAND’S INNOVATIVE INITIATIVES
N.1. Voluntary Stationary Source Reductions
Lead Agency: MDE
GGRA provides two paths for sources in the State’s manufacturing sector to follow to potentially get credit for any
voluntary programs that they are implementing. Either companies may simply take totally voluntary action and
provide a good faith estimate of potential reductions, which if appropriate, included in the plan as a reduction, or a
company can implement an early voluntary GHG emissions reduction plan, which must be approved by MDE before
January 1, 2012 and secure a
formal “credit.”
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Voluntary Stationary Source Reductions program in 2020 are estimated
to be 0.17 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG
reductions
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Voluntary Stationary Source Reductions program, once fully operational, would
support a total of 4 jobs by 2020, $5,126,953 in net economic output and $1,785,280 in wages over the lifetime of the
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic
benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This is a voluntary program.
N.2. Buy Local for GHG Benefits
Lead Agency: MDA
Although farm stands and farmers markets are not new, the phenomenal surge in the locally grown movement
has been fueled by not only by increasing awareness of the benefits of fresh, healthful foods and mounting
consumer interest in supporting nearby producers, but also concerns raised by well publicized episodes of product
contamination and foodborne illness. MDA’s “Maryland’s Best” campaign continues to be highly successful in
promoting local farms as preferred sources of food for Marylanders by helping agricultural producers market their
products directly to supermarket, food service, institutional, and other wholesale buyers, as well as consumers.
MDA will promote the sustainable production and consumption of local agricultural goods and thereby help to
displace the production and consumption of products transported from other states and countries. In addition to the
energy savings and GHG reductions resulting from decreased transportation emissions, greater demand for local
products preserves the agricultural landscape, supports agro-biodiversity, and encourages beneficial environmental
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

139

practices. MDA will work with farmers, local governments, restaurants, food distributors and retailers, value-added
producers, public and private institutions, and trade associations to maintain and expand its popular “Maryland’s Best
– Local, Fresh” program. By 2020, MDA aims to raise the number of farmers markets by 20%, establish a state farmers
market association, and increase direct sales (buyer/grower) by 20%.
MDA created the website “Maryland’s Best” (www.marylandsbest.net) as an online resource to help buyers and
consumers find locally grown products. A directory of markets also can be found online at: http://mda.maryland.gov/
maryland_products/pages/farmers_market_dir.aspx.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Buy Local for GHG Benefits program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.02
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Buy Local for GHG Benefits program, once fully operational, would support a
total of 27 jobs by 2020, $17,395,022 in net economic output and $8,266,448 in wages over the lifetime of the program.
Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits
associated with this program.
Implementation

MDA has fulfilled its goals under this initiative.
➢➢ The Maryland Farmers Market Association (www.marylandfma.org) was established in 2012
through a federal matching grant awarded to MDA in cooperation with the University of Maryland
and Maryland’s market managers.
➢➢ As of spring 2015, there were 145 farmers’ markets across the State, with at least one in every
Maryland county and Baltimore City.
✼✼ This number represents 94% of the 2020 goal, but it is likely that the target of 155 markets has
been achieved because there are always markets that are not included in the official count for
a variety of reasons.
✼✼ MDA participates in the USDA Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP), which provides
checks to low-income residents to purchase fresh produce. 400 Maryland farmers enrolled in
this effort last year and received over $500,000 through the program. In 2014, the Maryland
Department of Human Resources joined with the Farmers Market Association to install pointof-sale machines in farmers markets across the state so that purchases can be made by lowincome residents on electronic benefit transfer cards. In 2015, Maryland became the first state
in the nation to pilot the Farmers Market Finder, a mobile website, that lists all farmers’
markets with vendors who accept FMNP checks. (http://ecologycenter.org/fmfinder/)
➢➢ MDA does not track direct sales figures, but if annualized participant numbers at the buyer-grow
er expo held each winter since 2002 are used as a proxy, the event has grown 93% in the last
nine years.
➢➢ The Jane Lawton Farm-to-Food Program, established by the General Assembly in 2008, promotes and facilitates the sale of farm products to Maryland schools and educates students about
the sources of their food, how it is produced, and the benefits of a healthy diet.
➢➢ MDA was given legislative authority in the 2010 General Assembly session to regulate the use of
the terms “locally grown” and “local” when advertising or identifying agricultural products.

140

Maryland Department of the Environment

N.3. Pay-As-You-Drive® Insurance in Maryland
Lead Agency: MIA
Pay-As-You-Drive® automobile insurance is also known as use-based insurance. Generally, use-based insurance
plans are designed to align the amount of premium paid with actual vehicle usage. The distance an automobile is
driven, the speed at which it is driven, and the time of day it is driven all are factors that can be used to determine
premiums under a use-based plan.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Pay-As-You-Drive® Insurance program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.02
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Pay-As-You-Drive® Insurance program, once fully operational, would support
a total of 1 job by 2020, – $122,071 in net economic output and $30,518 in wages over the lifetime of the program.
Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits
associated with this program.
Implementation

This is a voluntary program. More companies are offering use-based insurance to customers than in 2012.
N.4. Job Creation and Economic Development Initiatives Related to Climate Change
Lead Agency: Commerce
This program promotes economic development opportunities associated with reducing GHG
emissions in Maryland. There are six areas of focus:
➢➢ Strengthen coordination and communication across State agencies, partners and stakeholders to provide
strategic vision for advancing a green economy
➢➢ Promote energy and resource efficiency efforts
➢➢ Develop and foster clean, local energy production and industrial capacity
➢➢ Capitalize upon economic opportunities to restore and protect Maryland’s natural resources
➢➢ Promote sustainable development practices that create jobs, generate prosperity and make Maryland more
self-reliant
➢➢ Increase access to capital for green businesses and projects
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Job Creation and Economic Development Initiatives Related to Climate
Change program have been aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Maryland’s Innovative
Initiatives bundle.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

Although the Job Creation and Economic Development Initiatives Related to Climate Change program will provide
both economic output and job creation, the benefits of this program are accounted for in the other programs detailed
in this chapter of the GGRA plan. Listing the benefits of this program in both this section and in the other programs
would result in double counting of the benefits. Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies
and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

This is a voluntary initiative.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

141

O. FUTURE OR DEVELOPING PROGRAMS
O.1. The Transportation and Climate Initiative
Lead Agency: MDE/MDOT
The Transportation and Climate Initiative (TCI) is a regional effort of Maryland and 10 other Northeast and MidAtlantic states and Washington, D.C. to reduce GHG emissions in the region’s transportation sector, minimize the
transportation system’s reliance on high-carbon fuels, promote sustainable growth to address the challenges of
vehicle-miles traveled, and help build the clean energy economy across the region. More information on this program
can be found at:www.transportationandclimate.org and www.georgetownclimate.org/
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the TCI program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.02 MMtCO2e. Appendices C
and J provide a more detailed description of the process used to quantify GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the TCI program, once fully operational, would support a total of 1 job by 2020,
$784,738 in net economic output and $697,548 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this program.
Implementation

The Transportation and Climate Initiative is a multi-state collaborative and voluntary initiative
O.2. Clean Fuels Standard
Lead Agency: MDE
The Clean Fuels Standard program is a cooperative effort being undertaken by eleven Northeast and Mid-Atlantic
States to design and implement a regional low carbon fuel standard to reduce the carbon intensity of transportation
fuels. The Clean Fuels Standard program is a collaboration of commissioners from the environmental and energy
agencies in those 11 states. This effort is still in the analysis stage and there are no specific plans on implementation at
this time.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Clean Fuels Standard program in 2020 are estimated to be
0.00 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

A detailed economic analysis of this initiative was not conducted as it is a new effort that is still evolving.
Implementation

This program is still under development. At this time, the eleven states involved in the partnership have not made
any decisions about program design or implementation. If finalized, this program would be implemented through
regulations adopted by MDE.

P. LAND USE PROGRAMS

T

he two programs designed to minimize GHG emissions from future land development are P1. Reducing Emissions through Smarter Growth and Land Use/Location Efficiency and P2. Priority Funding Area
(Growth Boundary) Related Benefits. MDP is the lead agency for these efforts, which involve the private sector
and various agencies and commissions at all levels of government within the State.
By better managing growth, local communities can minimize harmful sprawl development and contribute to a
reduction in Maryland’s GHG emissions. Smart growth is characterized by compact, transit-oriented, bicycle-friendly
land use, with neighborhood schools, walkable streets, mixed-use development and a wide range of housing choices.
Smart growth concentrates new development and redevelopment in areas with existing or planned infrastructure
to avoid sprawl, which is generally characterized as the increased development of land in suburban and rural
areas outside of their respective urban centers. This increased development on the outskirts of towns, villages and
metropolitan areas is often accompanied by a lack of development, redevelopment or reuse of land within the urban
centers themselves and results in a marked increase in GHG emissions.
It should be noted that many local governments in Maryland are already implementing smarter, more sustainable
land use policies and programs that are: promoting green building and compact, transit-oriented development;
reducing aggregate VMT; preserving vegetated/forested lands (which sequester carbon); and protecting agriculture.

GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS IN 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Land Use Programs in 2020 are estimated to be
0.64 MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions.

Looking up Crisfield Rd/413 — IAN Image Library

LAND USE

Program
P. Land Use Programs

Potential GHG
Emission Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
0.64

Implementation

Transportation Model Issue:
➢➢ The 2012 GGRA Plan noted that “conventional transportation models have focused on speed,
distance, and the number of vehicles accommodated. To measure GHG reductions from land
use/location efficiency, transportation models must also emphasize access, proximity and VMT.”
➢➢ To begin to address this issue, SHA is refining the Maryland Statewide Transportation Model
(MSTM) which, together with similar regional four step travel demand models, have been used
to forecast growth in vehicle volumes, test scenarios, make performance measurements, etc.
➢➢ MDP in cooperation with SHA has been using the MSTM and regional models to evaluate prog
ress toward compact development and GHG prevention.
Other Indicators of Land Use:

The 2012 GGRA Plan noted that “until an updated transportation model is in place that can adequately take into
account the GHG reduction benefits of land use/location efficiency factors, MDP recommends additional metrics
to determine progress.” MDP is supporting the Maryland Sustainable Growth Commission in its effort to develop
and evaluate smart growth indicators. A draft web tool entitled “Current Status Check: Progress toward Sustainable
Development and Conservation Objectives” is in development that includes sustainable transportation and land
use indicators.
As part of MDP’s technical assistance to local and state government to promote smart growth and land use/location
efficiency, MDP provides data analysis and forecasting, making use of a variety of data sets and analytical tools, such
as the MDP parcel database, U.S. Census information, MDP land use/land cover data, and MDP Growth Simulation
Model. MDP is also assisting local governments on infill and redevelopment projects in existing communities,
utilizing various best planning practices to help revitalize and attract new development to this areas.
MDP continues to implement the following existing programs in support of achieving 0.64 MMtCO2e in GHG
reduction by 2020:
Smart Growth Subcabinet:

144

Maryland Department of the Environment

➢➢ If necessary, recommends to the Governor changes in State law, regulations, and procedures
needed to support Smart Growth Policy and works to create, enhance, support, and revitalize
Sustainable Communities across Maryland.
Maryland Sustainable Growth Commission:

➢➢ Charged with assessing the progress that State, regional, and local planning agencies are
making progress toward the goals of the State Economic Growth, Resource Protection, and
Planning Policy (12 visions)
➢➢ Consistent with the 12 visions, the Commission is to make recommendations on the adequacy,
coordination, and implementation of funding mechanisms and State assistance for planning,
infrastructure, and land preservation.
➢➢ To facilitate voluntary joint planning among State and local jurisdictions, the Commission will
make recommendations that promote coordination and cooperation.
➢➢ The Commission will advise on the content, preparation, and implementation of the State
Development Plan, the State Transportation Plan, and the State Housing Plan, and also consider
how they relate to local land use plans.
Sustainable Communities Act of 2010:

➢➢ Established the “Sustainable Communities” designation in order to strengthen reinvestment
and revitalization
➢➢ Enhanced an existing rehabilitation tax credit into the Sustainable Communities Tax Credit Program
➢➢ Simplified the framework for designated revitalization target areas in the Community Legacy
and Neighborhood BusinessWorks programs
➢➢ Requires the Maryland Department of Transportation to consider Sustainable Communities as
it annually considers the Consolidated Transportation Program
2009 legislative suite (HB294/SB273, HB297/SB280 and HB295/SB276):

➢➢ Incorporation of the 12 new planning visions in local comprehensive plans
➢➢ Development of local land use goals
➢➢ Consistency of local land use ordinances with comprehensive plans
➢➢ Submittal of local annual reports
Priority Funding Areas:

➢➢ Maryland law directs the use of State funding for roads, water and sewer plants, economic
development and other growth-related needs toward Priority Funding Areas, recognizing that
these investments are the most important tool the State has to influence smarter,
more sustainable growth and development.
The 2009 California Climate Scoping Plan notes that GHG prevention should double every 20 years through a
combination of land use and enhanced transit policies. A 2008 U.C. Berkley study reviewed over 20 modeling studies
from California (including the State’s four largest MPOs), other states and Europe. The study found a range of 0.4 to
7.7 percent reduction in VMT resulting from a combination of land use and enhanced transit policies compared to a
business-as-usual case over a 10-year horizon, with benefits doubling by 2030.4
P1. Reducing Emissions through Smart Growth and Land Use/Location Efficiency
Lead Agency: MDP
This program reduces Marylanders’ dependence on motor vehicle travel, especially single occupant vehicles, by
developing incentives and requirements for development projects and regional land use patterns that achieve land
4

Rodier, Caroline. U.C. Berkeley, Transportation Sustainability Research Center, “A Review of the International Modeling Literature: Transit, Land
Use, and Auto Pricing Strategies to Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled and Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” August 2008. http://www.arb.ca.gov/planning/tsaq/docs/rodier_8-1-08_trb_paper.pdf

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

145

use/location efficiency with regard to transportation. The purpose is to reduce VMT and the combustion of fossil
fuels. Land use/location efficiency means that residences, jobs, shopping, schools, and recreational opportunities
are in close proximity to each other and that alternative transportation modes (walking, biking and mass transit) are
convenient and easily accessed. The Smart Growth development pattern, together with land use/location efficiency,
results
in shorter trip lengths, less need for automobile and truck travel, and greater use of alternative
transportation modes.
Existing state laws and initiatives that support the P.1 strategy include the Maryland Sustainable Growth
Commission, Smart Growth Subcabinet, Sustainable Communities Act of 2010, 2009 planning legislation, MDP data
analysis and forecasting, and MDP indicator development.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Reducing Emissions through Smart Growth and Land Use/Location
Efficiency program have been aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Land Use Programs
bundle.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Reducing Emissions through Smart Growth and Land Use/Location
Efficiency program, once fully operational, would support a total of 1,855 to 4,921 jobs by 2020, $6,678,779,555
to $7,045,812,977 in net economic output and $1,115,978,571 to $5,182,441,243 in wages over the lifetime of the
program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K of this report provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and
economic benefits associated with this program.
P2. Priority Funding Area (Growth Boundary) Related Benefits
Lead Agency: MDP
Maryland has established Priority Funding Areas to preserve existing communities, to target State resources to
build on past investments, and to reduce development pressure on critical farmland and natural resource areas. By
encouraging projects in already developed areas, PFAs reduce the GHG emissions associated with sprawl. Priority
Funding Areas are geographic growth areas defined under Maryland law and designated by local jurisdictions to
provide a map for targeting State investment in infrastructure. A map of the Priority Funding Areas in Maryland is
available on MDP’s website at: http://planning.maryland.gov/OurProducts/pfamap.shtml. Maryland law directs the
use of State funding for roads, water and sewer plants, economic development and other growth-related needs toward
Priority Funding Areas, recognizing that these investments are the most important tool the State has to influence
smarter, more sustainable growth and development.
GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Reducing Emissions through Smart Growth and Land Use/Location
Efficiency program have been aggregated with the estimated emission reductions from the Land Use Programs
bundle.
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Priority Funding Area (Growth Boundary) Related Benefits program, once fully
operational, would support a total of 3,776 to 4,769 jobs by 2020, $8,579,756,640 to $13,809,582,408 in net economic
output and $3,447,810,437 to $6,745,858,578 in wages over the lifetime of the program. Chapter 6 and Appendix K
of this report provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits associated with this
program.

146

Maryland Department of the Environment

Q OUTREACH AND PUBLIC EDUCATION
LEAD AGENCY: A MULTI-AGENCY EFFORT COORDINATED BY MDE

S

tate-sponsored public education and outreach combined with community actions form the foundation for
behavioral and life style changes necessary to reduce GHG emissions. This program is designed to promote
new actions and encourage continuation of existing efforts such as the educational efforts and action campaigns
of State agencies, such as MDE, DNR, Maryland State Department of Education, and University of Maryland;
electric utilities; non-profit organizations; faith communities; and others. This combination of efforts insures
that scientifically based factual information is made available through public education and outreach efforts and
reaches all segments of the public.

GHG Emission Reductions in 2020

The potential emission reductions from the Outreach and Public Education program in 2020 are estimated to be 0.03
MMtCO2e. Appendix C provides a more detailed description of the process used to quantify
GHG reductions
Job Creation and Economic Benefits

RESI’s 2015 Study estimated that the Outreach and Public Education program, once fully operational, would support
a total of zero jobs by 2020, $152,588 in net economic output and $61,036 in wages over the lifetime of the program.
Chapter 6 and Appendix K provide more detail on the RESI studies and the job creation and economic benefits
associated with this program.
Implementation

This is a voluntary program. Outreach and public education are supporting efforts to other programs. It does not
exist as a separate, quantifiable entity.EmPOWER Maryland
In July 2015, the PSC issued an order directing the continuation of utility programs supporting EmPOWER
Maryland energy reduction policy and set new savings targets that will extend beyond the original 2015 goals in the
EmPOWER Maryland statute. In its order, the PSC directed utilities to ramp up electricity savings to 2% of gross
sales5 for as long as cost-effective savings continue to be available. The PSC also directed workgroups to recommend
by February 1, 2016, separate goals for natural gas savings and low – and moderate-income sector savings. Savings
can come from a variety of sources, including traditional equipment-based measures, “smart meter” enabled
analytics, and more efficient distribution grid hardware. Utilities will be reviewing their current plans and proposing
modifications as needed to meet the new goals.
While the PSC order does not specifically contemplate a separate savings goal for non-utility entities, MEA and other
state agencies will continue to work closely with the PSC and Maryland utilities to ensure that programs are effectively
designed and implemented. Additionally, MEA and DGS continue to work on efforts to reduce energy use in State
buildings.
Maryland Clean Cars Program
The State is pursuing the following options to increase GHG emission reductions from motor vehicles by 2020 and
beyond:
➢➢ Incentivize Passenger Fleet Turnover
➢➢ Incentivize Taxi Fleet Turnover
National Fuel Efficiency and Emission Standards for Medium – and Heavy-Duty Trucks
MDOT efforts requiring trucks to maintain an average fleet age to ensure fleet turnover is discussed as an
enhancement option in E.2.A. On Road Technology, below.
On Road Technology
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
5

This is not equivalent to requiring that total electricity sales decrease by 2% a year. Instead, it requires verified savings to be equivalent to 2% of
the most recent baseline year’s weather-normalized gross sales. For example, if a utility’s most recently baseline year’s weather-normalized gross
sales were 1,000,000 MWh, their electricity savings target would be 20,000 MWh (2% of 1,000,000).

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

147

OUTREACH &
PUBLIC EDUCATION
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Enhance CHART – The FY2015-2020 CTP includes $113.8 million to expand and enhance CHART.
➢➢ Provide Real Time Transit Information – MTA and WMATA have implemented real-time technologies.
These are being expanded to some Locally Operated Transit Systems.
➢➢ Incentivize Truck Fleet Turnover – MDE, MDOT and MPA are working together to retire old dray trucks
through grant programs.
➢➢ Promote Driver Education and Training (ECO-Driving) – Baltimore and Washington MPOs promote
ECO-driving. The I-95 Corridor Coalition also promotes ECO-driving.
➢➢ Promote Black Carbon Reductions – The diesel vehicle emissions control program specifically targets the
vehicles most likely to emit black carbon. The program affects any diesel-powered vehicle with a gross
vehicle weight rating of over 10,000 pounds traveling on Maryland’s highways. Enforcement is carried out
by the Maryland State Police and the Maryland Transportation Authority Police (MTAP), who can require
any heavy-duty diesel vehicle to submit to a smoke emissions test at any time or place.

148

Maryland Department of the Environment

T

PROGRAM
ENHANCEMENTS

he following programs have been identified as areas to focus continued research and analyses on to explore
opportunities that could further reduce GHG emissions while strengthening Maryland’s economy, creating
jobs and protecting Maryland consumers. Any emissions reductions obtained by enhancement options that are
currently implemented have been accounted for relative to obtaining the 2020 GGRA goal.
MDE and the other State Agencies implementing the measures in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update will work
with the Maryland Climate Change Commission’s Mitigation Working Group to analyze at least the measures listed
below:
➢➢ Continued effort on electric vehicles, electric vehicle infrastructure, zero emission vehicles and
other possible enhancements to the Maryland Clean Cars program
➢➢ Additional analyses of options designed to promote renewable energy, conservation and energy
efficiency that support State economic development goals and protect Maryland consumers
➢➢ Expanded efforts on forestry and agricultural strategies that line up with State goals in those
areas while also supporting a strong economy
➢➢ New initiatives on fast acting climate changers, regional and local partnerships and creative
financing to support investment into transportation, energy and other technologies, that generate
significant cost savings over time, but not widely used at this time because of the initial capital
investment that is needed
Additional emerging issues for potential analysis include:
➢➢ Life cycle analyses of various energy strategies
➢➢ Health risk and benefits analysis
➢➢ Hydraulic fracturing and other natural gas issues
The following programs have been enhanced based upon the 2012 GGRA Plan.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

149

Airport Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Increase Alternative Fueled Ground Support Vehicles – 30% of MAA vehicles use alternative fuels.
➢➢ Promote Preferential Parking – Preferential Parking exists in both the daily and hourly garages at BWI.
➢➢ Promote Reforestation and Afforestation at BWI – MAA maintains a Reforestation Master Plan and
Forestry Management Plan that comply with multi-agency regulations and specify areas set aside for forest
conservation and retention.
➢➢ Promote Hybrid Car Rentals and Satellite Lot Shuttle Vehicles – Many car rental companies offer hybrid or
“green” rental options, which are available at BWI.
➢➢ Promote More Transit Connections – RTA, ICC Bus, MTA Bus and WMATA Bus service are all available at
BWI Thurgood Marshall. In addition, travelers can access MARC, AMTRAK and Light Rail trains.
Port Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Electrification of Power for Docked Ships – MPA is conducting feasibility studies of this technology. The
Port of Los Angeles and Port of Long Beach are good examples of recent successful implementation.
➢➢ Electrification of Ground Support Equipment – The Port continues to use grant and other funds to update
equipment including engine repowers, anti-idling devises, vehicle replacements and electrification
of gantries.
➢➢ Implementation of Marine Highways Corridors Program and Barge Subsidies – On behalf of its member
and affiliate agencies, the I-95 Corridor Coalition submitted a successful application to USDOT and has
attained designation of the M-95 Marine Highway Corridor. The corridor includes a series of waterways/
crossings/connections within the Coalition’s region, which includes the Port of Baltimore.
Freight & Freight Rail Programs
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Evaluate Implementation of National Gateway Initiative and Multi-Modal Goods Movement Strategy –
Maryland is continuing to work with CSX (National Gateway) and NS (Crescent Corridor).
➢➢ Accelerate Construction of High Speed Rail – MARC/Amtrak planning/engineering through Federal
grants for Howard Street Tunnel, Susquehanna River Bridge, and BWI Station enhancement/new track
are ongoing.
➢➢ Assist CSX in Constructing a New Intermodal Container Facility to Address Howard Street
Tunnel Challenge – Parties decided not to go forward with the original location based on public input;
discussions are ongoing.

150

Maryland Department of the Environment

Electric and Low Emitting Vehicle Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Extend Tax Credits for EVs and EV Charging Equipment – Both incentives have been extended by General
Assembly to June 30, 2017 (2014 Session). EV charging equipment tax credit was changed to a point of
purchase rebate.
➢➢ Extend HOV Lane Exemption – The General Assembly extended this to 2017 (2103 Session).
➢➢ Adopt EV Fleet Purchasing Goal – An Executive Order was signed establishing fleet purchasing goals in
January 2015. It is currently under review and a new fleet purchasing goal is under consideration.
➢➢ Provide EV Charging Stations for State Employees – The State has installed several new charging stations
at State facilities and is in the process of reviewing State facilities to determine which facilities would be
appropriate for charging stations. In addition, the State has implemented a program to install 21 DC Fast
Chargers throughout the state by the first quarter of 2016. When completed, this program will more than
double the existing Fast Charger network and allow EV travel throughout the state.
➢➢ Extend Idle Reduction Technology Grants – This program was discontinued in the fall of 2014 due to a loss
in federal funding. The State is exploring other funding options.
Public Transportation Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Expand Local Circulator Buses and Transit – MDOT provides funding for the LOTS program to support
fleet replacement, maintenance/operations, and capacity enhancements.
➢➢ Implemented Real-Time Transit Information Technologies – MTA and WMATA have or are in the process
of implementing real-time technologies.
➢➢ Expand Ridesharing through Apps and Social Marketing – Commuter Connections offers mobile apps to
commuters where they can access ridesharing matches with other commuters living and working in the
same area. Commuter Connections also maintains Facebook and LinkedIn pages.
➢➢ Increase Commuter Choice Employer Incentives – Commuter Connections offers a broad range of services
to employers, including consultation on many alternative modes of transportation and
telework oportunities. Maryland continues to offer tax credits for employers:
http://metroridehsare.com/employer-information/tax-credit/
➢➢ MTA Bus Replacement – 85% of MTAs fleet uses cleaner alternatives to conventional diesel.
➢➢ Transit Oriented Development – Eight sites are undergoing development.
Pricing Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Increase Gasoline Sales Tax – 2013 General Assembly action
➢➢ Enhance Electronic Toll Collection – MDTA plans for Francis Scott Key and Hatem Bridge conversion
to AET. Ongoing statewide feasibility study by MDTA
➢➢ Explore Other Revenue Instruments – In order to create an enhanced framework for future P3s that will
attract private investment to help build new infrastructure, Maryland passed House Bill 560, which was
signed into law on April 9, 2013.
The new legislation provides the private sector with a stronger, more predictable and streamlined process, protects
public assets, ensures a strong workforce, requires competitive bidding for all projects and allows the private sector to
submit new unsolicited concepts to address Maryland’s infrastructure needs.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

151

http://www.mdta.maryland.gov/partnerships/tp3overview.html
➢➢ Strengthen Parking Programs – SHA/MTA expansion of park-and-rides, TERM funding for Commuter
Connections, Commuter Choice Maryland
➢➢ Congestion Pricing – Opening of ICC and I-95 Express Toll Lanes. Future Plans for I-95 Phase 2 ETL
uncertain. Enhanced electronic toll collection through completion of the Intercounty Connector and the
I-95 Express Toll Lanes Added high-speed electronic toll lanes at the Fort McHenry Tunnel and Key Bridge
toll plazas. Commuter Choice Maryland and Commuter Connections ridesharing and guaranteed ride
home programs
➢➢ Park and Ride lots – Over 1,000 new spaces under construction or planned in 2015/2016. Other local and
regional transportation demand management strategies
Bike and Pedestrian Initiatives
The following enhancement options have been implemented to achieve additional reductions in GHG emissions by
2020 and beyond:
➢➢ Bike Shelters & Bike Sharing – Bike sharing program underway
➢➢ Consider Bike Accommodations for all Roadway Projects
✼✼ 77 roadway capacity or bridge upgrade projects in MDOT’s Consolidated Transportation Program
include accommodations for bicycles and pedestrians
✼✼ Bikeways Program (23 bike network projects funded in 2014) and Bikeshare Program (ongoing awards
supporting successful implementation in Baltimore City, College Park/UMD, and Montgomery County)
✼✼ SHA manages the Sidewalk Construction for Pedestrian Access Program, Retrofit Bicycle Program, and
the Community Safety and Enhancement Program
✼✼ Cycle Maryland
✼✼ East Coast Greenway
Leadership-By-Example: State of Maryland Initiatives
DGS will work with the Governor and General Assembly to improve energy efficiency, reduce waste, and integrate
renewable energy practices in State buildings:
➢➢ DGS is working with State Agencies to develop Energy Plans that set priorities for improvement at
each Agency.
➢➢ DGS is working with State agencies to train the Agency Energy Coordinator staff at each Agency to analyze
energy consumption and account for improvements and implementation of energy efficiency programs.
➢➢ DGS is working with the Maryland Green Building Council to ensure new State facilities are independently
metered for energy and water consumption.
➢➢ DGS is providing resources and expertise to local governments, businesses, and institutions to promote
widespread adoption of the State’s lead-by-example practices in environmentally preferable purchasing.

152

Maryland Department of the Environment

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

153

Montg omer y Park, B altimore — Mar y Jane Rutkowski

Small Bu siness S aturday, Hage rstow n , Mar yland — Mar yland D epar tme nt of C omme rce

6
Maryland Jobs
& the
Economy

Dredging for Oysters —
Ben Fertig, IAN Image Library (www.ian.umces.edu/imagelibrary/)

C

limate change and mitigation
strategies are important factors
for many elements of the economy
and society in general: the rising
costs of energy and transportation,
threats to the environment, and the
health of the greater population
(and, by extension, the labor pool).
Energy, transportation, agriculture
and forestry, recycling, buildings,
land use, and many other areas are
affected by climate change. As such,
mitigating climate change is a vital
concern.
Maryland State government
agencies are doing their part to
mitigate the negative effects of
climate change by creating and
implementing climate change
mitigation strategies designed to
reduce GHG emissions in the State.
The GGRA strategies under various
state government agencies have been
organized into eight subject areas:
energy, transportation, agriculture

and forestry, recycling, multi-sector,
buildings, land use, and innovative
initiatives.
This report is a refinement of
RESI’s 2014 results, taking into
account the short-term job creation,
economic activity, and wage effects
from these GGRA strategies and
potential enhancements of some
programs. The 2014 report was a
preliminary analysis of the potential
economic impacts of mitigation
strategies for the 2012 GGRA Plan.
During this refinement, RESI
used a dynamic model known as
the REMI model PI+ to assist in
determining cumulative benefits and
annual impacts to the region. This
model allowed RESI to review the
interactions among agencies within
the region from the strategies and
changes that would result from the
interaction of those agencies. The
results of this report are considered
to be a more accurate representation

of the possible outcomes from these
reduction strategies and provide a
potential estimation of economic
activity through 2020.
This report includes refined data
from agencies that outlined spending
on programs, and allocation of funds
to different industries. Additionally,
areas such as transportation were
refined with agency coordination
to determine the impact from these
programs directly associated with
GHG reduction, and the categories
of spending such as architecture,
planning, land acquisition, and
construction. This report highlights
how the GGRA will benefit
Maryland in job creation across all
economic groups, as well as retain
Maryland’s currently highly educated
workforce through programs
associated with the green economy.

Summary of Findings
RESI analyzed data collected in collaboration with state agencies and MDE in order to estimate the economic
impacts of climate action strategies and their subprograms. Using data contained in strategy write-ups provided by
MDE as well as external research from a variety of sources, including the implementing agencies, RESI estimated the
impacts of each strategy and subprogram.
RESI coordinated with state agencies to develop a methodology. The agencies assisted in the development and
finalization of all assumptions used in the economic modeling for RESI’s analysis. Through this coordinated effort,
RESI built upon their original design in 2011 creating an investment and operation phase. A detailed explanation of
the investment and operation phases and what they entail can be found in Appendix B.1 of Appendix E-1 of the 2012
GGRA Plan.
To quantify the economic and fiscal impacts of climate action strategies and their subprograms, RESI utilized the
REMI PI+ input/output model. For more information regarding REMI PI+, please refer to Appendix B.2 of Appendix
E-1 of the 2012 GGRA Plan, which presents The Economic Impact Analysis Revision for the Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reduction Act 2012 Plan.
RESI reviewed findings for both status quo program spending and enhancement spending. Although the
enhancements are not guaranteed funding, the potential to reduce more greenhouse gases and increase jobs within
the state was analyzed. Enhanced programs ranged from energy, transportation, land use, and innovative initiatives.
The agencies provided the potential costs to achieve these new GHG targets under the enhanced scenarios of specific
strategies, and RESI used this data to create a secondary analysis.
This update provides updated costs and benefits associated with GGRA policies as analyzed in the 2014 report. In
addition to updated annual data, RESI received detailed data regarding funding of programs, spending, and how
programs would be implemented if enhanced GGRA reductions were approved.
For more detailed impacts and further explanation, please refer to Section 3.0 of Appendix A in the 2012 GGRA
Plan Appendix E-1. Information regarding the modeling assumptions and procedures used to derive impacts for each
strategy within the subject areas can be found in Appendix C of Appendix E-2 of the 2012 GGRA Plan. Appendix D
of Appendix E-2 of the 2012 GGRA Plan provides a discussion of the general occupations most likely to be associated
with each subject area.

The Washington Post

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

157

Total Annual Economic Impacts by Strategy Subject Area—Investment and Operation Phases, 2010–20201 .
Jobs
(Net Impacts
in 2020)

Output
(2015 $)

Total Cost
(2015 $)

Total Net Benefit
(2015 $

Status Quo

12,156.0

$14,039,556,803

$14,983,805,248

-$944,248,445

Enhancement

14,058.1

$15,448,356,592

$16,729,297,904

-$1,280,941,312

Status Quo

3,099.7

$3,491,312,335

$2,206,654,201

$1,284,658,134

Enhancement

6,267.7

$8,383,504,300

$4,244,515,129

$4,138,989,171

Status Quo

-298.2

$2,099,151,612

$632,038,070

$1,467,113,542

Enhancement

-297.7

$2,104,949,646

$760,708,403

$1,344,241,243

Subject Area
Energy

Transportation

Agriculture

Recycling
Status Quo

325.5

$303,588,867

$9,257,145

$294,331,722

Enhancement

558.0

$419,730,048

$15,869,391

$403,860,657

Status Quo

726.8

$357,208,252

$7,873,194

$349,335,058

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

6,748.1

$15,258,536,194

$15,564,480,642

-$305,944,448

Enhancement

8,522.9

$21,967,353,014

$23,832,525,089

-$1,865,172,075

Status Quo

3,564.2

$602,800,640

$213,878,700

$388,921,940

Enhancement

3,572.4

$616,880,934

$228,332,229

$388,548,705

Status Quo

0.1

$152,588

$22,500

$130,088

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

26,322.2

$36,152,307,291

$33,618,009,700

$2,534,297,591

Enhancement

33,442.8

$49,298,135,374

$45,819,143,839

$3,478,991,535

Buildings

Land Use

Innovative Initiatives

Outreach

Total

Source: RESI

As shown in the table above, during the investment and operation phases of these strategies, the total economic
benefits would include approximately 26,322 jobs maintained in 2020 and $36.2 billion in output between 2010 and
2020 for the status quo. The total cost of all strategies in all subject areas is approximately $33.6 billion, for the status
quo. The expected net benefits under the enhanced scenarios would be $3.5 billion in net benefit with 33.4 thousand
jobs maintained in 2020. The net benefit includes public and private costs. It is important to note that employment
impacts are not cumulative, and therefore annual impacts are jobs created above the baseline forecast. For more
information on interpreting the results, please review the REMI PI+ model overview in Appendix B.2 of Appendix
E-1 of the 2012 GGRA Plan. All employment
impacts in this report represent the number of jobs created or maintained in a given year as compared to
the baseline.
A summary of the wage impacts is represented in the following two tables. The investment phase generates more
jobs than the operation phase because the public and private sectors must hire workers to implement the strategies.
However, once policies are in place, growth stabilizes, and maintenance and monitoring are the primary employment
needs of a program.
1

The Transportation and Innovative Intitiatives subject areas exhibit impacts from 2020 to 2025.

158

Maryland Department of the Environment

Wage Impact by Strategy Subject Area—Investment Phase, 2010–2020
Jobs
(Net Impacts
in 2020)

Wages
(2015 $)

Status Quo

9,019.5

$4,651,750,397

Enhancement

10,041.5

$7,761,206,051

Status Quo

2,490.0

$1,439,102,172

Enhancement

5,018.7

$2,980,082,579

Status Quo

498.4

$59,032,440

Enhancement

498.9

$61,617,397

Subject Area
Energy

Transportation

Agriculture

Recycling
Status Quo

773.1

$292,888,641

Enhancement

1,325.3

$414,719,170

Status Quo

18.6

$10,284,424

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

4,920.9

$4,744,735,057

Enhancement

5,652.4

$8,053,793,823

Status Quo

361.1

$228,725,433

Enhancement

368.3

$236,843,110

Buildings

Land Use

Innovative Initiatives

Outreach
Status Quo

0.0

$0

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

18,081.6

$11,426,518,564

Enhancement

22,923.6

$19,518,546,554

Total

Source: RESI

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

159

Wage Impact by Strategy Subject Area—Operation Phase, 2010–2020
Jobs
(Net Impacts
in 2020)

Wages
(2015 $)

Status Quo

3,136.4

$1,273,496,043

Enhancement

4,051.2

$1,932,556,944

Status Quo

609.8

$131,679,378

Enhancement

1,249.0

$247,501,555

Status Quo

-796.6

$698,379,517

Enhancement

-796.6

$698,379,517

Status Quo

-447.6

-$169,242,859

Enhancement

-767.3

-$238,978,248

Status Quo

708.2

$54,687,500

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

1,827.2

$1,601,903,602

Enhancement

2,870.5

$2,488,973,900

Status Quo

3,203.1

$181,956,159

Enhancement

3,204.0

$182,612,688

Status Quo

0.1

$61,035

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

8,240.7

$3,772,920,375

Enhancement

10,519.2

$5,365,794,892

Subject Area
Energy

Transportation

Agriculture

Recycling

Buildings

Land Use

Innovative Initiatives

Outreach

Total

Source: RESI

As shown in the tables above, these strategies result in a wage impact that ranges from of $11.4 to $19.5 billion in the
investment phase for status quo and enhancement, respectively. In the operation phase, wage impacts range from
$3.8 to $5.4 billion for status quo and enhancements, respectively. The strategies generate approximately 18.1 to
22.9 thousand jobs in the investment phase and 8.2 to 10.5 thousand jobs in the operation phase for status quo and
enhancements, respectively.

160

Maryland Department of the Environment

RESI also calculated the total net benefits from these strategies. A summary of these findings can be found in Tables
6-4 and 6-5. Although some of these policies may generate negative net impacts, the programs re still generating other
benefits that are not accounted for in the market. These benefits include environmental improvements to ecosystems
and improvements to human health from reduced pollution and greenhouse gases. Additionally, the program as a
whole has net economic benefits.
Total Net Benefit by Strategy Subject Area—Investment Phase, 2010–2020
Output
(2015 $)

Total Cost
(2015 $)

Total Net Benefit
(2015 $)

Status Quo

$11,154,722,778

$13,097,859,286

-$2,197,436,981

Enhancement

$12,316,690,319

$13,881,581,739

-$1,783,499,402

Status Quo

$3,270,160,599

$2,206,654,201

$1,056,522,384

Enhancement

$7,990,266,382

$4,244,515,129

$313,182,368

Status Quo

$65,643,311

$214,057,002

-$148,867,164

Enhancement

$71,441,345

$222,727,335

-$151,285,990

Subject Area
Energy

Transportation

Agriculture

Recycling
Status Quo

$719,085,693

$9,257,145

$709,828,548

Enhancement

$990,256,168

$15,869,391

$974,386,777

Status Quo

$17,364,502

$7,688,994

$9,675,508

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

$9,780,953,979

$15,230,800,642

-$1,133,515,000

Enhancement

$15,158,674,064

$22,837,241,668

-$974,355,000

Status Quo

$301,666,260

$213,878,700

$176,430,870

Enhancement

$393,191,252

$228,332,229

$175,316,299

Buildings

Land Use

Innovative Initiatives

Outreach
Status Quo

$0

$0

$0

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

$25,309,597,123

$30,980,195,969

-$5,670,598,846

Enhancement

$36,937,884,032

$41,437,956,486

-$4,500,072,454

Total

Source: RESI

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

161

Total Net Benefit by Strategy Subject Area—Operation Phase, 2010–2020
Output
(2015 $)

Total Cost
(2015 $)

Total Net Benefit
(2015 $)

Status Quo

$2,884,834,025

$1,885,945,962

$963,202,841

Enhancement

$3,131,666,273

$2,847,716,165

$226,564,081

Status Quo

$221,151,736

$0

$106,127,930

Enhancement

$393,237,918

$0

$202,999,028

Status Quo

$2,033,508,301

$417,981,068

$1,514,239,386

Enhancement

$2,033,508,301

$537,981,068

$854,071,331

Status Quo

-$415,496,826

$0

-$415,496,826

Enhancement

-$570,526,120

$0

-$570,526,120

Status Quo

$339,843,750

$184,200

$339,659,550

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

$5,477,582,215

$333,680,000

$1,165,863,599

Enhancement

$6,808,678,950

$995,283,421

$820,949,641

Status Quo

$301,134,380

$0

$223,458,425

Enhancement

$223,689,682

$0

$223,277,695

Status Quo

$152,588

$22,500

$130,088

Enhancement

N/A

N/A

N/A

Status Quo

$10,842,710,169

$2,637,813,730

$8,204,896,439

Enhancement

$12,360,251,342

$4,381,187,354

$7,979,063,988

Subject Area
Energy

Transportation

Agriculture

Recycling

Buildings

Land Use

Innovative Initiatives

Outreach

Total

Source: RESI

As shown in the two tables above, total net benefit during the investment phase totals a negative $5.7 billion and a
positive $7.9 billion during the operation phase for the status quo. For enhancements, as shown in Tables 6-4 and 6-5
the total net benefit during the investment phase totals a negative $4.5 billion and a positive $8.0 billion during the
operation phase. Total net benefit is the difference between output impact and total cost. Total net benefit is analogous
to “profit” in the business sense. Positive total net benefit values recognize desirable policy outcomes for Marylanders.
The total net benefit from both the investment and operation phases totals $2.3 billion for status quo, a desirable
outcome. An additional net benefit of $3.5 billion can be claimed in enhancement programs are considered into
Maryland’s GGRA initiatives.

162

Maryland Department of the Environment

Maryland
Department of
the Environment

7
Emerging
Technologies

The Innovation Files

V

arious technologies are in
development to mitigate the
impacts of GHG emissions. This
chapter summarizes the more
prominent emerging technologies
in this field. Further analysis of
these and other emerging technologies can be found in Appendix E.
ENERGY STORAGE

C

onstant improvements to the
technology of energy storage have created a lot of important
implications for GHG reduction.
As the use of renewable energy
sources, specifically solar and wind,
have massively increase, so has the
need for a reliable way to store the
energy produced. Recent improvements to energy storage would
allow for renewable energy to be
utilized when it is needed instead of
immediately when it is generated.
This will allow for solar energy to
be stored on sunny days and used
as the same rate when the sun is
down or covered. The same applies

for wind energy when the air is still.
Energy storage is also important to
remove the reliance on “peakers”,
which are power plants that operate
only during peak energy demand.
These power plants are often more
polluting and expensive than regular plants, so allowing energy to be
stored during off-peak hours will
make peakers obsolete. In addition
to energy storage connected to the
grid, home energy storage is also
emerging with the release of the
Tesla Powerwall, which will allow
consumers the option to store their
own renewable or off-peak energy
to power their homes.
Smart Grid Technology
A smart grid is an electrical
grid that has the ability to gather
information and then act on it. It
integrates both the generator’s and
consumer’s information, such as
usage or behaviors, and uses it to
create the most efficient, economical,
and sustainable system possible.
Through increasing efficiency and

conservation, renewable energy
integration, and plug-in electric
vehicle integration, smart grids can
greatly reduce GHG emissions.
Smart grids also have numerous
benefits in addition to lower GHG
emissions. A few other benefits are:
reduced operating costs for utilities,
increased ability to use all available
infrastructure, better coordination of
plug-in electric vehicles, and easier
installation of new technologies
into the grid. Smart grids reduce the
power outages, inefficiencies, and
lack of information problems for
which the complex U.S. electrical
grid is infamous; thus creating a
system that is much more reliable
and responsive.
Electric Vehicles
Due to a large portion of GHG
emissions coming from the
transportation sector, replacing
gasoline-fueled vehicles with electric
vehicles would have a significant
impact on the climate. Electric
vehicles are vehicles that are powered

by electricity that is usually stored in the vehicle in a battery, but vehicles can also be connected directly to generator
plants, which is how electric trains and trolleys work. As electric vehicle technology improves, the range of the vehicles
on a single charge goes up and the prices go down, raising consumer interest in them. This is therefore closely tied
in with small scale energy storage technology so that the onboard batteries can hold a large charge and provide a
larger range for the vehicle. While electric vehicles don’t emit greenhouse gasses themselves, they move the source of
pollution to the power plant generating the extra energy required to power the vehicles. Electric vehicles still have a
net positive impact, but this could be expanded even more by generating the electricity they require with renewable
sources. Electric vehicles using charging off of electricity generated by solar or wind power would be the most effective
way of decreasing transportation emissions. Some electric vehicles have even been designed with solar panels on the
roof to produce electricity for some basic processes in the vehicles, and as solar panels become more efficient these
vehicles could use its own generated solar power for most of the vehicle’s functions. Electric vehicles used in tandem
with a smart grid that provides significant charging infrastructure for the vehicles would also greatly encourage
their use.
The Water-Energy Nexus
The water-energy nexus refers to the connection between how much water is evaporated in energy production
and how much energy is used in the human use of water, such as the collecting, cleaning, and moving of water. It is
estimated that around 2 gallons of water is evaporated in order to create 1 kilowatt hour of energy. This amounts to
around 3,000 to 6,300 gallons of water being evaporated to power one 60W light bulb for one year. This results in
water shortages as the energy industry must also compete with other major water consumers, especially the evergrowing agriculture industry. It is also true that a lot of energy is required to use water in all processes. Therefore a way
to decrease GHG emissions is to maximize the efficiency of the water-energy nexus. Using less water and less energy
continues the cycle in the most efficient way possible. Less water use also means less wastewater to deal with, which
produces methane. Some GHG reduction plans have already framed their plans around water mitigation, such as
Massachusetts aiming for drinking water and wastewater facilities to reach a 20% GHG reduction goal.
CO2 REDUCTION TECHNOLOGY

I

ntegrated Environmental Services, Inc. has developed CO2 Reduction Technology that breaks down CO2 into
graphite and oxygen. The graphite that it produced can then go on to be used in other industries, such as battery, hybrid electric vehicle, and solar panel production. This process of breaking down CO2 used to be inefficient
due to it emitting more CO2 when producing the energy needed to undergo the process than was removed, but
IES has developed a method where they pre-process the CO2 which allows the molecular bond to require less
energy to be broken. This results in the process eliminating more CO2 than is produced. This technology can be
used in power plants to reduce their CO2 emissions and allow them to produce graphite that can be used in other
industrial processes.
Bio-energy with Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS)
Another emerging technology that is commonly debated is BECCS, or bioenergy with carbon capture and
sequestration. This is the process of generating electricity from biomass and then capturing and storing the resulting
CO2 emissions. This process allows the generation of energy to become carbon negative by removing CO2 from the
atmosphere and releasing none. However, there is still a lot of issues with the technology that must be dealt with before
it is considered viable. The methods of capturing carbon and storing it underground are incredibly expensive and
there are a lot of technological gaps to be filled in about it. The compression and transport of CO2 leaves a lot of room
for potential leaks and spills that would release large amounts of CO2 right back into the atmosphere, and the same
can happen when it is stored underground. One method that MIT has determined is geologically viable is injecting
and storing the captured CO2 in deep saline aquifers. Another option that is being considered is injecting the CO2
into depleted oil and gas fields. The Department of Energy currently has a BECCS project at a corn ethanol facility in
Illinois that captures about 1,000 metric tons of CO2 and stores it in a sandstone formation 7,000 feet underground.
Biochar
A technology similar to BECCS is biochar, a carbon-negative plant byproduct that resembles charcoal. Biochar is
made via pyrolysis (which is heating vegetation slow without oxygen) of lumber waste, dried corn stalks and other
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

167

plan residues. The resulting biochar is very carbon rich and can be placed in the soil as fertilizer. This allows carbon
to be locked underground instead of being emitted into the atmosphere. However there are some risks to keep in
mind to ensure that it remains carbon negative and doesn’t harm the soil it is meant to be fertilizing. Biochar must be
used in soils of similar pH or else it can have a negative effect on soil fertility. Also, biochar made from waste biomass,
sustainably harvested crop residues, or crops grown on non-forested abandoned land will be carbon negative. If the
biochar is made from forest ecosystems, the result could be a net increase in greenhouse gases.
Green Cement
Green cement and concrete is also an emerging carbon negative technology that can be used in place of regular
concrete. First of all, it uses fly ash in the mix which prevents large amounts of it reaching landfills. The mix also
requires only half the amount of water that is normally required to mix normal concrete, which helps cut down on
water demand. Finally, it undergoes a unique process which requires the concrete to consume CO2 as it cures. This
results in the process being carbon negative since it reduces the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Algae Systems
Algae Systems has developed an advanced process that uses algae to produce carbon negative fuels. The whole system
is overall extremely sustainable. It starts by taking untreated wastewater and giving it to algae, which uses CO2 and
sunlight to convert the nutrients and carbon from the wastewater into biomass. This process also turns wastewater
treatment from a huge energy sink into an energy source. The wet biomass is then converted into liquid fuels at high
temperature and pressure. This results in “biocrude” which can either be used directly or refined into a replacement
for fossil crude. This results in a carbon-negative fuel because the algae consumes more CO2 than the end product
biofuels emit.
Fuel Cell Vehicles
As an alternative to fossil fuel hybrids or electric vehicles, fuel cell vehicles are an emerging technology that shows
a lot of promise. Fuel cells are used to directly produce electricity inside the vehicle using hydrogen or natural gas,
as opposed to batteries which must be charged for a long time from an external source. Hydrogen fuel cells are
remarkable due to their only emission being pure liquid or gaseous water. Fuel cell vehicles can also travel much
further than battery powered electric vehicles, with a current range of up to 650 kilometers on a tank of compressed
hydrogen gas. Hydrogen fuel cells have gotten some controversy due to the fact that it requires a lot of energy to
electrolyze water, which is how the hydrogen fuel is produced. Therefore it releases a lot of CO2 into the air when
the hydrogen gas is created, which can make the whole usage of hydrogen cells carbon positive despite the lack of
emissions from the vehicle itself. In order to avoid this, wind or solar power could be used to power electrolysis,
but these power sources are still relatively inefficient compared to fossil fuels. If fossil fuels are utilized, one of the
technologies above can be used to capture and store/sequester the CO2 that is produced to prevent it from entering the
atmosphere.

168

Maryland Department of the Environment

GEOENGINEERING

G

eoengineering is a broad term for deliberate, large-scale manipulations of Earth’s environment that have
been proposed as methods to potentially offset some of the consequences of climate change. In general,
proposed geoengineering techniques fall into two categories: solar radiation management approaches that aim
to change the incoming solar radiation balance, and carbon dioxide removal approaches that would reduce the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
The National Academies of Sciences completed their Geoengineering Climate: Technical Evaluation of Selected
Approaches study and released two reports in February 2015; Climate Intervention: Carbon Dioxide Removal
and Reliable Sequestration, and Climate Intervention: Reflecting Sunlight to Cool Earth. These reports can be
found in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update as Appendices F and G, respectively. More information may be found at the
National Academies of Sciences website: http://nas-sites.org/americasclimatechoices/public-release-event-climateintervention-reports/

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

169

Paul Reed Smith Guitars Made in Maryland — www.prsguitars.com

8
Impact Analysis
of GGRA on the
Manufacturing
Industry
in Maryland

Domino Sugars — Maryland Manufacturing Extension Partnership

T

he Maryland Department
of the Environment (MDE)
tasked the Regional Economic
Studies Institute (RESI) to complete
an impact analysis of the policies
from the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act (GGRA) 2012
Plan on Maryland’s manufacturing
industry. RESI employed the REMI
PI+ model using agency level data
collected for the 2012 GGRA Plan
to determine the impact on Maryland’s Manufacturing industry. In
RESI’s report (Appendix I), RESI
assumed that all GGRA initiatives
were implemented and results are
reported for the Manufacturing
industry by the four-digit North
American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) codes.
In addition to an economic impact
analysis, RESI solicited feedback from
regional manufacturers to include in
the report. Manufacturer interviews
included in this report are case

studies of greenhouse gas reduction
measures taken by these firms to
remain compliant with government
environmental mandates. RESI and
representatives from MDE visited
these manufacturers to witness their
methods and interview them one
on one in regard to the challenges
faced with reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, if any.

and 2013 – an increase from
$1,324 in 2012 to $1,340 in 2013.
➢➢ The industry accounted for 5.9
percent of Maryland’s total
output in 2012.

The industry remains a vital
component of Maryland’s economic
base, despite declines since the
recent recession. Industry data
indicates that the workforce is
HISTORICAL TREND
shifting to demand employees with
ANALYSIS
middle skills and more training.
Partnerships with state-based groups
o provide background for the
economic impact analysis,
such as the Regional Manufacturing
RESI analyzed the current historical Institute (RMI) and state agencies
such as Maryland Public Service
trends of Manufacturing in Maryland. RESI found the following:
Commission (PSC) and Maryland
Energy Administration have assisted
➢➢ The average weekly wages
manufacturers through funding
in the Manufacturing
industry increased from $933 opportunities to meet energy
efficiency goals.
in 2002 to $1,324 in 2012.
National partnerships are also key
➢➢ Preliminary estimates indicate
in
building the needed workforce,
that average weekly wages
such as those with Manufacturing
increased by $16 between 2012

T

Extension Partnership (MEP) and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. This partnership seeks to
build and establish training to meet the higher skill needs of employers by the local workforce. As the industry shifts
towards a higher skill-based workforce, partnerships such as those between industry leaders, state agencies, and
federal agencies will be vital to producing the workforce needed to implement the policies outlined in the GGRA.
ECONOMIC IMPACT FINDINGS

R

ESI analyzed the GGRA initiatives outlined in the GGRA to determine the economic impacts on the manufacturing industry. Using agency-provided data along with external research, RESI found the following:

➢➢ The manufacturing industry will create 113 total jobs by 2020 related to implementation of the
policies between 2010 and 2020.
➢➢ Directly, policy implementation between 2010 and 2020 will result in 104 direct jobs created to
support the greenhouse gas reduction policies under the GGRA.
➢➢ The Computer and electronic product manufacturing sector will experience the greatest gains
in employment between 2010 and 2020.

➢➢ The industry’s wages will increase to $10.7 million by 2020.
➢➢ The industry’s output will increase to $26.5 million by 2020.
RESI’s economic impact analysis confirms historical and current trend analyses. To implement the strategies
outlined in the GGRA, Maryland will create an additional 113 jobs in the Manufacturing industry by 2020. Of these
113 jobs, nearly 54 percent will be created within higher skilled sectors, such as Computer and electronic product
manufacturing and Electrical equipment and appliance manufacturing. Some sectors, such as Food Manufacturing
and Textile mills; Textile product mills will see minimal job declines between 2010 and 2020 as the industry shifts to a
higher-skilled workforce demand to meet policy implementation associated with the GGRA. Despite all the change in
Maryland’s Manufacturing industry, there is no conclusive evidence that any closures or relocations outside Maryland
are directly attributable to the GGRA or climate change planning. Based on the analysis provided within this report,
RESI finds no discernible impacts on the manufacturing sector as a result of the GGRA programs. Furthermore, RESI
recommends based on this analysis that Maryland not adopt any manufacturing specific GHG regulations in the
future.

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

173

Siemens is supplying the main components for a 735-MW natural gas-fired power plant in Maryland — www.power-eng.com

9
Federal
Actions

T

he GGRA requires that MDE
report on the state of any
federal program designed to reduce
GHG emissions. The following initiatives are specific to EPA but there
are additional Federal programs
being implemented by other Federal Agencies such as Housing and
Urban Development, Department
of Energy, Department of Agriculture, etc., that are not specifically
discussed in this chapter.
CLEAN POWER PLAN
Clean Air Act 111
The federal Clean Power Plan
addresses both new and existing
power plants under separate
regulations through Clean Air Act
Section 111. Clean Air Act Section
111 provides direction for setting
standards for stationary sources from
a specific source sector such as power
plants. Section 111(b) allows EPA to
set standards for new sources while
Section 111(d) applies to existing

sources. Under Section 111(d) EPA
may establish guidelines for states
to set standards for existing sources.
EPA formulates the guidance by
considering systems of emission
reductions that have been adequately
demonstrated and the degree of
emission limitation achievable
considering cost, environmental
impact, compliance time periods
and other factors. In this case EPA
has interpreted the best system of
emission reductions broadly. States
then formulate emission limits
following the guidance.
Maryland will continue to monitor
the progress of this program.
EPA REGULATORY INITIATIVES
Stationary Sources
On May 13, 2010, EPA set GHG
emissions thresholds to define when
permits under the New Source
Review Prevention of Significant

Deterioration (PSD) and Title V
Operating Permit programs are
required for new and existing
industrial facilities. This final rule
“tailors” the requirements of these
Clean Air Act permitting programs
to limit covered facilities to the
nation’s largest GHG emitters: power
plants, refineries, and cement
production facilities.

Transportation/Mobile Sources
EPA and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Standards to Cut Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Fuel Use for New Motor Vehicles
EPA and NHTSA are taking coordinated steps to enable the production of a new generation of clean vehicles- – from
the smallest cars to the largest trucks--through reduced GHG emissions and improved fuel use. Together, the enacted
and proposed standards are expected to save more than six billion barrels of oil through 2025 and reduce more than
3,100 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions.
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) Program
EPA is also responsible for developing and implementing regulations to ensure that transportation fuel sold in the
United States contains a minimum volume of renewable fuel. By 2022, the RFS program will reduce GHG emissions
by 138 million metric tons, about the annual emissions of 27 million passenger vehicles, replacing about seven percent
of expected annual diesel consumption and decreasing oil imports by $41.5 billion.
Heavy-Duty Trucks

The proposed regulation is actually Phase 2, following Phase 1 standards finalized in August 2011 that created
standards for new Medium and Heavy Duty Vehicles (MDVs and HDVs). The Phase 1 plan is expected to result in
saving 530 million barrels of oil and avoid the emissions of 270 million metric tons of GHG, while also producing $50
billion in fuel savings and $49 billion in societal benefits. Phase 2 builds on this by presenting technology-advancing
standards that would roll out through model year 2027.
Other Related Actions

➢➢ Landfill Air Pollution Standards
➢➢ Oil and Natural Gas Air Pollution Standards
➢➢ Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide
➢➢ Emissions Reporting
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program
The Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program collects GHG data from large emission sources across a range of industry
sectors, as well as suppliers of products that would emit GHGs if released or combusted. GHG data are available
through the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program Data Publication Tool: http://www.epa.gov/ghgreporting/ghgdata/
reportingdatasets.html

2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

177

Sailing the Chester River — Jane Thomas, UMCES, IAN

10
Multi-Pollutant
Planning Exercise
for Maryland

Brandon Shores Power Plant — Jane Thomas, IAN Image Library

T

he NESCAUM report (Appendix H) presents the findings of a multi-pollutant planning exercise the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) initiated in April 2013. The goals are to continue to build
capacity in Maryland to conduct multi-pollutant planning and analyses as well as inform Maryland’s 2012
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act (GGRA) Plan Progress Report. The 2012 GGRA Plan’s Progress
Report is due in 2015.
The 2012 GGRA Plan seeks to achieve a 25 percent statewide reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2020,
while also spurring job creation and helping improve the economy. In the multi-pollutant planning context, it is part
of a “multi-pollutant” planning approach for selecting and analyzing control programs to address multiple public
health and environmental goals. The 2012 GGRA Plan will not only help reduce emissions of GHGs, but will also help
Maryland meet its mandates to: (1) further clean up the Chesapeake Bay; (2) meet and maintain National Ambient
Air Quality Standards for ground-level ozone, fine particles, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide; and (3) meet federal
and state requirements to further reduce regional haze as well as air emissions of mercury and other air toxics.
Maryland also intends to use a multi-pollutant framework to look at all pollutants whenever a single pollutant State
Implementation Plan (SIP) is being developed. Therefore, this exercise is also a part of Maryland’s preliminary effort
to establish credit for energy efficiency and renewable energy (EE/RE) programs as part of its ozone SIP. To that end, it
feeds into a larger effort in Maryland to better address some of the uncertainties associated with the SIP process through
an expanded weight-of-evidence (WOE) approach.
Multi-Pollutant Policy Analysis Framework
The planning exercise presented in the NESCAUM report employed the Multi-pollutant Policy Analysis Framework
(MPAF), which consists of the following model components to provide a broad view of climate and air quality
program impacts:
➢➢ NE-MARKAL, a Northeast version of the MARKet ALlocation (MARKAL)model, an energy model
that is widely used in Europe.EPA has a nine-region national version of this model, called US9r

➢➢ Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI), a 12-state model that evaluates the effects of policies and
programs on the economies of local regions
➢➢ EPA’s Community Multi-scale Air Quality (CMAQ) model, which assesses future air quality
impacts arising from changes in air emissions due to a set of policies and programs
➢➢ EPA’s Environmental Benefits Mapping and Analysis Program (BenMAP), which estimates health
impacts and associated monetized values resulting from changes in ambient air pollution
Two meta-scenarios, an initial and an enhanced, were developed in collaboration with MDE and other Maryland
state agencies, which were then analyzed through the MPAF. Each meta-scenario combined a suite of selected policies
into a single NE-MARKAL run that captured their interactive effects. The initial meta-scenario was comprised of
selected policies as they were defined in the 2012 GGRA Plan. The enhanced meta-scenario was comprised of a
combination of individual policies, some of which had enhanced goals defined either in the GGRA Plan or by MDE.
Note that enhanced policies not based on the GGRA Plan are for analytical exercise purposes only, and may not reflect
current Maryland policy.
Multi-Pollutant Impact of GGRA Policies
The multi-pollutant planning exercise demonstrated that the selected GGRA policies collectively made positive
contributions to near-term air quality outcomes, including the 2020 GGRA climate target. The analysis also indicated
that further reductions in CO2 emissions are needed to meet a hypothetical 80 percent reduction goal by 2050. In
order to meet longer-term emission reduction goals, more measures involving the transportation sector would need
to be considered. Climate sensitivity analyses undertaken as an extension of the meta-scenarios analyses found that
in 2050, the combination of the most aggressive modeled GGRA policies alone lowered Maryland’s reference case
2050 GHG emissions from almost 90 million tons of CO2 to about 46 million tons (other GHGs were not considered
in these analyses). This is still about 30 million tons short of a 2050 80 percent GHG reduction target of 17 million
tons (relative to 2006 emissions). Of the 46 million tons, about 35 million tons comes from the transportation sector.
This is not surprising, as the sensitivity analyses focused on more aggressive options for renewable energy and energy
efficiency, while more aggressive transportation policies were not considered.
The GGRA measures in the two meta-scenarios also led to projected emission reductions in nitrogen oxides (NOX)
and sulfur dioxide (SO2), key precursor pollutants for the criteria pollutants ozone (NOX) and PM2.5 (NOX and SO2)
over the modeling timeframe through 2023. Cumulatively over this time period, the initial meta-scenario projected
reductions of 63,000 tons of NOx and 399,000 tons of SO2 in Maryland. Larger reductions were seen for the enhanced
meta-scenario, with 70,000 tons of NOx and 492,000 tons of
SO2 reduced.
GGRA Contributions to Maryland’s Ozone State Implementation Plan Reductions
A selected set of GGRA measures that were included in an ozone sensitivity analysis demonstrated promise for
achieving additional NOx reductions relevant to Maryland’s ozone SIP timelines (2017 to 2023). These NOx reductions
go beyond current ozone SIP baseline projections and enforceable control strategies, thus they provide the technical
basis for an expanded weight-of-evidence demonstration of reasonably foreseeable NOx reductions in excess of those
attributable to traditional ozone SIP measures.
The estimated additional NOx reductions from the GGRA measures are in the range of 1,200 to 1,600 tons in the
year 2017, which is Maryland’s ozone attainment deadline for the 0.075 ppb ozone NAAQS (current NAAQS at the
time of this analysis). Additional NOx reductions in the range of 2,200 to 2,600 annual tons are projected for the year
2023, which is relevant to maintaining the current ozone NAAQS, as well as achieving a possible future revised ozone
NAAQS. By way of comparison, the annual NOx reductions projected under the ozone SIP sensitivity scenarios
are somewhat less than, but comparable to, projected annual NOx reductions from gasoline passenger vehicles in
Maryland expected from implementation of EPA’s Tier 3 motor vehicle program. The Tier 3 program represents one
of the largest, if not the largest, measure in Maryland for reducing NOX emissions in 2017 and beyond, and the results
of the ozone sensitivity runs indicate the potential for additional NOX reductions of a similar magnitude from the
modeled GGRA policies.
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

181

Maryland’s GGRA Measures Have Positive Air Quality, Health, and Economic Benefits
The projected GGRA emission changes estimated by NE-MARKAL were input into the Community Multi-scale
Air Quality (CMAQ) model to evaluate their impacts on ambient air quality. The projected changes in emissions
estimated by NE-MARKAL give rise to CMAQ-modeled air quality improvements for ozone and fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) in Maryland and in regions outside of the State, which in turn result in positive net health benefits in
terms of avoided adverse health outcomes, including premature mortality. These avoided health incidences were
quantified, along with their monetized benefits, using EPA’s BenMAP tool coupled with the modeled air quality
changes in ozone and PM2.5 from CMAQ for each of the
meta-scenarios.
As a result of the air quality changes attributable to the GGRA meta-scenarios, the BenMAP analysis found many
reduced incidences of respiratory ailment, asthma attack, heart attack, hospital room visits, and lost work and school
days. The monetary benefits of these public health improvements were driven largely by the reduced mortality, which
includes (within Maryland) 43 to 100 avoided deaths per year due to reduced ozone and PM2.5 under the initial metascenario, and 84 to 192 avoided deaths per year under the enhanced meta-scenario.
The monetized value of avoided mortality within Maryland ranges between $420 million to $850 million per year
under the initial meta-scenario, and between $810 million to $1.6 billion per year under the enhanced meta-scenario,
assuming a 3 percent discount rate for future health effects. With a 7 percent discount rate, the value is $320 million
to $740 million per year under the initial meta-scenario, and $620 million to $1.4 billion under the enhanced metascenario.
The regional economic assessment using REMI found that overall, the GGRA measures as analyzed under the initial
meta-scenario will benefit Maryland’s economy with respect to jobs, wages, and real disposable income growth.
However, the output and value added to Maryland’s economy may decline given the large declines in demand for
energy and maintenance associated with the electric power sector in the short term. Private, state, and households’
continual structured investments in the economy toward GGRA goals under the enhanced meta-scenario mitigated
some loss reported in the initial meta-scenario. Specifically, programs associated with increasing public transit helped
to offset the later declines. The initial work creates construction jobs within the region, but the longer-term benefits
associated with reduced motor fuel purchases and maintenance of private vehicles provide additional disposable
income to households in the form of savings. Given this newly acquired disposable income, consumers are more likely
to spend it locally, thereby creating additional induced impacts. Review of both scenarios indicates there will be a
short-term negative impact incurred for implementation, but Maryland’s economy benefits from nearly 20 additional
years of increased jobs, wages, and output in the long-term.

182

Maryland Department of the Environment

Boat in the Bay — Jane Hawkey, IAN Image Library (www.ian.umces.edu/imagelibrary/)

11
MDE
Recommendations

This chapter provides the MDE recommendations required by the GGRA.This chapter also provides more technical
recommendations from MDE on several emerging issues that will need to be considered in the future.

The GGRA requires MDE to:

➢➢ Include recommendations in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update on how the State should move forward to
continue making progress on Climate Change.
➢➢ Provide “Recommendations on the need for science based adjustments to the requirement to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 25% by 2020”
The GGRA further requires that:
“On review of the study required in Section 2-1207 of this subtitle (the 2015 GGRA Plan Update), the General
Assembly may act to maintain, revise or eliminate the 25% greenhouse gas emissions reductions required under
this subtitle.”

Section 6.7 of the Act states:

“And be it further enacted, That Section 2 (see below) of this Act shall take effect October 1, 2009. It shall remain
in effect for a period of 7 years and 3 months, and at the end of December 31, 2016, with no further action
required by the General Assembly, Section 2 of this Act shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.”
Section 2 of the Act, in total, states:
“The State shall reduce statewide greenhouse gas emissions by 25% from 2006 levels by 2020.”

MEETING THE 2020 REQUIREMENTS: REDUCING GHG EMISSIONS BY 25% BY 2020
The GGRA requires MDE to submit the 2015 GGRA Plan Update to summarize the State’s progress toward achieving
the 25% GHG emission reduction goal by 2020 established by the GGRA. This report shows that Maryland is on track
to meet this goal.
As described earlier in this report, the 25 percent reduction in Statewide GHG emissions from 2006 levels by 2020
goal of the GGRA has been calculated to be 34.66 MMtCO2e. The combined emissions reductions of all programs in
the 2015 GGRA Plan Update will yield a total of 38.37 MMtCO2e in emissions reductions. This will exceed the GGRA
2020 goal by 3.71 MMtCO2e.

Meeting the 2020 Requirements: Maryland Jobs and the Economy
Continued implementation of the programs included in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update will support new industry
and will accelerate investments in green technologies in Maryland by encouraging investments in the energy,
transportation, and land use sectors of our economy. Implementing the 2015 GGRA Plan Update will lead to
increased investments in energy efficiency, green buildings, renewable energy and low emission vehicles. Investing in
Maryland’s green economy now will encourage smarter investments and support more sustainable economic growth
for generations to come.
Current analyses project that the 2012 GGRA Plan will result in estimated economic benefits of between $2.5 billion
and $3.5 billion in increased economic output by 2020 and help create and maintain between 26,000 and 33,000 new
jobs.
An Update on the Science of Climate Change
The 2015 GGRA Plan Update includes an update from the MCCC’s Scientific and Technical Working Group on how
climate change is already impacting Maryland and what additional future GHG reductions need to be considered to
continue the States progress in reducing GHG emissions.
MDE Recommendations on Continuing Progress
The GGRA requires MDE to provide recommendations in the 2015 GGRA Plan Update on how the State should
move forward on climate change. The law requires the General Assembly to take an action in 2016 or the key
requirements of the GGRA sunset. The 2015 GGRA Plan Update is intended to provide the Governor and the General
Assembly with the information they need to determine how the State should move forward. MDE’s recommendation
includes the following:
➢➢ Continue to implement and enhance the programs in the 2012 GGRA Plan with a increased
focus on finding ways to continue emission reductions that also support economic development
and job creation.
➢➢ MDE recommends that the 2020 goal be maintained and that additional enhancements to the
GGRA Plan be considered, as long as those enhancements have a clear positive impact on
Maryland’s economy and job creation in Maryland while also protecting Maryland consumers.
➢➢ MDE would work through the MCCC and the MCCC working groups to develop these
enhancements where appropriate.
➢➢ Move beyond 2020 by adopting a “next step” of incremental progress towards the deeper
science-based reductions needed by 2050. This next step should also increase the emphasis
on improving Maryland’s economy by establishing quantitative goals for economic growth,
job creation and wages linked to the States GHG reduction efforts.
➢➢ Continued efforts should expand the “true-up” process in the current law to not only include
an every three year check-in on achieving the GHG emission reductions goals, but to expand
this check-in process to include economic and job goals. The purpose of the true-up process
is to make sure that the programs are achieving the projected emission reduction, economic
and job creation goals in the real world and to adjust programs appropriately when needed.
➢➢ Continue efforts to analyze emerging issues linked to continuing the progress the State
has made in reducing GHGs that have been identified by MDE over the past six years,
the MCCC working groups and stakeholders. These emerging issues include, but are not
limited to:
➢➢ Enhanced efforts on renewable energy, energy efficiency and transportation that seek to
further reduce emissions in a way that fosters economic development, creates new jobs
and protects consumers
➢➢ Continuing analyses of new scientific and technical opportunities like life-cycle analysis,
hydraulic fracturing and other natural gas related topics, fast acting climate changers, and
2015 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act Plan Update

187

other emerging issues related to the scientific, mitigation and adaptation efforts needed to
continue the State’s progress in addressing climate change.
➢➢ Increased efforts on climate resiliency to insure that the State is focusing not just on GHG
emission reductions but on community preparedness and adaptation for extreme weather
and other changing climate conditions.
MDE Recommendation on the Manufacturing Sector
The GGRA exempts the manufacturing sector from control under the law unless those controls are required by
federal law or regulation or part of existing State law adopted prior to 2009.
The GGRA states:
“Unless required by federal law or regulations or existing State law, regulations adopted by State agencies to
implement the final plan may not:
✼✼ Require greenhouse gas emissions reductions from the State’s manufacturing sector; or
✼✼ Cause a significant increase in the costs to the State’s manufacturing sector.”
The GGRA requires MDE to complete an analysis of the manufacturing sector as part of the 2015 GGRA Plan
Update. The law reads:
“An institution of higher education in the State shall conduct an independent study of the economic impacts of
requiring greenhouse gas emission reductions from the State’s manufacturing sector.”
This analysis of the manufacturing sector, performed by Towson University, is summarized in Chapter 8 of this
report. The full analysis can be found in Appendix I.
Based upon this work and the MDE inventory analyses that show that GHG emissions from the manufacturing
sector are significantly less in 2015 than they were in 2009, MDE recommends that the manufacturing sector
exemption contained in the GGRA be maintained as part of any future efforts to continue progress reducing GHG
emissions.

188

Maryland Department of the Environment

