Climate
Solutions and
Economic
Opportunities
A foundation for Minnesota’s
state climate action planning
Kadunce River, Lake Superior

Table of Contents
Executive Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10

CREDITS
Project Leadership:
Environmental Quality Board

Business as usual: How are we doing?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
Climate action policies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22

Pollution Control Agency
Department of Commerce
The development, analysis, and

• Immediate-impact policies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24

writing of this report included the
other EQB member agencies:

• Long-term strategies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
• Pilot programs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36

Board of Water and Soil Resources
Department of Administration
Department of Agriculture

Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39
Results Table  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 42

Department of Employment and
Economic Development
Department of Health
Department of Natural Resources
Department of Transportation
Metropolitan Council
EDITED BY Amanda Jarrett Smith
GRAPHIC DESIGN BY Paula Bohte

2

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

A Call to Action

Bass Lake, Grand Rapids

Minnesota has made significant strides to address
climate change . Renewable energy now accounts
for 21% of the Minnesota’s in-state electricity
generation, up from 4% in 2000 . Wind energy
alone provides over 17% of our state’s electricity
– equal to the total electricity use in one in six
homes, businesses, and community institutions .
Despite this progress, we missed our 2015
greenhouse gas emission targets and will miss
the 2025 goal without additional work . Minnesota
needs bold action to meet these goals and secure
the environmental, health, and economic benefits
of tackling climate change . This report provides
the foundation for state climate planning . We
need to work together to transform plans into
actions .
The need for action is clear: Minnesota is already
feeling the impacts of climate change . We have
experienced four 1,000-year rainfalls since 2002 .
We have watched our spruce, fir, aspen, and
birch forests retreat northward . And air pollution
related to greenhouse gas emissions annually
cost us more than $800 million in increased
health care costs .

in climate policies, Minnesota could add 25,000
new jobs and generate more than $2 billion
in additional wages during the next 15 years .
To achieve these results, Minnesota needs
clean energy policies that have an immediate
impact on reducing emissions from our homes,
buildings, and industries . We also need long-term
strategies to transform our communities and
their transportation systems to reduce our use of
gasoline .
We also must protect and increase the carbon
stored in our wetlands, forests, and agricultural
lands . These actions will not only help us address
climate change, but will also support habitat and
water quality, benefiting public health and wildlife.
Working together, we can take steps that protect
the environment, improve our health, and grow
our economy .

Tina Smith
Lt . Governor

Addressing climate change also has the potential
to grow our economy . By aggressively investing

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

3

Executive Summary
Minnesota is committed by statute to do its part for the
climate by meeting its Next Generation Energy Act goals .
This 2007 law requires the state cut its annual emissions of
greenhouse gases by 80% between 2005 and 2050 . While
much progress has been made, the 2050 goal will require
policies well beyond what is already in place at the federal
or state level . This report focuses on near-term emissions
reductions between the present and 2030 . It includes
analysis and discussion of the options before us, providing
a framework for decision-making that is based in part on
the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board and member
agencies’ Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunities
(CSEO) project .

Our climate is changing

Prevention

Reduce use of
fossil fuels

Preparation

Public education
Protect and build
carbon stored in land
Risk assessment

4

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

What is Climate Action?
Minnesota’s climate is changing: communities
are already experiencing warming temperatures
and more frequent extreme rain events . The
state is already paying the cost in infrastructure
damage, loss of winter tourism, and a cascade
of effects on agriculture, natural resources, and
wildlife . To prevent the situation from becoming
worse, the state needs to reduce its greenhouse
gas emissions . Doing so will require the state
to reduce use of fossil fuels and to protect the
carbon stored in its trees and lands . Government
and communities also need to assess and plan for
the risks posed by the changing climate . Climate
action requires efforts at global, federal, state,
community, and household levels .

Prevent the problem from getting worse
The first step to reducing the greenhouse gas
emissions that contribute to climate change is to
create an inventory of the sources of emissions and
then to identify where reductions could occur . The
next step is to design policies to implement these
reductions . Stakeholder engagement is important
for prioritizing policies, optimizing design, and
providing ongoing feedback and input .
This report reflects the first three out of the five
steps shown in the climate planning process . It
presents Minnesota’s greenhouse gas inventory,
identifies where reductions could occur, and

Climate Planning

Inventory
Greenhouse
gas emissions

Identify
Where
reductions
could occur

Design
policies

Engage
stakeholders
to prioritize
and optimize

Implement

describes policy options to do so . To meet the
state’s 2025 greenhouse gas emissions reduction
goal, the state will need to take immediate actions to
reduce fossil fuel use in the electricity and industrial
sectors . To meet the state’s 2050 goal, the state
needs to immediately begin to implement long-term
strategies that reduce fossil fuel use in vehicles and
that protect carbon stored in the state’s land . Finally,
the state needs to test new technologies and ideas
through small-scale pilot projects .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

5

Executive Summary
Prepare for extreme weather and climate
warming
More frequent extreme weather and changing
climate pose risks to Minnesota’s communities
and businesses . The state needs to adapt to
these changes and increase its resilience so that
when events occur, communities and businesses
recover more quickly . Doing so requires
that Minnesota assess the risks to its critical
infrastructure, natural resources, and businesses .
Then the state can plan for risks and incorporate
those risks into program and policy development .
The state can do much of this planning through
existing programs and efforts such as relate to
storm water management, urban trees and land
management, water conservation, agricultural
best practices, and wetland protection and
restoration . While this document focuses on
climate mitigation, many of the strategies also
have adaptation co-benefits that are noted.

Red River Valley

Adaptation

Assess risks
hospitals

ecosystems

When
disasters occur,
communities
and businesses
recover more
quickly.

Implement
changes to
reduce risk

A more resilient

Plan for
these risks

water
supplies
power
generation
roads

Incorporate
plans into
action

crops

6

Manage risks
you cannot
eliminate

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Minnesota

Key Findings of This Report
This report is based on work done by the State
of Minnesota to better understand the state’s
progress on the road to reaching its climate
goals and with the objective of advancing
discussion of additional policy options to
achieve the state’s climate goals . Some of the
key findings of these efforts are reflected here.

Status of climate action
• Minnesota has strong climate goals and a
commitment to help maintain a stable climate
on Earth .
• Minnesota is not on track to meet these goals
and does not have policies in place to meet
them .
• The state’s renewable energy and energy
efficiency policies have been hugely
successful, but do not go far enough to meet
the state’s greenhouse gas reduction goals .
• Minnesota’s climate action thus far shows a
pairing of economic growth with decreasing
emissions .

What the state can do to meet its
climate goals
• Increase levels of energy efficiency and
renewable energy in electric generation,
which will have an immediate impact on
emission reductions .

• Identify overlap between climate action and
other environmental protections and economic
interests and work to leverage best outcomes .
• Modify agricultural production to prevent
the additional loss of soil carbon, increase
carbon storage in soils, and avoid emissions
from fertilizer . These changes will also greatly
improve soil health and water quality .
• Invest in urban and rural forests, wetlands,
peatlands, and prairies to maintain and expand
sequestered carbon . These investments will
also protect Minnesota’s air, water, recreation
opportunities, and wildlife habitat .

Opportunities to grow cross-sector
partnerships
• Build capacity in state government, regional
and local governments, and the public sector
for ongoing assessment of the economic and
greenhouse gas impacts of environmental and
climate policies .
• Partner across interest groups focused on
issues such as air quality, water quality, wildlife
protection, as well as climate change to move
policies forward . There is much opportunity to
do this as climate policies include significant
co-benefits for public health, the environment,
and the economy .
• Recognize and support private businesses for
their sustainability and climate planning .

• Strengthen efforts to transform land use
patterns and mass transit systems to reduce
reliance on single occupancy, internal
combustion engine vehicles .
• Plan and implement the conversion from
gasoline to electric- and hybrid-powered cars
and transit .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

7

Executive Summary
Visions for the Future

Emission reductions in Minnesota
communities

While this report focuses on being on track
The shift away from fossil fuels offers
in 2030, the ultimate goal is 80% reduction
opportunities to make Minnesota communities
by 2050 from 2005 greenhouse gas emission
levels . To do so will require ongoing analysis and more livable and to achieve public health benefits
through greater opportunities to walk or bike,
climate planning . Achieving the 2050 goal will
cleaner air and water, and more green spaces . In
likely require changes in how Minnesota builds
and grows its communities, as well as changes in communities, climate action could take the form
of reducing how much cars are driven, increasing
the electricity and transportation systems . The
the connectivity and density of where people live,
policy options discussed in this report seek to
and using more mixed zoning to allow people
lay the groundwork for actions to set a path for
to live near the places they enjoy and rely on .
2050, recognizing a need for ongoing updates
By locating businesses and residential areas
over time .
together, residents have more opportunities to
go places by foot, bike, mass transit, or with
shorter drive times . Expanding bike lanes and
mass transit options as viable travel choices
can further support the shift away from single
occupancy vehicles .

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions in our communities
Outcomes

Action

Improve air quality

Build compact
communities

Expand bike lanes

Reduce use of
single occupancy
vehicles

Expand mass transit

8

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Improve public health with
access to physical activity
Preserve
open space

Accomodate
population growth
Build communities through
casual interaction in neighborhoods

What could 2050 and 80% greenhouse gas reduction look like?
Action
Energy
efficiency

Outcomes
With a clean grid
-Electrify cars
-Electrify buses
-Electrify heating

Clean
electric grid

Clean local
energy projects

What could 2050 look like?
There are many pathways to reach 80%
greenhouse gas reductions by 2050 . One vision
for doing so is to make the electric grid nearly
carbon free through renewable energy and
energy efficiency. Other energy needs could then
move from directly burning fossil fuels in vehicles,

Clean air
Improve public health
Create local jobs

Electric cars and buses provide
storage that can be used
for electric grid back-up

homes, and industries to using clean, renewably
generated electric power . For instance, cars,
buses, and trains could be powered by electricity
and electric-charged batteries . Heating in homes
and industry could switch from directly burning
fuels like propane and natural gas to using
electric power or fuel from biomass .

Little Chippewa Lake

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

9

Introduction
Economic Growth with Climate Action
150%

% Change GSP

PERCENT CHANGE

120%

% Change GHG

90%

Total % Change (GHG/GSP)
60%

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Minnesota continues to grow its economy as it reduces
greenhouse gas emissions. Relative to 1997, Gross State
Product (GSP) has increased while emissions have
declined and reached a plateau.

Minnesota is committed in statute to do its part
to maintain a stable climate through its Next
Generation Energy Act goals . This commitment
requires reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
well beyond what existing state policies will
achieve . In Minnesota, these goals can be achieved
by reducing fossil fuel consumption and by
protecting and increasing carbon stored in the
land and trees . This report provides a framework
for directing the state’s climate action planning,
including descriptions of policy options and
consideration of their economic and emissionreduction potential . Minnesota’s climate action
thus far shows a pairing of economic growth with
decreasing emissions . This means that Minnesota
is continuing to grow its economy while also
reducing its greenhouse gas emissions .

The state of Minnesota began assessing policy
options for the potential to reduce emissions
through the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory
Group (MCCAG) in 2007 and 2008 . In 2014, the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board with all its
member agencies began updating this work with the Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunities
(CSEO) project . To set priorities for this reanalysis, stakeholders were convened in a public meeting in
March of 2014 . Stakeholder discussion focused on trends in technology adoption and new policy ideas
that had emerged since 2008 . State agencies designed policy options and discussed them in several
stakeholder meetings in 2014 and 2015 . The Center for Climate Strategies (CCS) consulting group,
under a memorandum of agreement with the state, analyzed policy options to estimate greenhouse
gas emission reductions and economic impacts of policy options . The analysis focuses on being on
track in 2030, where the 2030 target is a linear interpolation between the 2025 and the 2050 goal .
This report reflects the state’s takeaways from the project and presents them as a foundation for
climate action planning .

10

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Immediate-impact policies
Electricity:
• Increase the renewable
electricity standard
• Retire and repower
coal plants
Energy efficiency
opportunities:
• Conservation improvement
programs
• Combined heat and power
• SB 2030 building guidelines
• Wastewater facilities

Long-term strategies
to start now

Pilot programs to develop

Urban development:
• Transit and multimodal travel
• Compact development
• Electric vehicles
• Urban forests

Transportation:
• Advanced biofuels
• Pay-as-you-go car insurance
• Fuel- or carbon-based tax
Energy:
• Renewable thermal energy

Land management:
• Forest health
• Conservation and
working lands
• Agricultural soil development

Agriculture:
• Fertilizer efficiency
• Market development for
cover crops and perennials

Minnesota’s greenhouse gas reduction goals

Reduce fossil fuel use

In the 2007 Next Generation Energy Act signed
by Governor Tim Pawlenty, Minnesota set a
greenhouse gas emission reduction goal of 80%
below 2005 levels by 2050 . The goal includes
benchmarks of a 15% reduction by 2015 and a
30% reduction by 2025 . Since then, Minnesota
has successfully changed the trajectory of its
emissions profile so it is no longer increasing.
However, this trajectory is not adequate to meet
the goal .

The majority of the state’s emissions currently
come from burning fossil fuels . Minnesota has
no fossil fuel resources of its own: according
to the Energy Information Administration,
the state imported over $18 billion of fossil
fuels in 2012 from other states and countries
to power vehicles, homes, businesses, and
industries . Minnesota energy sources include
wind, solar, biomass, and hydro . These homegrown, renewable resources produce little
or no greenhouse gas emissions and can be
used for electricity, direct heating, and vehicle
fuel . In addition to renewable energy sources,
energy efficiency offers opportunity to reduce
fossil fuel use while saving money . According
to Minnesota’s 2025 Energy Action Plan draft
report, the state wastes more energy through
inefficiencies – an estimated 58% – than it
actually uses for electricity, direct heating, and
vehicle fuel .

In 2015, Governor Mark Dayton reaffirmed the
state’s climate goals by signing the Under 2
MOU . This non-binding international agreement
represents over 700 million people worldwide .
The agreement focuses on keeping the changes
in global temperature below two degrees Celsius,
which is consistent with the magnitude of the
goals of the 2007 Next Generation Energy Act .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

11

Introduction
Build compact communities with more
transit options

Protect carbon stored in lands
Minnesota stores significant amounts of carbon
in its land and trees . As of today, an estimated
15 billion CO2-equivalent short tons (CO2-e)
remain sequestered in Minnesota wetlands and
peatlands – this represents thousands of years
of carbon accumulation . An estimated 6 billion
CO2-e tons are preserved in Minnesota forests .
Since the beginning of European settlement, the
state lost or diminished many of its wetlands,
forests, prairies, peatlands, and other natural
landscapes . This has reduced the landscape’s
capacity to store carbon and provide other
environmental benefits, such as clean water and
habitat for plants and animals . Protecting and
restoring natural features of the landscape and
increasing adoption of agricultural best practices
can have multiple environmental benefits,
including reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
Federal and state policy recognizes that there is a
social cost associated with carbon emissions that
can be considered in decision making . Globally,
many groups are advocating for the development
of a universal price for carbon emissions that
would capture the social costs associated with
climate change . With such a price, the value of
natural lands and efforts to protect them would
be recognized and encouraged by the markets .

12

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Emissions Reductions from
CSEO Policy Options (CO2-e short tons)
PROJECTED

Business as usual

150

IN MILLIONS

Bass Lake near Grand Rapids

A significant portion of emissions in Minnesota
comes from vehicles . Increasing compact
development of Minnesota cities by locating
housing, commercial areas, workplaces, and
institutions like schools nearer to each other and
near transportation corridors and nodes, could
provide more opportunities for people to bike,
walk, and ride public transit . These strategies take
careful planning and infrastructure improvements
over years, but have the potential to improve
neighborhoods and improve the sense of
connection within communities . Replacing
vehicle miles traveled with active travel such as
biking and walking can have important public
health benefits, while also reducing emissions
of greenhouse gases and other harmful air
pollutants .

100

2025 NGEA
Goals

Residential,
commercial, industrial
Electric
Transportation
Forestry
Agriculture
Waste

50

0

2015

2020

2030

Emissions

2025

2030

2014-2016 analyses of policies to reduce emissions in
Minnesota are shown by sector. The height of the gray
area and all the colored wedges represent businessas-usual emissions, the colored (non-gray) areas
represent emissions avoided through policies discussed
in this report. The height of the gray area represents
the remaining emissions after policy options are
implemented.

Policy options for meeting climate goals
Meeting state greenhouse gas reduction goals
will require both near- and long-term planning
and additional actions that must begin now .
Based on analysis, and further informed
through public engagement, policies are
divided into three categories:
• Immediate-impact policies – These policies
result in immediate reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions . These policies account for
64 to 79% of the emissions reductions the
analysis showed could be made between
now and 2030 . All the immediate-action
policies focus on the electric sector .
• Long-term strategies – These policies are
critical for reaching the 2050 goals, but
they require more time for development .
Generally, these policies reduce the use
of single-occupancy internal combustion
vehicles and protect or increase carbon
stored in soils and trees .
• Pilot programs – These policies have high
potential to reduce emissions; however, they
involve new programs or technologies that
need to be explored and tested before they
can be implemented at a large scale . These
policies include transportation options,
distributed renewable energy for direct
heating and cooling, and agricultural best
practices .
Policies are comprised of state-level actions
that could be implemented through legislative
or administrative action by state government .
Many of the policies could also be implemented
on a smaller scale by local governments,
grassroots community initiatives, and some
individual actions . Additionally, many of these
policies could be implemented or supported by
federal policy .

What are the broader impacts of these
policies?
In addition to reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
several of the policies have the potential for
broader impacts on the environment and
economy that could increase the quality of life in
Minnesota, such as:
Increase resilience to extreme
weather by protecting lands
or infrastructure from damage
or adapting infrastructure to
allow for continued services
when extreme weather shuts
down or impairs systems.

Create new jobs in
Minnesota through
investment in construction
of new infrastructure,
land management, and
community energy projects.

Protect water quality by
minimizing contaminants,
conserving the use of water,
or protecting and restoring
wetlands that act as a filter.

Protect air quality by
minimizing emissions of
particles or chemicals that
have adverse health and
environmental impacts.

Protect wildlife by
creating, enhancing,
or protecting habitat.

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

13

Business as Usual: How Are We Doing?

Sappi Paper Mill, Cloquet

Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector (CO2-e short tons)
MEASURED

200

PROJECTED

Additional reductions
to be on track in 2030:
53 million short tons

2012

IN MILLIONS

150
2015 NGEA Goal

Electric Power

2025 NGEA Goal

100

2030 NGEA
Target Level

Transportation
Agriculture

50

Industrial
0
1990

Waste Management
1995

Residential
2000

Commercial
2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic greenhouse gas emissions (1990-2011) and projected emissions (2012–2030) are shown by economic sector.
To be on track in 2030 for meeting Next Generation Energy Act Goals, an additional 53 million CO2-equivalent
short tons (CO2-e) a year need to be reduced beyond business as usual. (Data source: Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, September 2013).

Greenhouse gases are gases in the atmosphere
that trap heat from the sun and warm the
atmosphere and surface of the planet . Man-made
increases in the amount of these gases in the
atmosphere are altering Earth’s climate . To track
progress toward the Next Generation Energy
Act reduction goals, the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency estimates and reports emissions
of several greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide
(CO2), nitrous oxide, methane, sulfur hexafluoride,
and two classes of compounds known as

14

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons.
For planning purposes, the state also projects
greenhouse gas emissions in future years .
Projections are based on compliance with
existing state and federal law, population and
economic trends, forecasted technology changes,
and proposed energy projects and new large
industrial production facilities .
Greenhouse gas emissions in 2012 totaled 154
million CO2-e tons . Between 2005 and 2012,

Minnesota’s emissions declined by about 7% .
Some of these reductions resulted from the
temporary outage of one of the state’s largest
coal-fired power plants and thus don’t reflect
long-term decreases .
In addition to the greenhouse gas emissions
inventoried and produced in state, significant
indirect emissions result from products and
services purchased by Minnesotans that are
not tracked by the state inventory . Many of
these products and services are manufactured,
distributed, grown, or disposed of outside of
the state, resulting in emissions outside of state

borders that are not addressed in this report .
Minnesotans can reduce these emissions by
purchasing fewer new goods and growing
the state’s reuse and refurbishment industry .
Businesses and corporations can also work to
track and reduce emissions in their supply chain .
Significant greenhouse gas emissions reductions
can be achieved in many sectors of Minnesota’s
economy . The following sections provide
information on each sector of the economy and
the sources of greenhouse gases and background
on what has already been done to achieve
emissions reductions .

Emissions come from all sectors of the economy with 85% of the state’s
emissions coming from electricity generation, transportation, and agriculture .

Electricity
generation

Transportation

Agriculture

Commercial, industrial,
and residential buildings
and processes

Waste

Combustion of fuel for
generation of electricity

Fuel combustion, air conditioning
leakage, leakage from natural gas
pipelines and stations

Livestock flatulence, manure
management, fertilizer use, crop
cultivation, fuel combustion
Fuel combustion to directly heat
spaces and water, chemical use,
non-combustion industrial processes

*note this does not include electricity use in
buildings, industry, or homes

Waste processing and incineration, methane
from landfill gas and wastewater,
carbon sequestered in demolition landfills

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

15

Business as Usual
Electric Utility Sector

switching from coal to natural gas . Electricity
from in-state renewable sources could comprise
as much as 33% of net generation to service
Minnesota electric demand in 2030 based on the
2015 forecast. Energy efficiency will reduce the
state’s electricity use by an estimated 11 million
megawatt hours (MWHs) by 2030 .

Electricity Sector (CO2-e short tons)
PROJECTED

MEASURED

80

2012

Emissions-avoided

70

Renewable Energy

IN MILLIONS

Revised Electricity Sector Forecast
(CO2-e short tons)

Ener
nergy Efficiency
ncy

60

Coal Retirement

CHP

50

50
40

Business as usual (2013)

30

40

Emissions

Revised forecast (2015)

10
0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic emissions (1990 – 2011) and projected emissions
(2012 – 2030) are shown for the consumption of
electricity in blue. These values include emissions from
generation imported from other states. Estimated avoided
emissions from renewable energy, energy efficiency, and
coal retirement or replacement are shown in orange.
(Data source: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
September 2013). ***CSEO analysis is based on this 2014 forecast.

Emissions from electricity generation result
primarily from the combustion of coal and natural
gas at power plants . This electricity is used to
light Minnesota homes, offices, and commercial
buildings . It powers electronic devices and air
conditioners . It’s also used in industrial and
manufacturing processes that don’t generate
electricity onsite . Emissions from electric power
generation peaked in Minnesota in 2006 .
Between 2006 and 2011, emissions declined
about 13% at a rate of approximately 3% per year .
By 2030, electric sector emissions are projected
to decline by 27% based on the updated 2015
forecast despite increased customer demands .
The state is increasing electricity output while
lowering emissions through the deployment of
energy efficiency and renewable energy and by

16

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

IN MILLIONS

20

30

Sherco reduction

20

10

0

2012

2015

2020

2025

2030

The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA)
completed its greenhouse gas forecast for the state’s
business as usual emissions in early 2013. The forecasts
use information provided annually to the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission (PUC) by utilities in their
Electric Utility Annual Report, Advanced Forecast
(EUAR AF). The MPCA revised its electric power sector
forecast in December 2015, using a more recent EUAR.
The downward revision reflects more robust renewable
energy expansion, lower expected natural gas prices,
retirements at six coal-burning facilities in the state
(Black Dog, Hoot Lake, Silver Lake, Austin Northeast,
Taconite Harbor, and Boswell Energy Center), somewhat
slower expected growth in retail electric sales, and
a general reduced intensity of emissions associated
with imported power. In October 2015, Xcel Energy
proposed shuttering its large coal-burning units 1 and 2
in Sherburne County, and replacing one with a natural
gas combined cycle unit. The MPCA estimates that this
proposal, subject to PUC approval, would result in an
additional emission reduction of roughly 5 million CO2-e
tons annually.

The 2015 forecast shows that between
2011 and 2030 the amount of emissions
produced per MWH of electricity in
Minnesota will decline 34%
Between 1990 and 2011, several policies were
implemented in Minnesota that in combination
reduced 15 .6 million CO2-e tons of emissions per
year from the electric power sector . Major policies
include:

help rate-payers reduce energy use also have
increased energy efficiency. Energy efficiency
improvements generally are the least expensive
source of additional power to meet demand, often
costing less than half the cost of power from new
generating sources .

• In 1994, an initial investment was made in wind
power and solid biomass generation capacity
as part of Prairie Island nuclear spent storage
legislation .

In addition to state policies, federal environmental
standards are also influencing the electric sector in
Minnesota . In particular, the 2011 Mercury and Air
Toxics Standard and the ongoing Clean Power Plan
process require reductions in mercury and carbon
dioxide pollution, respectively, from coal-fired
power plants . These policies are contributing to the
switch from coal to natural gas as well as increasing
investment in new renewable energy capacity .

• In 2004, the state implemented its Renewable
Energy Objective .

Electricity is Geting Cleaner

• Adoption of the “emissions reduction rider”
statute M .S . 216B .1692 allowing Minnesota
utilities to propose projects through an
expedited cost recovery process .

• In 2007, the state implemented electric utility
requirements to reduce 1 .5% of retail sales
through programs that target the users of
electricity, building on previous successful
efficiency programs.
• In 2013, the state added a Solar Electricity
Standard of 1 .5% by 2020 for investor owned
utilities and a goal of 10% solar electricity by 2030 .
These clean energy policies continue to drive
emission reductions . By 2030, existing policies
will drive annual reductions of about 30 million
CO2-e tons below 2005 levels . These avoided
emissions result primarily from increases in
renewable energy and energy efficiency. Most of
this renewable energy capacity has been utilityscale wind power . Many programs designed to

FACTOR INCREASE 1990 = 1

• In 2007, the Renewable Electricity Standard
(RES) required that by 2025, about 27% of
power provided to consumers by electric utilities
be generated using renewable forms of energy .

HISTORIC

2.0

Forecast

2012

Electric Retail Sales

1.5

In-State Net
Generation

Greenhouse Gases

1.0

0.5

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

While electricity demand has increased and is forecasted
to continue to increase, the greenhouse gas emissions
from the electric sector will continue to decline from
increased renewable energy and switching from coal to
natural gas. (Data source: Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, September 2013).

Between 1990 and 2011, increased

efficiency allowed Minnesota utilities
to forego the construction of roughly
1,400 megawatts (MW) of new

power generation capacity.
Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

17

Business as Usual
Transportation Sector
Transportation Sector (CO2-e short tons)
MEASURED

50

PROJECTED

2012

Emissions-avoided

40

IN MILLIONS

Fuel
Economy Standards

from improved fuel efficiency of vehicles balanced
against an increase in emissions from air travel .
While the number of vehicle miles traveled on roads
is projected to increase, highway vehicle emissions
are projected to decline about 18% as a result of
federal fuel economy standards for light- and heavyduty vehicles . By contrast, emissions from aviation
are projected to rise more than 25% between 2011
and 2030 .

30

Vehicles are Geting More Eﬃcient

Emissions
20

HISTORIC

2.0

Forecast

2012

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic emissions (1990 – 2011) and projected emissions
(2012 – 2030) are shown for the transportation sector.
Estimated avoided emissions from federal fuel economy
standards are shown in orange. (Data source: Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, September 2013).

The largest source of emissions in the
transportation sector is from combustion of
fossil fuels in vehicles. Significant emissions
also come from aviation . This category does
not include emissions from the construction of
transportation infrastructure, which is accounted
for in industrial emissions . The manufacturing of
concrete and asphalt are energy-intensive and
produce significant greenhouse gas emissions.
Transportation emissions increased about 30%
from 1990 to 2004, peaking in 2004 . Emissions
declined about 11% between 2004 and 2011 as a
result of improved vehicle efficiency, petroleum
replacement by ethanol and biodiesel, and a
decline in overall driving .
Emissions from transportation are projected
to continue to decline . By 2030, emissions are
projected to be about 9% below 2011 levels . This
decline reflects a projected decrease in emissions

18

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

FACTOR INCREASE 1990 = 1

10

VMT

1.5

Greenhouse
Gases
1.0

0.5
1990

Fuel Economy

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Vehicle miles travelled are forecast to increase about
15% between 2011 and 2030. This increase in miles
traveled will be somewhat offset by improved federal
fuel economy standards. (Data source: Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, September 2013).

Reducing surface transportation emissions can be
impacted by three main variables:
• Reducing the number of trips taken
• Making shorter trips
• Increasing the efficiency of vehicles or traveling
by foot or bike
The first two variables are affected by land use
and the way communities are planned and laid
out . For instance, mixed zoning that allows
grocery stores, places of worship, and day care

centers to be located near to where people live
or work can reduce the distance people travel
and increase the number of trips taken by foot,
bike, or public transportation . Carbon emissions
per mile traveled is determined by the mode
of transportation and the efficiency of the
vehicle, so walking or biking have no associated
emissions; wide-spread use of mass transit results
in significantly less emissions compared to driving
a car; and electric, hybrid, fuel flex, or more
efficient vehicles result in fewer emissions than
driving a conventional vehicle .
Minnesota is investing in improved transit
offerings and bike and pedestrian facilities,
especially in the Twin Cities Metropolitan
Area and other regional centers . Many more
transportation alternatives are being considered
as part of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation, the Metropolitan Council,
and other regional and local government
transportation plans .

Agriculture Sector
Agricultural Sector (CO2-e short tons)
MEASURED

35

PROJECTED

2012

30

IN MILLIONS

25

Crop Production

20
15
10

Feedlots/Livestock
5
0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic emissions (1990 – 2011) and projected
emissions (2012 – 2030) are shown for the agricultural
sector. (Data source: Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, September 2013).

Fillmore County

Agriculture is a critical part of Minnesota’s
diversified economy and is also the third-largest
source of greenhouse gas emissions . About 65%
of these emissions derive from crop production
and the remainder comes from the production
of livestock . About half of emissions from crop
production are related to the use of nitrogen
fertilizers . Nitrogen fertilizers release a powerful
greenhouse gas called nitrous oxide . The other
half of crop production emissions are from the
combustion of fuel by farm tractors and other
equipment or from the oxidation of soils rich in
organic matter . Of livestock emissions, about
one-half originate directly from animal flatulence
and about one-third comes from stored manure .
Agricultural emissions reductions can be
achieved through using practices that reduce or
increase the efficiency of nitrogen fertilizer use
and improve manure management .
Agricultural emissions increased 15% from 1990
levels by 2011 . Of this increase, about 70% was
attributable to crop production, mainly from
increased nitrogen fertilizer applications to farm
fields and increased use of petroleum fuels in
farm equipment . The other 30% increase came
from livestock production: in particular, methane
emissions increased as a result of a change in
manure management from solid to liquid storage .
Under current policies, agricultural emissions are
projected to remain roughly constant between
2011 and 2030 . The agricultural sector has the
potential to achieve greenhouse gas emissions
reductions by using practices that improve
nitrogen fertilizer and manure management,
while also sequestering carbon in soils and
perennials .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

19

Business as Usual
Commercial, Industrial, and
Residential Sectors

efficiencies save consumers money on their
energy bills .

Residential, Commercial, and
Industrial Sector (CO2-e short tons)
MEASURED

50

PROJECTED

2012

Emissions-avoided
Energy Efficiency

IN MILLIONS

40

30

Industrial
20

Residential

10

Commercial
0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic emissions (1990 – 2011) and projected emissions
(2012 – 2030) are shown for the Industrial, Residential,
and Commercial sectors. Estimated avoided emissions
are shown in orange. (Data source: Pollution Control
Agency, September 2013).

Many industrial and household products include
chemicals that emit greenhouse gases with a
high global warming potential . These chemicals
are found in everything from hair styling products
to refrigerators . There are many alternative
products that use less-potent chemicals . Recently
released new federal standards are critical to
decreasing the use of these chemicals . The state
could support federal efforts by tracking and
reporting on quantities of these chemicals in
products .
Businesses and individuals often do not have
information about the presence of high global
warming potential chemicals in the products
they buy . Without this information, there is no
market force to drive changes . If the state tracks
and reports on these chemicals, and adds it to
labels or otherwise makes it widely available to
the public, it could better inform the choices of
individual consumers and private business supply
chains .

The residential, commercial, and industrial
categories include fuel combusted to directly
heat spaces and water . They also include
emissions from chemicals associated with
solvents, fertilizer, air conditioners, and
refrigerators, as well as fuel used in processes
like petroleum refining, taconite processing,
and manufacturing . The direct emissions
from electricity use in homes, businesses, and
industries are accounted for in the electric sector .
The state’s Conservation Improvement Program
drives avoided emissions in this sector by
requiring natural gas utilities to implement costeffective energy efficiency end-use programs
to reduce energy use by 1% per year . Similar to
efficiency in the electric sector, the opportunity
to reduce wasted energy is significant and these

20

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Minneapolis Water Treatment Plant

Waste Sector
Waste Management Sector
(CO2-e short tons)
MEASURED

6

5

IN MILLIONS

PROJECTED

2012

Emissions-avoided

4

Methane Flaring
3

Emissions
2

1

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Historic emissions (1990 – 2011) and projected (2012
– 2030) are shown for the waste sector. Avoided
emissions are shown in orange. (Data source: Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency September 2013).

Waste sector greenhouse emissions result
from landfills, solid waste incineration, and
wastewater treatment . Greenhouse gas emissions
from landfills currently account for more than
half of all emissions from waste management .
Wastewater treatment accounts for about 40%
and solid waste incineration and other minor
sources account for the remainder . Methane,
a greenhouse gas that, on a per-ton basis,
has approximately 25 times the atmospheric
warming effect as carbon dioxide, is produced
by decomposition of organic wastes in landfills,
municipal wastewater treatment facilities, and
septic systems . The combustion of solid waste in
large incinerators or in backyard burn barrels also
releases emissions .

Waste emissions in Minnesota peaked in 1990
and have since fallen by about two-thirds
to about 2 million CO2-e tons . Emissions are
projected to decline an additional 17% below 2011
levels by 2030 . These reductions largely resulted
from capturing and flaring landfill gas. Thirty-one
landfills in Minnesota currently capture methane
and either destroy it in flares or use it to generate
electricity or energy for space and water heating .
At present, about half of all methane that is
produced in Minnesota’s landfills – roughly 2
million CO2-e tons – is captured and destroyed .
Aside from flaring, it is also possible to reduce
the amount of methane produced in landfills by
reducing the amount of material that goes into
landfills by providing recycling and composting
opportunities . Recycling collects metals and
plastics, melts them down, and uses the material
to make new products . Composting or digesting
organic materials such as food waste provides
a means of keeping food and organic waste
out of landfills as well. While more than 70% of
waste can theoretically be recycled, at present
only about 45% of solid waste in Minnesota is
recycled . Many local governments are working
to find ways to divert waste away from landfills
through programs such as curb-side pickup of
recycling and composting, one-stream recycling,
and education campaigns .
The policy analysis in this report showed that
reduction of packaging, increased composting,
and increased recycling could drive waste
reductions . These types of policies create jobs .
However, Minnesota does not currently have
extensive recycling processing facilities, and
thus most of the economic gains and emissions
reductions from these policies likely occur out of
state .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

21

Climate Action Policies
Immediate-Impact Policies
Electricity:
• Increase the renewable
electricity standard
• Retire and repower coal plants
Energy efficiency opportunities:
• Conservation improvement programs
• Combined heat and power
• SB 2030 building guidelines
• Wastewater facilities

22

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

30

27%
25

19%

20

15%

15

13%
10%

10

10%
7%

5

Wastwater
Efficiency

CIP 2%

CIP 2.5%

CHP

Retire Coal

40% RES

SB2030

0.14%
0

50% RES

In addition to contributing to meeting state
goals, the immediate-impact policy options
described in this section could be used to
support Minnesota’s compliance with the federal
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Clean
Power Plan, a federal rule intended to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from electricity
generation . The federal rule does not start until
2022; however, the state will need to design an
implementation plan to meet the rule well ahead
of 2022 . In addition, utilities need time to plan
for compliance. By increasing energy efficiency,
increasing renewable energy, and decreasing use
of coal, Minnesota can decrease its greenhouse
gas emissions without decreasing economic
productivity or quality of life .

Percent of Achieving 2030 Target

% of achievig 2030 goal

The policy options discussed in this section would
result in an immediate reduction of greenhouse
gases through deployment of clean energy .
Clean energy includes both renewable energy
and energy efficiency. Together, the policies
in this section would achieve 64–79% of the
emission reductions needed to be on track in
2030, with the range depending on their level of
implementation . Policies were analyzed for their
potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and for their potential economic impact on
Minnesota .

Washington County Landfill

Clean energy policies that immediately reduce emissions
are shown. Bar height corresponds to the percent of
emission reductions towards the 2030 target.

BROADER IMPACT KEY

JOBS

CLEAN
WATER

CLEAN
AIR

PROTECT RESILIENCY
HABITAT

Decrease Fossil Fuel Use in
Electricity

Minnesota Job Creation

Increase Renewable Electricity Standard

3,000

2,500

1,500

1,000

Wastewater
EE

Retire coal

40% RES

CIP 2%

50% RES

0

CHP

500

SB2030

Average Employment

2,000

Clean energy policies that immediately reduce emissions
are shown. Bar height corresponds to the average
annual jobs created in the economy through policy
implementation using the Regional Economic Models, Inc.
(REMI) model of Minnesota’s economy.

-1,000

Retire coal plants

-500

50% RES

40% RES

CHP

CIP 2%

0

CIP 2.5%

500

SB2030

NPV Costs/Savings 2015-2030 ($2014MM)

1,000

Wastewater EE

Cost Versus Savings

-1,500

-2,000

-2,500

Clean energy policies that immediately reduce emissions
are shown. Bar height correspond to the net costs and
savings of policies where negative numbers are savings
and positive numbers are costs. Net present value (NPV)
takes all future dollars and discounts them back to the
value of a dollar (in this case) in 2014.

Minnesota’s Renewable Electricity Standard
(RES) is a state mandate that requires different
categories of electricity providers (investor-owned
utilities, publically owned municipal utilities, and
cooperatives) to source a minimum amount of
their retail electricity sales from eligible renewable
energy technologies . Legislation passed in 2013
supports higher levels of renewable energy use
in Minnesota (Minnesota Laws 2013, Chapter 85
HF 729, Article 12, Sections 1, 4, and 7) . State
legislation also sets the goal that by 2030, 10%
of the retail electric sales in Minnesota should
be generated by solar energy (Minnesota Stat .
§216B .1691) . Increasing the renewable electricity
standard would need to be done by legislation and
not by administrative action .
Analysis shows that a 50% RES alone would reduce
more than a quarter of the emissions needed
to be on target in the year 2030 . This emissions
reduction is the largest for any policy analyzed .
Analysis also projected that this could create on
average 1,500 new jobs annually in the state . Since
the analysis was done, several new renewable
energy projects have been proposed that, if built,
would potentially increase renewable generation
to levels over 30% and potentially closer to 40%
of the electricity mix . Some of these changes
are pending in the Integrated Resource Planning
processes . A 50% RES could move the state
beyond these projects and create more certainty in
increasing use of renewables .
The analysis found that, while increasing the RES
would require upfront investments, there would
be a net savings because instillation of renewable
energy equipment, such as wind turbines and solar

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

23

Climate Action Policies - Immediate-Impact Policies
panels, is less expensive than new gas or coal
units . Further, once wind and solar equipment
is installed, they have much lower operation
and maintenance costs compared to fossil fuel
equipment . It is important to note that the
analysis did not focus on the technical feasibility
of policies, nor did it take into account the cost
of transmission system upgrades needed to
accommodate potential changes in the location
of energy generation .
Other states are increasing their RES as they
approach fulfillment of their standards. For
instance, Vermont has a 75% RES by 2032,
California has a 50% RES by 2030, and Hawaii
has a 100% RES by 2045 . These increased
RES targets reflect successful development of
renewable energy .

Retire and repower coal plants

Governor Dayton has publicly announced his
intention to move Minnesota away from reliance
on coal . Since 2005, the state has retired or
converted 12 coal units to natural gas . There are
18 coal-fired utility units currently operating that
provide about a quarter of Minnesota’s electricgenerating capacity (approximately, 4200 MW
out of a total of about 15,100MW in the state) . Six
of the 20 currently operating units are greater
than 250 MW, and some units are even greater
than 500 MW . Closing units this size means
that a large amount of electric needs must be
provided through other means, including shifts
to renewable electricity production and demand
management . This makes long-range planning
and evaluation critical . By 2020, four more units
are proposed for retirement, and between 2020
and 2030, another four are up for consideration .
Two of these units are assets owned by Xcel
Energy in Sherburne County and are in a
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission process of
review for possible early retirement .
24

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Clean energy policies in Minnesota
have not only reduced
greenhouse gas emissions,
but also created jobs and

improved air quality
To aid in considering options available to meet
the state’s greenhouse gas reduction goals,
this analysis used Sherburne County (Sherco)
Generating Plant Units 1 and 2 as a proxy for
modeling the impact of replacing approximately
1,360 MWs of coal power with a combination
of natural gas combined cycle generation and
utility-scale wind power . Due to their size, Xcel
Energy’s Sherburne County Units 1 and 2 are
some of the largest emitters of CO2 in the state .
This analysis is useful as a proxy for generically
evaluating the potential impact of transitioning
utilities from coal to natural gas and renewable
energy . Evaluating the transition for any particular
power plant requires a more in-depth analysis
and consideration of both demand and supply
alternatives .

Co-benefits to increasing renewable energy
and decreasing the use of coal in Minnesota
Renewable energy growth has been rapid and has
had a positive impact on the economy . In 2000,
only 4 .2% of Minnesota’s in-state generation came
from renewable sources like wind or solar . In 2015,
21% of in-state generation was renewable . Since
Minnesota does not have fossil fuel resources, the
growth in renewable energy represents economic
growth for the state . Clean energy employment in
Minnesota surged 78% between 2000 and 2014,
growing steadily through the recession . That is
in comparison to the state’s total employment
growth of only 11% over that period . Over 50,000
people work on renewable energy in some
capacity, and more than 15,000 employees spend
over 50% of their time on renewable energy .
Burning coal releases chemicals into the air that

Increase Energy Efficiency in Homes,
Buildings, and Industrial Processes

Source: MPCA

In addition to renewable resources, great
opportunity exists to reduce emissions and save
money through energy efficiency. Minnesota wastes
more energy than it actually uses – an estimated
58% (based on analysis of EIA data in Minnesota’s
2025 Energy Action Plan draft report) . Energy is
wasted due to inefficiencies such as thermal power
plant and transmission losses, leaky windows,
buildings without proper insulation, and inefficient
industrial processes. When the efficiency of energy
use increases, it saves money for homeowners and
businesses while reducing unnecessary greenhouse
gas emissions .

Expand the conservation improvement

can make it unhealthy to breathe . Breathing
programs
and exposure to polluted air can contribute to
a variety of health problems from itchy eyes to
asthma attacks . Air pollution can also contribute
to serious illness and even early death . The Life
The state’s conservation improvement programs
and Breath Report (produced jointly by the
established an energy efficiency resource standard
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the
requirement (EERS) for utilities that requires annual
Minnesota Department of Health) estimated
reductions in energy sold by utilities through
that air pollution contributed to about 6 to 13%
end-use efficiency programs. This policy has
of all Twin Cities deaths in 2008 . Air pollution in
successfully reduced energy consumption and
Minnesota also creates haze that impacts views
demand, saving individuals and businesses money .
in even the wildest and most remote parts of
The program could be expanded by increasing the
the state . Further, mercury deposits from coalstandard:
fired power plants (in and out of state) impact
aquatic ecosystems and the health of people
• Electric utilities could increase the EERS to 2
who consume fish. Reducing the amount of coal
or 2 .5% with the ability to count electric energy
burned reduces air and water pollution in the state .
savings from energy utility infrastructure
improvements and electricity displaced by
During extreme weather events, the electric grid
combined heat and power projects (CHP) on top
can be knocked out for hours or days, impacting
of a minimum savings goal of 1 .5% from end-use
critical services and disrupting commerce .
efficiency.
Renewable energy installations on-site can be
designed to go into “island mode” to continue
• Gas utilities could retain the EERS of 1 .5%,
to power buildings and operations independent
with a minimum savings goal of 1% for end use
of the larger electric grid system . These types
efficiency and the addition of CHP as an eligible
of microgrid installations improve resiliency
technology that could satisfy the remaining 0 .5%
to extreme weather and other electric grid
requirement .
disruptions .
Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

25

Climate Action Policies - Immediate-Impact Policies

58% of the total energy
consumed in Minnesota is lost
through inefficiencies
• In addition to the demand-side management
requirements through the EERS, natural gas
utilities and electric utilities could be required
to meet a CHP standard that is embedded in
the EERS . Collectively, the natural gas utilities
could be required to meet a CHP goal of 34
million British Thermal Units of displaced fossil
fuel by 2030 . Collectively, the electric utilities
could be required to meet a CHP goal of 800
MW by 2030 .
Increasing the state’s energy efficiency
requirements to 2 or 2 .5% would reduce
significant greenhouse gas emissions, making up
between 5 and 10% of the emission reductions
needed to be on target in 2030 . This policy
also has economic and health benefits. Energy
efficiency saves homeowners, business owners,
and utility ratepayers money . In addition, this
policy is projected to create on average over
1,500 jobs annually . It would also lead to the
health and environmental benefits of reducing
coal and natural gas burning in the state .

Combined heat and power

Combined heat and power (CHP) systems reduce
fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions
by recovering heat for useful purposes that
would otherwise be wasted as reject heat in
power plants . CHP systems can use this “waste”
energy for heating buildings, domestic hot water,
industrial processes, or for conversion to electric
generation . Additional reductions are achieved
both through the improved efficiency of the

26

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

CHP systems, relative to separate heat and power
technologies, and by avoiding transmission and
distribution losses associated with moving power
from central power stations that are located far
away from the point of electricity end use .
Encouraging an increase in the use of CHP could
be achieved through several existing statutes:
• Conservation Improvement Program (Minnesota
Statute 216B.241) – Expand electricity and
natural gas utility Conservation Improvement
Program goals to promote use of CHP systems,
including encouragement of electric or natural
gas utility-owned CHP as well as incentives for
implementation of non-utility owned CHP .
• Renewable Electricity Standard (Minnesota
Statute 216B.1691) – Expand the Renewable
Electricity Standard (RES) to include a specific
goal for currently eligible CHP technologies, and
incorporate additional provisions for RES credit
to encourage use of biomass for thermal energy
production without power production in areas of
the state without access to natural gas service .
• Integrated Resource Planning (Minnesota
Statute 216B.2422) – Require that electric
utilities demonstrate that they have considered
CHP opportunities before they propose building
new generation capacity .
In addition, the following are needed to support CHP:
• Technical assistance for utilities and industry to
analyze feasibility and apply implementation
actions to commercialize high-performing CHP
and other thermal recovery and advanced clean
energy technologies
• Revision of standby rate practices
• Update of state rules on application of the
capacity credit for avoided cost .
• Establishment of clear and consistent
interconnection standards based on best- known
practices

Analysis shows that this policy would save
money over the fifteen-year modelling window
and create an average of more than 2,000
new jobs annually, while achieving 10% of the
emission reductions needed to be on target
in 2030 . Further, CHP can be integrated into
microgrids to allow for systems to operate
independent of the electric grid, making systems
resilient to power outages .

SB2030 building guidelines

Buildings account for 40% of all the energy
used in Minnesota . In 2011, the residential sector
consumed about 21% and the commercial
sector consumed about 18% of all the energy
used . Ensuring that new or renovated buildings
serve us well into the future means constructing
energy-efficient buildings paired with renewable
energy . Initiatives such as the national programs
Architecture 2030 and Zero Energy Ready
Homes and Buildings or Minnesota’s Sustainable
Building 2030 (SB2030) provide standards to
progressively achieve improved building energy
performance so that buildings avoid energy use

through efficiency measures, produce as much as
or more energy than they use annually, and can
export excess renewable energy generation to
the utility to offset the energy used .
State building energy codes specify minimum
requirements for new and renovated buildings .
These codes are uniform across the state and
restrict local governments from setting their own
standards . Possible ways to move this policy
option forward include:
• Use a stepped process to require use of
SB2030 for all new and renovated commercial
buildings, all new one- and two-family
dwellings, and multi-family residential
buildings .
• Sufficient technical assistance and training
could be made available to assist local units
of government, architects, engineers, builders,
and developers in moving toward SB2030 .
• Adoption of SB2030 as an appendix into
the Minnesota Building Code could make
the SB2030 standards available for local
jurisdictions to use .

Minneapolis, MN

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

27

Climate Action Policies - Immediate-Impact Policies
• Legislation could require all state-licensed
buildings use SB2030 design guidelines
and could provide funding for the technical
assistance and training required to support
these changes .
This policy has great potential for job creation
and financial savings, creating on average a
projected 2,500 new jobs annually or more,
saving $2 billion over a 15-year period, and
reducing almost 20% of the emissions needed
to be on track in 2030 . Savings come from
reduced energy needs over the 15-year period .
It is important to note that upfront capital and
investment in supportive programs would be
needed to enact the policy .

Metro Wastewater Treatment Plant

Wastewater facilities energy efficiency

There are approximately 600 wastewater
treatment facilities in Minnesota . These critical,
energy-intensive facilities have large electricity
bills taxpayers pay . The potential for conservation
is substantial and offers savings in electricity bills
for local governments across the state . To achieve
desired reductions, the state could require a
25% reduction of energy by 2025 at wastewater
treatment facilities or the state could tie energy
efficiency goals to public funding.
The best opportunity for achieving energy
efficiency at wastewater facilities comes from
replacing old aeration equipment with new, more
efficient equipment. Aeration equipment typically
accounts for half the energy usage at mechanical
facilities and nearly all of the energy consumption
for aerated lagoon facilities . Replacement of
older aeration blowers with new high-efficiency
blowers can reduce energy consumption for
aeration by 50% or more .

Wastewater aeration tank

28

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

This policy option does not have the potential
to achieve huge reductions of greenhouse gas
emissions at the state level, but may achieve
important savings at the local level . As local
governments are stressed by financial demands,
additional funding would be key to the success of
this effort .

Retiring or replacing coal
with natural gas and wind

6,000

6,000

5,500

5,500

5,000

5,000

4,500

4,500

4,000

4,000

3,500

3,500

3,000

JOBS

JOBS

40 or 50% renewable energy standard

Total Employment

50% RES

2,500

3,000
2,500

2,000

2,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

Total Employment

Jobs

40% RES

500

500
0

0
2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2014

2030

Increasing the Conservation
Improvement Standard to 2% a year

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

6,000

5,500

5,500

5,000

5,000

4,500

4,500

4,000

4,000

3,500

3,500

JOBS

JOBS

2016

Combined heat and power

6,000

3000
2,,500

Jobs
3,000
2,500

Jobs
2000

2,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

500

500

0
2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

0

2030

2014

Implementing an energy
stretch code for buildings (SB2030)

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

Implementing wastewater efficiency

6,000

6,000

5,500

5,500

5,000

5,000
4,500

4,500

Jobs
4,000

4,000

3,500

3,500

JOBS

JOBS

New full- and parttime jobs created over
the 15-year modelling
period using the
Regional Economic
Models, Inc. (REMI).
All figures are shown
on the same scale for
comparison.

3,000

3,000

2,500

2,500

2,000

2,000

1,500

1,500

Jobs
1,000

1,000

500

500

0

0
2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

29

Climate Action Policies - Long-term Strategies
Long-term Strategies
to Start Now
Urban development:
• Transit and multimodal travel
• Compact development
• Electric vehicles
• Urban forests
Land management:
• Forest health
• Conservation and working lands
• Agricultural soil development

Emissions reductions from the policies in this
section require more time for development,
but they are critical for Minnesota to meet its
80% emissions reduction goal . Policy options
include changes in urban and rural land
management, which require long-term planning,
infrastructure, and ongoing public discussion . In
rural landscapes, policies could support land use
practices that include protection of carbon stored
in plants and soils . In urban areas, policies could
support reductions in the use of automobiles .
Land management in the Metro and across the
state has historically been designed to support
automobile travel . While mass transit is available
at some level across the state, it is not developed
to accommodate a wide range of daily trips .
The availability of bike lanes, pedestrian paths,
and electric vehicle infrastructure are not widespread across all communities either . Policies
could support a wider range of transportation
options and more compact and energy-efficient
development .

Hovland, MN

Urban and Community
Development
Transit and multimodal travel

The Twin Cities Metropolitan Area’s long-range
transportation guide – the 2040 Transportation
Policy Plan – is multimodal: addressing
highways, transit, pedestrian facilities, bicycle
facilities, freight, and aviation . Objectives and
outcomes that strongly relate to greenhouse
gas emissions reduction include:
• Reduced transportation-related air emissions
• Additional MnPASS managed lanes
• Additional transit-ways and arterial bus rapid
transit lines
• Increased the of transit, bicycling, and
walking
• Increasing availability of multimodal travel
options

30

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Each of these efforts focuses on relieving
congestion and increasing opportunities for travel
by means other than a single-occupant vehicle .
Developing new and more convenient transit
options and improving the quality and safety of
bike and pedestrian facilities encourages people
to use alternative means of transportation, which
would reduce greenhouse gas emissions . A more
balanced system has many co-benefits. Increased
walking and biking are associated with better
health . Decreased driving can lead to lower levels
of harmful particulate pollution in the air .

How do Minnesotans get to work?
NUMBER

PERCENT TOTAL

Drive alone

2,136,394

78 .1%

Carpool

237,894

8 .7%

Transit

94,172

3 .4%

Bicycle

20,803

0 .8%

Walk

79,106

2 .9%

Other means
(including taxi)

22,648

0 .8%

Work at home

145,028

5 .3%

2,736,045

100.0%

Total

and cities could lead to greater concentration of
new development, a more compact urban form,
more locally diverse land uses, and shorter trip
distances . These policies can reduce the number
of vehicle miles traveled and greenhouse gases
emitted from transportation by making the
places that people rely on, such as grocery stores,
schools, and work, closer to home . If people don’t
have to travel far for the things they need or want,
their vehicle trips are shorter and they are more
inclined use transit or bike or walk instead of
driving . Also, more compact development means
municipalities need to build and maintain fewer
roads and other infrastructure, which can reduce
greenhouse gas emissions related to construction .
Compact urban development, which features
multi-family homes and mixed-use commercial
and residential buildings, can also reduce heating
and cooling loads through improved efficiency,
thus reducing greenhouse gas emissions from
buildings . Since urban form and travel behavior
are mutually reinforcing factors, limiting growth
of vehicle miles traveled will require a suite of
coordinated land use and transportation actions .

Electric vehicles

(Data Source U.S. Department of Transportation for
Minnesota in 2013)

Compact development in urban areas

Land use patterns and population density can
have a significant impact on transportation
and residential energy consumption . The
implementation of urban planning and
development strategies in larger communities

Electric Vehicles (EVs) are powered by
electricity (via battery) instead of by fossil fuel
burning combustion engines . EVs have several
advantages . They have no tailpipe emissions
and lower operating and maintenance costs .
In addition, they can reduce greenhouse gas

In 2014, Minnesotans imported
$11 billion of fossil fuels for
transportation from out of state

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

31

Climate Action Policies - Long-term Strategies
emissions . The potential for emission reduction
from EVs depends on the energy sources
powering the electric grid . With renewablebased grid electricity, EVs offer a significant
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions relative
to conventional vehicles . The more renewable
energy on the electric grid, the greater the
emissions reduction . Currently, many EV
customers choose to use utility renewable energy
programs and some provide their own renewable
power through residential solar panels . For
example, Xcel Energy’s Windsource program
allows consumers to choose wind-powered
electricity . Great River Energy offers the Revolt
Program supplying renewable electricity for EVs
at no added cost .

Como Lake, St. Paul

In order to meet the 2050 climate goal,
Minnesota will need to significantly reduce
gasoline and diesel consumption . For example,
a recent study conducted by Siemens for
Minneapolis, estimates that for the city to meet
its greenhouse gas reduction goals (also 80%
by 2050) they would need to replace 65%
of passenger vehicles with electric vehicles .
While EVs are being adopted by some drivers
in Minnesota, there are many challenges and
barriers to more wide-spread adoption . EVs are
a relatively new technology and cost more than
comparable conventional vehicles . With most
new technologies, costs often start high, but
with advances in manufacturing or design and
with economies of scale, the prices come down
dramatically . The same trend could be expected
of EVs . The trajectory for EV prices is not known,
but supportive policies could help grow the

32

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

market and lower prices . As manufacturing of
EVs is still a growing industry, early adoption and
commitment to EVs in Minnesota might draw
part of the supply chain to the state and have an
added economic benefit. Minnesota can continue
to grow its EV fleet through:
• Provide more utility programs that incentivize
off-peak charging or that create a market value
for vehicle-to-grid services as part of gridmodernization efforts .
• Join the existing Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV)
Standard, which would require that by 2030
automobile manufacturers, through their
dealerships, ensure that 10% of the total lightand medium-duty vehicle sales in Minnesota
are EVs .
• Build charging infrastructure along major
highway corridors, in rest areas, and at public
destinations such as state parks . Work with
developers and private partners to expand
options in parking ramps, commercial districts,
and other locations .
• Provide incentives to support EV adoption: for
instance, parking and metered highway lanes
could be made free or discounted for EVs .
• Research, test, and deploy electric buses on
regular route services in the Twin Cities region
and urban areas in Greater Minnesota where
feasible .
• Research and monitor new technologies that
have the potential for expanding EV use,
such as dynamic wireless power transfer and
autonomous/self-driving vehicles .
Broad adoption of EVs in Minnesota could reduce
air pollution from cars, improving public health
and reducing greenhouse gas emissions . While
EVs require new charging infrastructure, they
otherwise work well with Minnesota’s existing
transportation system .

Community and urban forests

Land Management
Forest health

Trees and tree canopies in communities provide
shade and windbreaks that reduce energy use .
Although disturbances, such as blow downs,
Trees also provide other economic, environmental,
fires, pests, and disease outbreaks are natural
and public health benefits. For instance, trees
features of forest ecosystems, they release large
improve air quality, slow the velocity of storm
amounts of carbon and reduce the rate at which
water, provide habitat for birds and other wildlife,
the state’s forests as a whole remove carbon from
mitigate temperature extremes, improve soil
the atmosphere . With anticipated changes in
health, and sequester carbon . Trees also contribute
climate, the frequency and intensity of landscapeto the aesthetics of communities, increasing
level forest disturbance (tens to a few hundreds
property values and supporting the physical and
of thousands of acres) in Minnesota will likely
mental well-being of residents .
increase . Re-establishing forests without delay on
disturbed sites helps restore high levels of carbon
To support Minnesota’s community forests,
sequestration . Dedicated resources, however, are
funding is needed to protect, maintain and
needed to ensure timely restoration of forests
expand the canopy . For instance, the emerald
following large disturbances .
ash borer poses a significant threat to ash trees
across Minnesota. Communities would benefit by
Conservation and working lands
planning to mitigate the potential loss of ash trees .
Urban heat islands in Minnesota can be extreme,
with temperature differences of up to 10°F, even
within an area of just a few miles in the Metro Area .
Perennial vegetation in natural ecosystems and
Investing in expanding canopy in areas impacted
agricultural systems sequesters more carbon than
by urban heat islands can reduce these impacts .
do row crops . Restoring and protecting prairies,
Priority could be given to planting and protecting
wetlands, forests, hay fields, and pastures will
trees in areas with vulnerable populations,
increase carbon sequestration . In the case of
including low-income individuals, children, and the
working lands, it will minimize carbon losses from
elderly who are disproportionately impacted by
annual cultivation and erosion . Protecting forests
the negative health and economic effects of tree
sustains high rates of carbon sequestration while
loss .
preventing large emissions associated with forest
loss . In addition, conserving vegetative cover
improves groundwater recharge, wildlife habitat,
and ecological integrity .
Conservation policy actions are pursued for many
reasons other than climate change, but policy
makers should consider ways that these actions
can also achieve and be tracked for greenhouse
gas emissions reductions .
Como Park, St. Paul

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

33

Climate Action Policies - Long-term Strategies
Several existing federal and state programs
support landowners setting aside lands from
row crop production, including the federal
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), Reinvest in
Minnesota (RIM), and Minnesota’s Conservation
Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP) . Typically,
the land that is set aside is vulnerable to erosion
and not ideal for production . The expansion
of these programs is limited by funding to pay
landowners for the retirement of working land
and establishment of perennial vegetation . To
make land conservation programs effective
at protecting and increasing carbon stored in
the land, there need to be guarantees that the
land will be set aside for a long enough period
for carbon to collect . If land taken out of these
programs is returned to row crops, the carbon
stores would be removed and the greenhouse gas
benefits of the programs would be lost.

Agricultural soil development

Soils contain vast quantities of carbon and are in
fact the largest terrestrial carbon pool on Earth .
On a global scale, the soil carbon pool is about
three times larger than the atmospheric pool .

St. Peter, MN

34

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Carbon levels in soils vary depending on climate,
soil parent material, vegetation type, landscape
position, and human activities . Organic carbon is
an important part of soil health and is critical for
growing crops and other plants . Carbon escapes
from soils when it is exposed to the air through
tilling and other agricultural practices . Loss of
carbon from the soil both impacts climate change
and decreases the agricultural value of the soil,
making it less productive . Agricultural soil carbon
stocks can be increased by practices such as
diversifying production systems with perennials,
minimizing tillage, using manure as a soil
amendment, and incorporating cover crops where
practicable. These strategies are most efficient
at sequestering carbon when implemented
as a suite of practices rather than stand-alone
activities . Minnesota has approximately 19 .5 million
acres of cropland . Even a modest change in soil
carbon content per acre results in significant total
greenhouse gas benefits.
Cover crops and perennial crops sequester and
store greater quantities of carbon than row
crops . Row crops grow for 3 to 4 months of the
year before harvest, leaving the soil bare for
the remaining 8 months . Cover crops can be
incorporated into annual row crop systems to
lengthen the amount of time there are living plants
holding the soil in place on fields. Cover crops
both protect soil from erosion and increase carbon
sequestration in the soil with their root structures .
Similarly, perennial crops increase carbon storage
by maintaining permanent root systems that add
biomass to the soil and minimize the loss of carbon
resulting from tillage operations .

Climate Action Policies - Pilot Programs
Pilot Programs to Develop
Transportation:
• Advanced biofuels
• Pay-as-you-go car insurance
• Fuel or carbon based tax
Energy:
• Renewable thermal energy
Agriculture:
• Fertilizer efficiency
• Market development for cover crops
and perennials

Minneapolis Fire Chief filling his tank with E85

New programs and technologies have a lot of
potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
but they need to be further explored and tested
before they can be implemented on a larger scale .
Designing and implementing pilot programs can
provide the opportunity to test these programs
and technologies . These policies include transit
options, distributed renewable energy, and
agriculture strategies .

Source: MPCA

Pilot Project
Implement
programs
at a small scale
• New technology
• New ideas
• Problem solving
• Experimental

Public support
positive outcome

Problems &
challenges

Make program
available to all
Minnesotans

Re-evaluate,
address problems,
make changes

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

35

Climate Action Policies - Pilot Programs
Transportation
Advanced biofuels

Minnesota has been a national leader in
renewable fuel policy and development . It was
the first state to mandate the use of ethanol
and biodiesel in the state’s fuel supply . Today,
Minnesota has an ethanol production capacity
of more than 1 billion gallons, has the most E85
stations in the nation, and it is estimated that the
state’s biodiesel requirement will replace over 65
million gallons of petroleum-based diesel fuel .
The state has aggressive goals for in-state liquid
biofuels consumption to replace gasoline: 14%
by 2015, 18% by 2017, 25% by 2020, and 30% by
2025 (Minnesota Statute 239 .7911) . However, it
is not on track to achieve these goals . Further,
biofuels have yet to achieve their full potential for
emissions reductions .
For biofuels to produce a significant life-cycle
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions as
compared to fossil fuels, further development
of “advanced biofuels” is needed . Advanced
biofuels are biofuels other than ethanol
produced from corn starch, with a minimum 50%
improvement in greenhouse gas emissions over
the use of fossil fuels . Advanced biofuels can
be sourced primarily from Minnesota biomass
from agricultural or forestry sources, or from
the organic content of municipal solid waste .
While electrification is increasingly an option for
passenger vehicles, larger commercial vehicles
are less likely to be electrified, so advanced
biofuels offer a viable cleaner alternative for
these large vehicles .
A state financial incentive is now in place to assist
with the commercial production of advanced
biofuels (Minnesota Statute 41A .16) and federal
funds and matching funds from state and private
sources are supporting grants for retail biofuel
36

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

pumps and storage tanks . Minnesota can further
support the development of advanced biofuels
and related technology through incentives
for commercial production in Minnesota and
incentives to improve fuel delivery infrastructure
for higher biofuel blends .

Pay-as-you-go car insurance

Under most current insurance plans, drivers pay
a flat amount regardless of how many miles
they drive . However, the more one drives the
more likely one is to incur damages and seek
repayment from insurance . As a result, some
insurance companies now offer plans that vary
based on how much a person drives, called “payas-you-go” insurance pricing . Conversion from
existing fixed cost for insurance to a per-mile
variable cost would incentivize a reduction in
vehicle miles traveled without increasing costs
to Minnesota drivers . Modeling of this policy
found that it would save consumers money while
reducing emissions, but adoption rates to-date
have been slow . One of the key challenges to
broader adoption of pay-as-you-go insurance
is concerns about privacy related to how a
consumers’ mileage is tracked .

Fuel- or carbon-based transportation tax

Transportation taxes and user fees can reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by increasing the
marginal and/or total cost of driving, which may
encourage behavior changes that reduce the total
vehicle miles traveled or encourage the purchase
of more fuel-efficient vehicles. The economic
impact of these policies hinges on how the tax
revenue is reinvested . Reinvestment in households
and infrastructure would grow the economy . In
particular, investing in infrastructure can create new

construction jobs . Two examples of transportation
taxes that could be implemented are:
• Carbon Tax: A $30 per ton societal cost for
each ton of carbon . This amounts to a tax of
$0 .24 per gallon for E10 gasoline .

incentive fund that would provide financial aid for
the installation of thermal renewable technologies
and could target high-value customers including
farmers, delivered-fuel customers, low-income
housing authorities, and commercial users . The
state could establish the fund by collecting a fee on
natural gas, fuel oil, and propane sold in Minnesota .

• Fuel Tax: A 6 .5% statewide wholesale fuel sales
tax on gross gasoline and special fuel (including
Recent propane infrastructure changes and the
diesel) purchases .
severe shortages of propane in the winter of 20132014 highlight the benefits of diversifying heating
Revenue from these taxes could be used to fund
options to mitigate volatility in fuel pricing and
road improvements, provide rebates to lowavailability throughout greater Minnesota . However,
income households to address equity issues or
since renewable thermal energy sources are only
they could be used to support other greenhouse
used in small quantities, the cost is often higher
gas mitigation opportunities, such as increased
than fossil fuels with established distribution
mass transit .
systems .

Energy
Renewable thermal energy

A renewable thermal energy policy could take
advantage of in-state resources such as sun and
biomass to heat homes and businesses . Currently
many Minnesotan homes are heated using natural
gas, fuel oil, and propane . A renewable thermal
energy policy could establish a goal of switching
from delivered fuels to renewable thermal sources,
such as solar heat and biomass fuels . A goal could
be set for 5% renewable thermal by 2020 and 20%
by 2030. Minnesota has significant biomass and
solar resources, as well as a history of heating with
wood . Opportunities exist to meet heating load
with more of these renewable resources, resulting
in reduced greenhouse gas emissions .
To achieve a renewable thermal energy goal,
Minnesota would need to develop incentives
that would encourage consumers to purchase
renewable-fueled heating systems . One policy
that could encourage this switch would be the
establishment of a state-wide renewable thermal

Renewable thermal energy can be developed
at a pilot project scale to determine where and
how these resources might best be put to use .
Upfront investment to develop supply chains
and distribution networks could result in longterm solutions that mitigate volatility of fossil
fuel markets and supplies, as well as reducing
greenhouse gas emissions .

Agriculture
Fertilizer efficiency

The nitrogen in fertilizer is the primary contributor
to nitrous oxide emissions from crop, which is a
potent greenhouse gas . The nitrogen in fertilizer
that plants do not use can leach into groundwater
and be emitted into the atmosphere, contributing
to global warming . Practices that can increase
efficiency of fertilizer use include:
• Implementation of nitrogen fertilizer best
management practices
• Improved nitrogen fertilizer products and

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

37

Climate Action Policies - Pilot Programs
techniques such as the “4Rs”: Right fertilizer
source at the Right rate at the Right time and
in the Right place
• Precision agriculture materials and
methodologies such as variable fertilizer rate
application, drone use, plant tissue sensors,
global positioning system-based yield
monitoring, enhanced soil sampling, etc .
Reducing fertilizer use in Minnesota through
efficiency improvements has significant public
health and environment co-benefits. In areas of
the state, Minnesota’s groundwater aquifers are
susceptible to contamination due to geology,
soils, climate, and land use . In these sensitive
areas, nitrate from fertilizer is polluting drinking
water in Minnesota at levels that are a threat to
public health . An increasing number of municipal
water supply systems need to invest in costly
nitrate treatment facilities to meet drinking
water standards, while private well owners are
on their own to mitigate contamination . Nitrate
in surface water leads to the growth of algal
blooms in aquatic ecosystems that can choke out
other species and cause serious harm . As waters
flow out of Minnesota and into other states and
eventually into the Gulf of Mexico and Lake
Winnipeg, these excess nutrients are contributing
to massive environmental and health problems .

Market development for cover and
perennial crops

Current market forces do not provide adequate
incentives for perennial crop production or the
use of cover crops . Markets for perennials can
be enhanced through implementing policies that
support grass-fed beef and dairy products or
support producing energy from perennial crops .
The state may also be able to encourage the
development of consumer markets to support
cover and perennial crops based on consumers’

38

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

interest in sustainability . Many consumers and
companies want to know that the products
they purchase are produced sustainably and
do not degrade water quality or contribute to
climate change . Likewise, producers who choose
best management practices, especially if those
practices come at a cost, want their products
valued more highly for their environmental
responsibility . Many consumers and companies, for
instance, choose to pay more for US Department
of Agriculture organic–certified farm products
and Forest Stewardship Council–certified wood
products . Along these lines, the new Minnesota
Agricultural Water Quality Certification Program
certifies farmers when every field and cropping
system on a farm attains an environmental
standard determined by a water quality risk
assessment. This program does not specifically
track or focus on achieving greenhouse gas
reductions, but the best practices for water
overlap with climate action . Further, the program
provides a framework that could be expanded to
specifically include climate action.
While cover crops work well for short season
sweet corn, edible beans, and other “canning”
vegetables, market, logistical, technical, financial,
and agronomic barriers exist that prevent
widespread adoption of cover crop use in corn
and soybean systems . Pilot programs could help
reduce these barriers by developing and testing
new cover crop varieties and seeding equipment,
demonstrating on-farm successes, and quantifying
on-farm economic benefits.

Source: MPCA

Conclusion

St. Paul, Minnesota

Minnesota has made important strides in its efforts to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, achieve its Next Generation Energy Act Goals, and live up to its
international commitments in the Under 2 MOU to address climate change .
However, further action and leadership is needed to achieve state goals and
international agreements for maintaining a stable global climate . This report
provides many recommendations on policy options for immediate impacts,
long-term strategies, and pilot programs that Minnesota could develop to
address greenhouse gas emissions . These recommendations by no means
capture all that the state could do to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
but they provide a strong foundation for moving forward with planning
and public discussion. The scientific, economic, and social understanding
of climate change and its impacts on Minnesota is constantly changing
and plans must be flexible and adaptive. There are many things that can be
done that will contribute to the global efforts to tackle climate change . It
will require engagement at all levels of government as well as citizen and
community efforts and voices .

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

39

CSEO Analytical Results

Wolf Ridge science immersion program

Consultants analyzed each of the policies in this
report for potential greenhouse gas emissions
reduction, cost, and other economic impacts .
The summary of this analysis is shown in the
table below . For analysis, policies were assessed
for the period of 2015 to 2030 for greenhouse
gas emissions reductions, costs and savings,
and for jobs . The analysis focuses on being on
track in 2030, where the 2030 targer is a linear
interpolation between the 2025 and the 2050
goal . Minnesota would need to reduce annual

greenhouse gas emissions by an additional 53
million CO2-equivalent short tons (CO2-e) beyond
projected business as usual emissions by 2030 in
order to be on track . Policies are divided into three
categories based on the length of time it would
take to see an emissions reduction and based on
the degree to which policies have already been
developed in the state . Results are shown for each
policy, not taking into account potential overlap
when multiple related policies are implemented .

Immediate Action – These policies result in immediate reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions . They account for 64 to 79% of the emissions reductions that could be made
between now and 2030 . All the immediate action policies focus on the electric sector .
Policy options

2030 annual
in-state GHG
reduction (CO2e-tons)

% Reduction
towards
2030 target

NPV costs/savings
2015-2030
($2014MM)

Average annual
employment (fulland part-time)

Increase the renewable
electricity standard to 50%

14

27

-404

1,820

Increase the renewable
electricity standard to 40%

8

15

-620

1,510

Retire and repower coal plants

7

13

752

310

Increase energy efficiency
requirements 2 .5%

5

10

-1,882

1,560

Increase energy efficiency
requirements 2%

4

7

1,272

N/A

Combined heat and power (CHP)

5

10

-1,112

2,330

Zero energy building codes (SB2030)

10

19

-2,050

2,750

Wastewater treatment facilities
energy efficiency

0 .07

0 .14

-56

80

40

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Long-term Strategies – These policies are critical for reaching Minnesota’s 2050 goals, but they
require more time for development . Generally, these policies reduce the use of single-occupancy
internal combustion vehicles and protect or increase carbon stores in soils and trees .
Policy options

2030 annual
in-state GHG
reduction (CO2e-tons)

% Reduction
towards
2030 target

NPV costs/savings
2015-2030
($2014MM)

Average annual
employment (fulland part-time)

0 .28

1

-330

450

Compact development in urban areas

1

2

-425

220

Electric vehicles on 100%
renewable energy

1

3

3,000 *

-1,220

Community and urban forests

1

1

1,806

4,180

Forest health

2

4

187

-210

Increased conversion of row crops
to perennial crops

2

3

-2,104

-490

Increased use of cover crops

1

1

-1,346

230

Re-use, composting, and recycling

0 .17

0 .31

-817

2,750

Source reduction

0 .06

0 .12

-277

60

Transit and multimodal travel

*assumes little change in the price of an electric vehicle

Pilot Programs – These policies have high potential to reduce emissions; however, they
involve new programs or technologies that need to be explored and tested before they can be
implemented at a large scale . These policies include transportation options, distributed renewable
energy for direct heating and cooling, and agriculture practices .
Policy options

2030 annual
in-state GHG
reduction (CO2e-tons)

% Reduction
towards
2030 target

NPV costs/savings
2015-2030
($2014MM)

Average annual
employment (fulland part-time)

Advanced and conventional biofuels

0 .19

0 .35

462

3,420

Transportation pricing cumulative

2

4

2,718

8,230

Transportation pricing: PAYD
insurance component

1

2

-2,160

N/A

Transportation pricing:
carbon tax component

1

1

1,898

N/A

Transportation pricing:
fuel tax component

0 .46

1

2,980

N/A

Thermal renewable energy

3

6

872

-690

Nutrient management in agriculture

0 .15

0 .29

-131

-200

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

41

How do we use energy and where is it wasted?
This diagram illustrates Minnesota’s energy use . Primary fuel source use and losses due to
inefficiencies are shown by sector: electricity generation, residential use, commercial use, industrial
use, and transportation . Notably, more than half of the energy that is produced in the state is
wasted due to inefficiencies. Ultimately, 42 % of the energy consumed in Minnesota is useful and
the rest is wasted .

ELECT. IMPORTS

184.2

SOLAR

0.6

WIND

78.8

HYDRO

4.9

GEOTHERMAL

1.1

BIOMASS

ELECTRICITY 509

NATURAL GAS

417

COMMERCIAL

358

USEFUL

786

81

111.9

478.8

INDUSTRIAL

COAL

1074

148.4
ETHANOL

NUCLEAR

RESIDENTIAL

REJECTED

581

267.7

TRANSPORTATION 504

PETROLEUM

583.4

Data Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration. State Energy Data System (SEDS): 1960-2013. July 2015. End use efficie
Acknowledgments: The information, data, or work presented herein was funded in part by the Office of Energy Efficie
produced by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory for the Department of Energy.

y is estimated as 65% for the residential and commercial sectors, 80% for the industrial sector, and 21% for the transportation sector.

y and Renewable Energy (EERE), U.S. Department of Energy, under Award Number DE-EE0006885. The graphic format is inspired by the energy fl w charts

Disclaimer: The information, data, or work presented herein was funded in part by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any
legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not
necessarily state or refle t those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.

42

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

Jackson County

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

43

Printed on 100% post-consumer waste recycled paper.
The state of Minnesota is an equal opportunity employer and service provider.
Upon request, this document can be made available in alternative formats by
calling 651-259-7114.
07-2016

44

Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunties

