North Carolina

Clean Energy Plan
Transitioning to a 21st Century Electricity System

POLICY & ACTION
RECOMMENDATIONS
October 2019

3

A strong clean
energy economy
creates good
jobs and a
healthy
environment.

Acknowledgements
This North Carolina Clean Energy Plan (CEP) is prepared by the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality
(NCDEQ) to foster and encourage the utilization of clean energy resources and the integration of those resources to
facilitate the development of a modern and resilient electric grid as directed in Executive Order 80 which was signed
by Governor Roy Cooper on October 29, 2018.
NCDEQ recognizes and thanks representatives of the Regulatory Assistance Project (RAP) and the Rocky Mountain
Institute (RMI) for providing technical guidance and facilitation support throughout the CEP development process.
Special thanks is extended to the Duke Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions at Duke University and
North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center at NC State University for reviewing and providing feedback on
drafts of the CEP. Appreciations are also extended to the North Carolina Utilities Commission and the NCUC Public
Staff for providing guidance and perspectives during the development of the CEP.
NCDEQ is thankful to the organizations and individuals that contributed to the development of the CEP through
participation in stakeholder engagement activities. Four methods of stakeholder engagement were offered allowing
organizations and individuals to contribute to the CEP including: facilitated workshops, regional listening sessions,
other statewide events and online input. A complete list of the 166 organizations that participated in stakeholder
engagement through these four methods is provided in the Supporting Documents.
NCDEQ is also thankful to contributors who participated in this process in special ways. These special contributors to
the CEP development process include the following:

Facilitated Workshop Presenters:

North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, Duke Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, UNC
Chapel Hill School of Law, Energy Production and Infrastructure Center at UNC Charlotte, North Carolina
Sustainable Energy Association, North Carolina Electric Cooperatives, Advanced Energy Economy, Gridlab, Duke
Energy, Resources for the Future, Environmental Defense Fund’s Cities Initiative, CERES, Litz Strategies and
Georgetown Climate Center, Natural Resources Defense Council and E4 Carolinas.

Facilitated Workshop Hosts:

Nature Research Center at NC Museum of Natural Sciences and NCSU’s McKimmon Conference and Training
Center.

Regional Listening Session Hosts:

UNC Charlotte, The Collider in Asheville, The Rocky Mount Event Center, Fayetteville State University, Western
Piedmont Council of Governments in Hickory, Museum of the Albemarle in Elizabeth City, Cape Fear Community
College in Wilmington, and NCA&T State University.

Energy Modeling Organizations:

Resources for the Future, Natural Resources Defense Council, NC State University, Environmental Protection Agency,
Georgetown Climate Center, NC Sustainable Energy Association.
In addition, other organizations offered technical information and guidance during the development of the CEP such as
National Governor’s Association, U.S. Department of Energy, National Association of State Energy Officials,
Virginia’s Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy, Massachusetts’ Department of Energy Resources, New Jersey’s
Department of Environmental Protection and New York State Energy Research and Development Authority.
A very special thanks to all NCDEQ staff that contributed to the development of the CEP.
6

Preface
The Clean Energy Plan was written by the Department of Environmental Quality as directed by Executive
Order No. 80. 1 DEQ was tasked with the creation of a CEP to encourage the use of clean energy
resources and technologies and to foster the development of a modern and resilient electricity system.
The purpose of the CEP is to outline policy and action recommendations that will accomplish these goals.
The CEP is made up of the main document titled Policy and Action Recommendations and six supporting
documents.
0F

Part 1: Energy Sector Profile and Landscape
Part 2: North Carolina’s Energy Resources
Part 3: Electricity Rates and Energy Burden
Part 4: Stakeholder Engagement Process and
Comments
Part 5: Energy and Emissions Modeling
Part 6: Clean Energy Jobs and Economic
Outlook

The CEP uses best available data, analysis, and stakeholder input to examine what our electricity system
should look like in 2030 and what values we must retain moving forward. It identifies achievable goals,
proposes modern policies and strategies to achieve the goals, and identifies activities needed to adjust the
regulatory framework to accommodate 21st century customer expectations, public policy goals, energy
needs, economic development opportunities, and societal outcomes related to climate change.
The policies and strategies identified here are intended to provide policy makers, regulatory bodies, local
governments, and others with a high-level implementation plan for achieving the goals and targets set in
the CEP. When viewed collectively, these strategies should help develop a broad, clear picture of the
actions North Carolina can undertake to maximize energy, economic and environmental benefits.
Promising strategies and actions will require further deeper dives and detailed analysis when considering
proposing new legislation or amending existing policies and procedures. The CEP presents short term
(less than 12 months), mid-term (1-3 years), and longer term (3-5) actions to ensure the State’s energy
needs are served in a cost-effective, reliable and sustainable manner. The longer term action (3-5 years)
also consists of assessing the accomplishments made, consideration of technology advancements, and a
relook at the strategies and actions to take in the future. In summary, these policies and strategies will
provide stakeholders a common understanding of the vision and direction which we want to move
towards.

https://files.nc.gov/ncdeq/climate-change/EO80--NC-s-Commitment-to-Address-Climate-Change---Transition-toa-Clean-Energy-Economy.pdf
1

7

Contents
Acknowledgments
Preface

Executive Summary
Detailed Report

10

18
19

NC’s Current and Anticipated Energy Landscape
Drivers of Power Sector Transformation

29

Clean Energy Plan development: Stakeholder Process
Detailed Policy and Action Recommendations

45

51

55

•

Carbon Reduction

•

Utility Incentives & Comprehensive System Planning

•

Grid Modernization and Resilience

•

Clean Energy Deployment & Economic Development

•

Equitable Access and Just Transition

•

Energy Efficiency and Beneficial Electrification

Conclusions & Next Steps

65

82

92

112
125

143

Supporting Documents (Parts 1-6 available at deq.nc.gov/cleanenergyplan)

Executive
Summary

10

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Climate change is an increasing threat to the health, safety and prosperity of North Carolinians. At
the same time, the clean energy economy is creating opportunities to create jobs and propel North
Carolina to be globally competitive. On October 29, 2018, Governor Roy Cooper signed an
executive order calling for a 40 percent reduction in statewide greenhouse gas emissions by 2025.
The order tasked the Department of Environmental Quality with developing a clean energy plan
for North Carolina.
After an extensive stakeholder engagement process, including meetings and public comment
periods, the plan was presented to Governor Cooper on September 27, 2019. Over the last 10
months, utilities, policymakers, regulators, universities, non-profits, the public, and industry
experts have offered their expertise to help craft the plan, which is a holistic vision for the clean
energy future of our state. More than 160 stakeholder groups helped develop this shared vision for
North Carolina’s energy future.
•
•

Multiple sessions were held over a period of six months in geographically diverse venues
across the state.
Feedback was collected through facilitated workshops, regional listening sessions, at
energy related events and through online/direct input – culminating in a draft report that
was released for public comment.

Building on Existing Accomplishments
North Carolina has built an impressive record on clean energy, but to continue that leadership the
strategies laid out in this plan must inform the legislative and policy changes the state adopts.
The rapid pace of economic, environmental, and technological change has created an opportunity
for North Carolina to pursue a modern, 21st century electricity system. By leveraging the State’s
existing energy resources, innovative public and private sector partners and a competitive
workforce, North Carolina is positioned to help drive a larger transition to a clean energy economy.
The Clean Energy Plan is presented as a framework to accelerate that process.
Drivers of Transformation
The declining costs and large-scale deployment of renewable energy systems and the rapid
advancement of information management, communications, and consumer product devices are
transforming both the electricity supply and public demand for our electrical grid. These forces are
driving decarbonization of the electric power sector while creating economic development
opportunities in both urban and rural areas of the state.
North Carolina will need to design policies that provide certainty in the marketplace with enough
flexibility to support innovation and creativity to adapt to the rapidly changing demands for
electricity. New technologies can drive cost savings for customers, notably incentives and rate
structures must modernize to achieve the values and goals prioritized in this document.

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

11

Clean Energy Plan Goals
•
•
•

Reduce electric power sector greenhouse gas emissions by 70% below 2005 levels by 2030
and attain carbon neutrality by 2050.
Foster long-term energy affordability and price stability for North Carolina’s residents and
businesses by modernizing regulatory and planning processes.
Accelerate clean energy innovation, development, and deployment to create economic
opportunities for both rural and urban areas of the state.

Key Recommendations
The Clean Energy Plan (CEP) is designed to be a living document that can be modified as needed.
While it lays out a vision through 2030, the intention is for revisions to be made every 3-5 years.
Recommendations in this document are divided into action items intended to fall into one of three
categories: short-term (1 year), medium-term (1-3 years), and long-term (3-5 years). Many of these
recommendations and action items are interconnected, but not interdependent.
To successfully transition to a clean energy future, North Carolina must establish a 21st century
regulatory model that incentivizes business decisions that benefit both the utilities and the public
in creating an energy system that is clean, affordable, reliable, and equitable. The following
overarching recommendations are critical to the transition and will drive the priorities identified
by the stakeholders:
•

Develop carbon reduction policy designs for accelerated retirement of uneconomic coal
assets and other market-based and clean energy policy options.

•

Develop and implement policies and tools such as performance-based mechanisms, multiyear rate planning, and revenue decoupling, that better align utility incentives with public
interest, grid needs, and state policy.

•

Modernize the grid to support clean energy resource adoption, resilience, and other public
interest outcomes.

Next Steps
This plan is intended to guide the direction North Carolina takes in adapting to a changing
economy, climate, and market and help shape what change looks like, the timeframe in which
change happens, and how changes impact ratepayers.

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

12

OVERVIEW OF STRATEGY AREAS & RECOMMENDATIONS
Carbon Reduction (A)
A. Decarbonize the electric power sector

Page 55

•

A-1. Deliver a report that recommends carbon-reduction policies and the specific design of such policies that
best advance core values, such as GHG emission reductions, electricity affordability, and grid reliability. The
report will evaluate policy designs for the following carbon reduction strategies:
1. Accelerated coal retirements,
2. Market-based carbon reduction program,
3. Clean energy policies, such as an updated REPS, clean energy standard, and EERS, and
4. A combination of these strategies.
Legislature, State Agencies, Academia

•

A-2. Require integrated resource plans and distribution system plans to use portfolios and action plans that
incorporate a cost of carbon into the portfolio or plan that is selected for use by the utility.
Utilities Commission, Investor Owned Utilities, State Agencies

Utility Incentives and Comprehensive System Planning (B-C)
B. Modernize utility tools and incentives
•

•

•

•

Page 65

B-1. Launch a North Carolina energy process with representatives from key stakeholder groups to design
policies that align regulatory incentives and processes with 21st Century public policy goals, customer
expectations, utility needs, and technology innovation.
Governor’s Office, Legislature,
B-2. Encourage use of pilot programs or other methods for testing and evaluating components of a
performance-based regulatory framework.
Utilities Commission, Investor Owned Utilities
B-3. When authorizing “securitization” as a utility financing tool, include uneconomic generation assets in
the scope of what can be securitized
Legislature, Utilities Commission
B-4. Initiate a study on the potential costs and benefits of different options to increase competition in
electricity sector, including but not limited to joining an existing wholesale market and allowing retail energy
choice.
Legislature, State Agencies

C. Require comprehensive utility system planning processes
•

Page 74

C-1. Establish comprehensive utility system planning process that connects generation, transmission, and
distribution planning in a holistic, iterative and transparent process that involves stakeholder input
throughout, starting with a Commission-led investigation into desired elements of utility distribution system
plans.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities, Local
Government, Academia, Businesses

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

13

•

•

C-2. Expand cost-benefit methodologies used to make decisions about resources and programs to include
societal and environmental factors
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
C-3. Implement competitive procurement of resources by investor-owned utilities
Utilities Commission

Grid Modernizations and Resilience (D-E)
D. Modernize the grid to support clean energy resources
•

•

D-1. When evaluating proposals for grid modernization, consider whether the following outcomes are
supported:
o Demonstrated net benefits for all proposed investments, including presentation of all costs and
benefits used in utility analyses
o Enhanced transparency of regionally appropriate DERs, grid needs and opportunities for DERs to
interconnect
o Increased customer access to their usage data and sources of energy
o Facilitation of greater utilization of storage, demand-side resources, grid operation/management
devices, and the bi-directional flow of power
o Measurement of performance to ensure anticipated benefits are delivered and accounted for
o Increased deployment of clean energy
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
D-2. Use comprehensive utility planning processes to determine the sequence, needed functionality, and
costs and benefits of grid modernization investments. Create accountability by requiring transparency,
setting targets, timelines and metrics of progress made toward grid modernization goals.
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities

E. Strengthen the resilience and flexibility of the grid
•

•

•

Page 82

Page 87

E-1. Require utilities to develop projects focused on DERs, community solutions, and microgrids at state
facilities and critical infrastructure locations (e.g. hospitals, shelters) to enhance resilience.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities,
Local Government
E-2. Coordinate resilience planning with disaster recovery operations center and require NC Emergency
Management’s Recovery Support Functions to address cybersecurity concerns in conjunction with energy
resiliency issues.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
E-3. Develop a method to quantify the human costs of power outages, and integrate these costs when
evaluating grid modernization plan components related to resiliency.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Academia

Clean Energy Deployment and Economic Development (F-H)
F. Enable customers to choose clean energy

Page 92

F-1. Consider revisions to clean energy programs authorized by HB 589 to ensure successful delivery of
desired outcomes, such as increasing customer access to clean energy.
Legislature, State Agencies

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

14

•
•

•
•

F-2. Enact a statewide commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) and Pay as You Save Program
Legislature, Governor’s Office, State Agencies, Local Government, Academia
F-3. Develop a green energy bank or statewide clean energy fund to catalyze the development and expansion
of clean energy markets by connecting private capital with clean energy projects.
Governor’s Office, Local Government, Academia
F-4. Require utilities to offer virtual or group net metering to enable greater access to community solar.
Legislature
F-5. Increase the existing REPS or create a new policy with zero-emitting resource targets without carveouts for specific resources
Legislature, Utilities Commission

G. DER interconnection and compensation for value added to the grid
•

•

G-1. Develop rates that provide accurate price signals to demand-side resources about costs and value to the
grid, such as Time of Use (TOU) or real time pricing. In the long term, consider establishing new rate and
compensation structures for DERs based on the value of grid services that can be provided by DERs, such as
a “value of DER” tariff.
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
G-2. Consider ways to provide greater transparency of system constraints and optimal locations for
distributed resources
Utilities Commission

H. Clean energy economic development opportunities
•

•

•

•

Page 107

H-1. Identify and advance legislative and/or regulatory actions to foster development of North Carolina’s
offshore wind energy resources
State Agency
H-2. Create and foster statewide and regional offshore wind collaborative partnerships with industry, the
public, stakeholders, and neighboring states to bring economic growth to North Carolina.
Governor’s Office, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Local Government, Academia,
Businesses
H-3. Conduct an assessment of offshore wind supply chain and ports and other transportation infrastructure
to identify state assets and resource gaps for the offshore wind industry.
State Agencies, Local Government, Businesses
H-4. Develop pathways to expand renewable natural gas recovery and usage
Academia, State Agencies, EPC

Equitable Access and Just Transition (I-J)
I. Address equitable access and energy affordability
•

Page 101

Page 112

I-1. Include non-energy equity-focused costs and benefits in decisions regarding resource needs, program
design, cost-benefit analyses, and facility siting.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities, Local
Government

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

15

•

I-2. Examine the feasibility and proper design of a low-income rate class and associated rate structures,
including but not limited to the elimination or reduction of fixed charges for ratepayers with high energy
burdens.
Academia, NCUC

•

I-3. Expand energy efficiency and clean energy programs specifically targeted at underserved markets and
low-income communities.
Legislature, State Agencies, Others

J. Foster a just transition to clean energy

Page 120

•

J-1. Ensure inclusion and meaningful involvement of historically marginalized individuals (people of color
and people living in poverty) in decision-making regarding siting electricity generation assets and
implementing programs that would affect their energy bills, health, and access to clean energy and energy
efficiency opportunities.
Utilities Commission, State Agencies

•

J-2. Launch an EE Apprenticeship program within Apprenticeship NC to expand access to clean energy
careers.
Academia
J-3. Create long term jobs with family sustaining wages and benefits in renewables and grid infrastructure
industries for low income communities and workers displaced by the transition to a clean energy economy.
Legislature, Governor’s Office, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities,
Local Government, Academia, Businesses

•

Energy Efficiency and Beneficial Electrification (K-L)
K. Increase use of energy efficiency & demand side management programs Page 125
•

•

•

•

•

•

K-1. Establish an Energy Efficiency Advisory Council (EEAC) to oversee implementation of the
EE Roadmap recommendations
Governor’s Office
K-2. Enable customers to have greater access to their energy data through new functionalities, such as those
available through Green Button “Download My Data” Button
Legislature, Utilities Commission, State Agencies, Investor Owned Utilities, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
K-3. Establish minimum EE goals within existing REPS or establish an energy efficiency resource standard
(EERS)
Legislature, Utilities Commission
K-4. Enhance education and awareness around energy efficiency opportunities in K-12 schools and
community colleges through an “Energy Efficiency Everywhere (E3)” project
Academia
K-5. Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots to encourage customer behavior that helps
achieve clean energy goals, such as peak demand reduction, better utilization of renewable resources, and
strategic storage deployment.
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities
K-6. Increase EE awareness on the North Carolina Building Code Council
Legislature, State Agencies

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

16

L. Create strategies for electrification

Page 137

•

L-1. Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots for electric vehicles to encourage off-peak
charging of vehicles and to test effectiveness of different rate structures at shifting customer usage of the grid
and encouraging the adoption of electric vehicles.
Utilities Commission, Co-Ops/Public Utilities

•

L-2. Conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits of using electrification to reduce energy burden and GHG
emissions in consumer end-use sectors in NC, such as in homes, buildings, transportation, industrial and
agricultural operations.
Academia

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

17

Detailed
Report

18

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN

1. NC’s Current & Anticipated Energy Landscape
The electricity consumed in NC (NC) homes,
businesses, and industries is mostly generated at
central power stations, transported through a network
of high-voltage transmission lines, and distributed
via local poles and wires to customers. Figure 1
shows the current capacity levels and electricity
generation by resource type. These resources
produced 3% of the nation’s power output, ranking
NC as the 8th largest electricity generating state for
both 2017 and 2018. 1 Traditional fuel resources such
as coal, natural gas, and nuclear stations represented
about 90% of the annual output. NC’s coal-fired and
natural-gas fired power plants are ranked 11th and 5th
in the nation, respectively, for the amount of
electricity generated in both 2017 and 2018. 2
0F

1F

Since the enactment of the NC Renewable Energy
and Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard (REPS) 3,
the capacity of clean energy resources has increased
dramatically. NC’s interpretation of the 1978 federal
mandate, the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act
(PURPA), provided historically generous and long
term “avoided cost” contracts for utility scale solar
projects and is another growth driver of utility-scale
solar in the state. 4 NC’s Business and Energy Tax
Credits provided a 35% state tax credit for renewable
energy projects. These credits doubled every year after
the REPS was established in 2007 and grew to $245
2F

3F

Figure 1: NC’s Electricity Statistics by Resource
Type

U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electricity Data Browser, https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/browser/
Ibid
3
Session Law 2007-397, “NC’s Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard (REPS), August20,
2007, http://www.ncuc.commerce.state.nc.us/reps/reps.htm.
4
EIA. (2019). Retrieved from https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=27632
1
2

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

19

million in 2016, the last year of the program. 5 When coupled with a 30% federal solar tax credit, project
developers were able to cut the cost of a renewable facility in half. The collective impact of state and
federal policies and precipitous decline in solar costs led to NC being ranked 2nd in the nation for the most
installed solar photovoltaic (PV) capacity. This infrastructure produced between 10 and 11% of the
nation’s total solar electricity output, ranking NC as the 2nd highest solar producing state each year from
2017 through 2019 (as of May). 6 Independent power producers accounted for over 92% of NC’s solar
generation, while utilities represented about 6% and commercial sector represented 2% of the state’s solar
electricity generation.
4F

5F

The state subsidy for solar PV expired in 2015 and the federal tax credit is slated to expire in 2021. 7
Going forward, the next phase of growth in the clean energy sector will be determined by legislation
passed in 2017 called the Competitive Energy Solutions for NC, also known as House Bill (HB589). 8
This bill creates new programs for competitive renewable energy (RE) procurement, solar rebates and
leasing, community solar, and special studies related to RE. The solar capacity projected to be added to
the system is about 4,000 megawatts (MW) by 2025 (essentially doubling the capacity shown in Figure 1
if all the requirements in the legislation are fulfilled).
6F

7F

The 2018 latest Integrated Resource Plans (IRPs) filed by NC’s investor owned utilities (IOUs) indicate
that the capacity of solar PV will remain at about the same level from 2025 to 2030. The capacity of
energy storage is planned to increase from the current level of 1 MW to 246 MW by 2025 and 291 MW
by 2030. The IRPs suggest that an additional 7,200 MW of natural gas capacity will be part of NC’s
portfolio (18% increase relative to Figure 1) and 4,000 MW of coal capacity will be retired (12% decrease
relative to Figure 1).
In the wake of continuing declining costs of renewable generation and battery storage options, NC
regulators and policy makers will be called upon to evaluate the economic viability of traditional
infrastructure projects whose costs will be borne by ratepayers for years to come. As NC makes capital
investment decisions for future capacity additions, it will be important to select the cost-effective system
that maintains affordability, reliability, equity, grid efficiency, and economic viability. In just the past
year, many states and utilities have made groundbreaking announcements, some of which are highlighted
below:
•

Georgia state regulators approved Georgia Power's long-term IRP, authorizing the utility to own
and operate 80 MW of battery energy storage, and add 2,260 MW of new renewables (primarily
solar), growing its renewable generation to 5,390 MW by 2024 and increasing the company's
total renewable capacity to 22% of its portfolio. The Georgia plan also calls for retiring five coal
units, based on its Public Service Commission’s analysis on coal units' economics and concluded
that keeping them was costly to ratepayers, and reducing its use of natural gas, from almost half
to about a third of its portfolio by 2024. Georgia Power's IRP also includes energy efficiency

NCDOR. (2016). Article 3B – Business and Energy Credits. Retrieved from
https://files.nc.gov/ncdor/documents/reports/2-3B-RenEngyProp2016.pdf
6
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electricity Data Browser, https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/browser/
7
U.S. Department of Energy. (2019). Expired, Repealed, and Archived NC Incentives and Laws. Retrieved from
https://afdc.energy.gov/laws/laws_expired?jurisdiction=NC
8
House Bill 589, Session Law 2017-192, NC General Assembly, 2017,
https://www.ncleg.net/gascripts/BillLookUp/BillLookUp.pl?Session=2017&BillID=h589&submitButton=Go
5

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

20

•

•

•

targets 15% above previous IRPs. The utility said it added new programs for both residential and
commercial customers, including an income-qualified efficiency pilot designed to help up to 500
residents reduce household energy demand by 20%.
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) recently published its 2019 Final IRP, calling for up to
14 GW of new solar energy, 5,300 MW of energy storage and 2.2 GW of energy efficiency
savings by 2038. TVA plans to retire some of its coal plants, and will consider retirement of
additional coal and gas-fired combustion turbines if determined cost-effective.
Southern Company, the third largest utility in the U.S., set a long-term goal of low to no carbon
operations by 2050 on an enterprise-wide basis, with an interim goal of 50% reduction by 2030.
The company also committed to seeking approval of low-carbon and carbon-free resources that
are in the best interest of its customers.
Both of the primary IOUs servicing NC have set emission reduction goals. Duke Energy recently
announced an entity wide goal of reducing CO2 emissions by at least 50% from 2005 levels by
the year 2030 and net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. 9 Dominion Energy has set a goal to reduce
CO2 emissions 80% by 2050 and methane emissions from natural gas assets 50% by 2030. 10
In Colorado, Xcel Energy’s recent requests for proposals have set record-low prices, receiving
solar-plus-storage bids as low as $36 per megawatt hour (MWh), compared to $25 per MW-hour
for standalone solar. Xcel plans to retire 660 MW of coal capacity ahead of schedule in favor of
renewable sources and battery storage options, and reduce costs in the process.
In the Midwest, MidAmerican will be the first utility to reach 100% RE by 2020 without
increasing customer rates. Indiana’s NIPSCO will replace 1.8 gigawatts (GW) of coal with wind
and solar.
In Oklahoma, NextEra Energy Resources will develop the largest hybrid renewable project in the
United States, a 700 MW facility that will serve 21 utility members and other customers of
Western Farmers Electric Cooperative.
Dominion has expressed the possibility of developing more than 2,000 MW of offshore wind off
the Virginia coast. Dominion's Power Generation Group subsidiary plans to invest $1.1 billion
through 2023, $300 million of which will be used towards its offshore wind.
8F

9F

•

•

•

•

As RE and distributed energy resources (DER) costs continue to fall and penetration rises, these assets
will reach a point where they can be treated as a true grid resource, providing services that benefit both
the customer and the utility. Intelligently managed DERs could offer a vision of a world where demand
may be as easily dispatchable as supply. NC regulators and policy makers will be called to 1) evaluate
the amount of RE and DERs that can be technologically integrated, 2) resolve grid balancing and
operability issues that come with increasing quantities of non-dispatchable generation, and 3) ensure fair
and equitable methods to pay for the transitioning power grid. Additionally, the forthcoming utility
proposal for smart grid initiatives and grid modernization will require a substantial investment, posing a
challenge to keep rates low and still maintain reliability.
Our state enjoys some of the lowest retail electricity prices in the nation, with a ranking in the bottom 10
states for the past several years. NC’s average residential rate has been about 6% less than the South
Atlantic region and about 11% less than the nation as a whole since 2015. Despite having low rates, NC is
number 25 in the nation for average monthly residential bills (the total amount that customers pay for
9

https://news.duke-energy.com/releases/duke-energy-aims-to-achieve-net-zero-carbon-emissions-by-2050
Dominion Energy comment letter to DEQ on the draft Clean Energy Plan.

10

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

21

electricity service per month). 11 In other words, in 26 states residential customers have lower bills than
their NC counterparts. This is one of the reasons that low-income households continue to pay a significant
portion of their annual income on energy bills. In 2018, 15% of NC’s residents (1.4 million) were living
below 100% of the federal poverty level (FPL). On average, these individuals spent 18 to 33% of their
annual income on energy bills, of which about 20% went to pay electric bills. Comparatively, the energy
burden for those at 200% above the FPL ($50,000) was only 7%. 12 Public policy focusing on energy
rates, equitable access, and a just transition to clean energy economy is needed to address the current
disparity.
10F

11F

Moving forward, electricity prices for
generation are projected to decline rapidly
while the transmission and distribution
related prices will increase to
accommodate both grid scale RE and
DERs. According to the Annual Energy
Outlook (AEO) 2019 forecast, it is
projected that the total electricity price
(sum of generation, transmission, and
distribution) will decline slightly or
remain the same relative to the 2018 levels
(see Figure 2).

Electricity prices by service category
(Reference case)
2018 cents per kilowatthours
12
10
8
6

2.85
1.32

2.97

3.41

3.58

3.54

1.34

1.46

1.56

1.55 transmission

distribution

In the coming years, our infrastructure
4
generation
will be challenged to deliver smart and
6.38 5.92
5.57 5.37 5.40
resilient energy, due to the technological
2
changes and climate impacts and that are
on the horizon. It is neither feasible nor
0
prudent to build out the entire
2018 2020 2030 2040 2050
transmission or distribution system
AEO 2019
simultaneously, but there is a growing
www.eia.gov/aeo
recognition that changes are needed
sooner than planned, to stay ahead of the rapidly
Figure 2: Electricity Prices by Service Category
(Reference Case)
changing industry. Therefore, it is important for NC
to establish a vision for what the modern gird should
look like for NC.
With this vision, we can;
•
•
•
•

meet the state’s rapidly changing electricity market,
deploy advanced technologies
find value in the electric distribution system,
create additional revenue mechanism for the utilities, customers, and system integrators, and

2017 data from EIA, Table 5.a. http://www.eia.gov/electricity/sales_revenue_price/
For more information on energy burden of low-income households, see Supporting Document Part 3: Electricity
Rates and Energy Burden.
11
12

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

22

•

develop a competitive and vibrant new energy economy, where jobs of the future are both created
and retained.

1.1 Nuclear Energy
Since the start-up of NC’s first nuclear reactor in 1975, nuclear-generated electricity has become a
substantial part of the states’ energy landscape and it now provides approximately one-third of the
electricity consumed in the state. Duke Energy operates a total of five reactors at three NC nuclear power
plants, with licenses to operate between 2036 and 2046 as issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
In its 2018 IRPs, Duke Energy reported that no new nuclear generation units are planned, with no
anticipated nuclear retirements over the IRP planning period. Duke Energy noted that capacity uprates
(an increase in the peak operating output of a facility, totaling 56 MW) are planned for the Brunswick and
Harris plants during 2019 to 2028. Additional details regarding this resource, including benefits and
concerns associated with its application, are highlighted in Supporting Document Part 2.
The CEP examines energy resource availability and technology trends over a planning horizon of ten
years through 2030. During this time period, NC’s current fleet of nuclear reactors are expected to
continue to supply baseload electricity. The carbon policy analysis discussed later in the plan assumes
continuous generation from the existing nuclear fleet, emitting zero tons of carbon emissions per unit of
energy generated. As the expiration dates for existing power plants near, the State will need to evaluate
extending the licenses (as desired by Duke Energy) for an additional twenty years or replace with other
generation sources.
Several smaller scale nuclear technologies are currently being developed which may be considered by the
State as options in the future. One such nuclear technology is the small modular reactor (SMR) with
generating capacity of 300 MW or less. SMRs are anticipated to be less capital intensive than
conventional nuclear plants which average around 1,000 MW per plant, may offer easier financing, and
require shorter construction times due to in-factory fabrication. The micro-reactor, with capacity ranging
between 1 and 20 MWs, can be factory-fabricated and integrated with distributed energy sources. Both
technologies are under development. The U.S. Department of Energy projects that SMRs and microreactors could be introduced by the mid-2020s. The technical feasibility, safety and cost effectiveness of
these emerging technologies will need to be considered as part of future energy portfolio for NC.

1.2 Natural Gas
Natural gas is used by the electricity generation sector as fuel for three primary types of generator
systems: (1) natural gas combined cycle systems (NGCC), (2) simple cycle gas combustion turbines (NG
CT) and (3) as a replacement fuel for coal in steam boilers. Between 2000 and 2017, the capacity of NC’s
natural gas power plants tripled as the State transitioned from coal due to (1) increased supply of natural
gas from shale formations, (2) lower natural gas fuel prices, and (3) increased environmental regulations
on coal-fired power plants. Since 2010, electricity generation from natural gas has increased 4.5 times.
NGCC power plants are now providing about 30% of NC’s electricity needs.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

23

There are plans to build two new natural gas pipelines to bring shale gas produced in West Virginia to
NC. The first pipeline is the Atlantic Coast Pipeline (ACP) which is a joint venture between Dominion
Energy, Duke Energy, Piedmont Natural Gas, and Southern Company Gas. The determination of the
route and the federal approval occurred during the previous administration. The project is on hold
pending a Fall 2019 decision by the U.S. Supreme Court to determine whether or not to hear the case over
a dispute regarding federal permits. The second pipeline is the Mountain Valley Southgate Pipeline
which filed for approval in November of 2018. It is in earlier stages of development. Both projects are
facing significant opposition from local communities and environmental groups.
Natural gas is composed primarily of methane, which is a greenhouse gas (GHG) with a warming
potential 25 times greater than carbon dioxide (CO2). In 2016, NC’s natural gas power plants emitted
about 15.7 million metric tons (MMT) as CO2 equivalent GHGs, and emissions are expected to increase
in the future. 13 During natural gas extraction, process and transmission activities, significant amounts of
methane can escape into the atmosphere. The US EPA estimated that nationally, methane emissions
from these non-combustion activities was approximately
1

164 MMT GHGs in 2016. Based on the volume of natural gas consumed for electricity use in NC, it is
estimated that 0.95 MMT GHGs are emitted in other states due to our usage. 15 Additionally, in state
emissions from the operation of the natural gas transmission and storage system, including natural gas
consumed by compressor stations and fugitive emissions, are estimated to be 1.34 MMT GHGs for 2016.
14

13F

14F

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) special report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels calls for reaching net zero CO2 emissions globally around
2050 and concurrent deep reductions in emissions of non- CO2 forcers, particularly methane. 16 In the
"Systems Transitions" chapter, the IPCC notes that new natural gas power generation should be deployed
in tandem with carbon sequestering technologies. Similarly, the U.S. Fourth National Climate
Assessment calls for “replacing conventional, CO2-emitting fossil fuel energy technologies or systems
with low- or zero-emissions ones (such as wind, solar, nuclear, biofuels, fossil energy with carbon capture
and storage, and energy efficiency measures), as well as changing technologies and practices in order to
lower emissions of other GHGs such as methane, nitrous oxide, and hydrofluorocarbons.” 17
15F

16F

In NC, significant growth in natural gas electricity production is planned. Between now and 2022, Duke
Energy plans to bring two new NGCC units online. After that, the projection relies on the Duke Energy
IRPs for capacity additions. The IRPs indicate approximately 4,000 MW of new NGCC power will come

NC Greenhouse Gas Inventory (1990-2030), NC Department of Environmental Quality
Division of Air Quality, January 2019, accessed at https://deq.nc.gov/energy-climate/climate-change/greenhousegas-inventory.
14
Draft Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2016, EPA 430-P-18-001, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., February 6, 2018.
15
According to the Energy Information Administration, NC consumed 1.6% of U.S. total natural gas production. Of
this amount, 56% was consumed to generated electricity in the state.
16
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, SPECIAL REPORT - Global Warming of 1.5 oC, August 2018.
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
17
USGCRP, 2018: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment,
Volume II, Chapter 29: Reducing Risks Through Emissions Mitigation [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R.
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research
Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.
13

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

24

online between 2024 and 2030 and an additional 1,800 MW of NG CT will be built. The significant
planned capacity additions are expected to increase natural gas supplied electricity from about 50,000
thousand MWh in 2018 to about 77,000 thousand MWh in 2030. Based on the current projections,
natural gas will become NC’s dominant source of electricity production as certain coal plants retire,
contributing to most of the State’s remaining GHG emissions (estimated to be 43 MMT by 2030 or 47%
below 2005 levels). The current “business as usual” approach will not achieve the goal to reduce power
sector GHG emissions 70% below 2005 unless the additional generation need is met by clean energy
sources.
In the coming years, NC regulators will be making decisions regarding the utilities’ requests to add new
natural gas capacity to the generation fleet. These decisions will need to consider the drivers of electricity
system transformation, including declining cost of clean energy technologies and the goal to decarbonize
the power sector. They will also need to consider the rapidly changing market dynamics that could lead
to stranded natural gas assets, and the best means to assure grid reliability and electricity affordability for
ratepayers. The CEP identifies several recommendations and mechanisms to enable consideration of
clean energy technologies that support NC’s growing economy. Examples include incentivizing utilities
for developing alternatives to capital intensive infrastructure projects, comprehensive energy system
planning that considers generation, transmission and distribution system in tandem, consideration of the
social cost of carbon in least cost analysis, developing clean energy policies and market-based carbon
reduction program, and others.

1.3 Biomass
Electricity generated from biomass is eligible for Renewable Energy Credits (REC) as part of REPS.
According to the NC Renewable Energy Tracking System (NC-RETS), in 2017, 20.2% of the State’s
RECs were from woody biomass. 18 According to Duke Energy’s 2018 IRP, the capacity growth of
biomass projects peak in 2020 at 406 MW, then steadily decline to 52 MW in 2032. The National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) evaluated the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) projections for
biomass plants and forecasts it to be relatively flat through 2050 due to the low heat content of biomass
fuels. 19
17F

18F

Currently, the wood pellet industry does not contribute to NC’s energy generation portfolio and does not
advance NC’s clean energy economy. The wood pellets harvested from NC increase the state’s carbon
output during logging, processing and transportation and are burned for fuel elsewhere, mostly Europe.
There are currently no known plans for the industry to become a contributor to NC’s energy sector in the
coming years. If this trend reverses, NC should not support activities that would increase emissions from
its electricity generation sector for the reasons cited below.
Stakeholders have raised concerns regarding whether biomass or products derived from NC forests, is
carbon neutral. We acknowledge the science regarding carbon neutrality and accounting methods are
contentious issues. Biomass combustion releases carbon into the atmosphere at a faster pace than if the
18
19

NC Renewable Energy Tracking System (NC-RETS), Feb 2019, https://www.ncrets.org/
Annual Technology Baseline-LCOE, NREL, 2018, https://atb.nrel.gov/electricity/2018/index.html?t=cb&s=pr

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

25

forests were left intact to absorb and sequester carbon dioxide emitted from anthropogenic sources.
Biomass energy is carbon neutral if growing the biomass removes as much CO2 as is emitted into the
atmosphere from its combustion. 20
19F

The method for accounting this complex issue has been studied by EPA and other national experts.
EPA’s Science Advisory Board remains deadlocked after years of debate on the best way to advise
regulators on how to account for emissions from burning biomass. Meanwhile, in a 2018 publication,
scientists concluded that the use of wood as fuel is likely to result in net CO2 emissions and may endanger
forest biodiversity. 21 Due to this uncertainty, large scale use of NC’s natural resources to meet foreign
markets’ carbon reduction goals by taking advantage of current accounting of methodology should be
challenged at the national and international level.
20F

1.4 Biogas
NC ranks third in the nation with the most biogas potential. 22, 23 Biogas refers to the recovery of methane
gas from anaerobic digestion of municipal and solid waste generated from swine operations, landfills,
dairy farms, wastewater treatment plants, and food waste operations. It is also commonly referred to as
renewable natural gas (RNG) because the principal constituents are methane and carbon dioxide. NC’s
REPS program offers RECs for electricity generated from landfill gas and animal waste, including swine
operations. In 2017, 5.9% of the State’s RECs were from Landfill gas, and 3.6% were from animal
waste. 24
21F

22F

23F

RNG can play an important role in reducing methane emissions, a potent GHG with global warming
potential 25 times greater than carbon dioxide. Reducing methane emissions can have a larger impact on
the environment than other carbon reduction initiatives. The IPCC special report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global GHG mitigation pathways identifies this
resource as one of the primary energy pathways. 25
24F

Agriculture is NC’s top industry, accounting for $91.8 billion of the $538 billion gross state product and
17% of the state’s workforce. The agricultural community sees RNG production as a new “home-grown”
industry with the potential to increase employment and revenue generation potential for rural and
agricultural communities, create more advanced, sustainable waste management solutions and produce
bioenergy that offsets GHG emissions.
For NC, the agriculture sector accounted for 7% of the State’s 2017 gross GHG emissions and waste
management operations (landfills and wastewater plants) accounted for 6%. Combined, emissions from
Depending on the type of tree, forests may take decades to draw the same amount of carbon back out of the air.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/congress-says-biomass-is-carbon-neutral-but-scientists-disagree/
22
Department of Energy National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Energy Analysis: Biogas Potential in the United
States, August 2013. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/60178.pdf
23
Department of Energy and US Department of Agriculture concluded the Biogas Opportunities Roadmap
http://www.usda.gov/oce/reports/energy/Biogas_Opportunities_Roadmap_8-1-14.pdf) in 2014, subtitled “Voluntary
Actions to Reduce Methane Emissions and Increase Energy Independence.”
24
NC Renewable Energy Tracking System (NC-RETS), Feb 2019, https://www.ncrets.org/
25
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, SPECIAL REPORT - Global Warming of 1.5 oC, August 2018.
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
20
21

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

26

these activities equated to almost 40% of the total GHGs emitted from the State’s electricity sector. 26 By
2030, emissions from the agriculture and waste management sectors are projected to be almost half of the
total emissions from the electricity sector. RNG projects in the State have the potential to significantly
reduce these emissions. Furthermore, RNG can reduce reliance on natural gas.
25F

Stakeholders have expressed concerns over air and water pollution from swine operations’ use of biogas
technology that rely on lagoons and sprayfield waste management systems. Pollution to waterways,
odors, and public health concerns for nearby and downstream communities, including those felt
disproportionately by minority populations, are the reasons for opposition to biogas production.
States like California, Washington, Oregon and New York recognize RNG in meeting their GHG
emission reduction goals. The private sector also incorporates biogas into their GHG mitigation plans.
For example, UPS plans to convert 40% of their ground fleet to use alternative fuel, including RNG, by
2025. NC’s agriculture to energy projects have been frontrunners in the country, and are pioneering the
development and utilization of RNG. For example, Smithfield Foods plans to reduce its absolute GHG
emissions by 25% by 2025, equivalent to 4 MMT. Smithfield Foods and Dominion Energy recently
formed a joint venture Align Renewable Natural gas and are investing $250 million over the next decade
to expand RNG on a wide scale. The City of Raleigh’s Neuse River Resource Recovery Facility is
incorporating an advanced anaerobic digestion process to reduce the overall biosolids content and
accommodate future growth. The recovered RNG is planned to be used for the City’s Go Raleigh bus
fleet or sold to a third party as revenue, and is a key component of the City’s GHG emission reduction
strategy.
It is anticipated that over the coming years, new projects will be tested and applied at swine farms, food
and solid waste operations, landfills and wastewater treatment plants. Technological advancements are
expected to lead the industries to becoming cleaner and more efficient. The RNG industry is young and
can help our state realize the benefits of decreased carbon emissions, improved resiliency (through
alternative fuel supply and microgrid applications during disaster), less reliance on imported energy fuels
or sources that are weather dependent, and economic development in the most impoverished areas of the
state.

NC Department of Environmental Quality, NC Greenhouse Gas Inventory (1990-203), January 2019.
https://files.nc.gov/ncdeq/climate-change/ghg-inventory/GHG-Inventory-Report-FINAL.pdf
26

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

27

28

2. Drivers of Power Sector Transformation
The declining cost of clean energy and energy storage technologies, along with rapid advancement of
information management, communications, and consumer products is transforming our electrical grid.
These forces are leading the decarbonization of the electric power sector while creating economic
development opportunities in urban and rural areas of the state. The four key drivers of power sector
transformation in the 21st century are described below.

Key Drivers of
Power Sector
Transformation
•

Decentralization

•

Digitization

•

Decarbonization

•

Development

2.1 Decentralization Driven by Declining Costs
The costs of clean energy technologies have declined rapidly in the last decade. Lazard’s latest annual
Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis (LCOE 12.0) shows a continued decline in the cost of generating
electricity from alternative energy technologies, especially utility-scale solar and wind. In some
scenarios, alternative energy costs have decreased to the point that they are now at or below the marginal
cost of conventional generation (see Figure 3). Lazard’s data shows that since 2009, solar PV and wind
costs have dropped 88% and 69%, respectively. 27 By 2024, Wood-Mackenzie predicts that wind energy
will continue to cost less than new combined-cycle natural-gas facilities on an LCOE basis in 20 states,
and will grow to 28 states by 2027. For battery storage, Lazard’s latest annual Levelized Cost of Storage
Analysis (LCOS 4.0) shows significant cost declines across most use cases and technologies, especially
for shorter duration applications, such as utility-scale solar PV plus storage (see Figure 4). 28 Lazard also
projects that by 2020, the cost of lithium-based storage could decline by 38%. An overview of key
technologies enabling decentralization of the power grid is provided in the discussion below.
26F

27F

”Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis – Version 12.0”, Nov 2018, accessed at
https://www.lazard.com/media/450784/lazards-levelized-cost-of-energy-version-120-vfinal.pdf
28
Ibid
27

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

29

Figure 3: Lazard’s Unsubsidized Levelized Cost of Energy for Alternative and Conventional Technologies,
version 12.0

Figure 4: Lazard’s annual Levelized Cost of Storage Analysis (LCOS 4.0)

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

30

2.1.1 Utility Scale Renewables
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) forecasts that non-hydroelectric renewables will be the
fastest growing source of electricity generation. In April 2019, U.S. monthly electricity generation from
renewable sources exceeded coal-fired generation for the first time. 29 Renewable sources provided 23%
of total electricity generation, compared to coal’s 20%. EIA’s January 2019 Short-Term Energy Outlook
(STEO) forecasts that electricity generation from utility-scale solar generating units will grow by 10% in
2019, and by 17% in 2020. Wind generation is predicted to grow by 12% and 14% during the next two
years. 30
28F

29F

This projected growth is a result of new generating capacity the industry expects to bring online. In 2017,
renewables represented almost 50% of the new utility-scale electric generating capacity added to the U.S.
power grid. Solar is the third-largest clean energy source in the U.S. power sector, having surpassed
biomass in 2017. The U.S. electric power sector plans to add more than 4 GW of new solar capacity in
2019, and almost 6 GW in 2020, a total increase of 32% from the operational capacity at the end of 2018.
There are now more than 2 million solar installations in the U.S., with an additional 2 million anticipated
by 2023. 31 Figures 5 illustrates historical and projected solar capacity additions for the US.
30F

Source: gtm, a Wood Mackenzie Business

Figure 5: Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Capacity Additions

According to the Solar Energy Industries Association, NC is currently ranked 2nd in the nation for
cumulative total installed solar capacity. Figure 6 (next page) shows the rise and leveling off of solar
installations in the state, with utility scale projects dominating the capacity growth. How the utilities
comply with HB 589, taking into consideration grid operational needs, customer demands, and cost, will
determine the level of solar capacity added in the coming years.

U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electric Power Monthly
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Current Issues and Trends. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/issuestrends/
31
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/how-distributed-energy-is-reshaping-the-energylandscape#gs.r0dwgu
29
30

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

31

Figure 6: NC Annual Solar Installations 32
31F

Wind turbines now operate across 41 states and 2 U.S. territories. The U.S. wind industry installed 841
MW of new wind power capacity in the first quarter of 2019, a 107% increase over installations in the
first quarter of 2018. It is estimated that through calendar year 2019, installed capacity for wind energy
generation will grow, likely doubling the installations completed in 2018. This drastic expansion should
continue for the next few years as developers install projects prior to the expiration of the Production Tax
Credit. 33 The U.S. EIA predicts that wind capacity additions in 2019 will total 12.7 GW, exceeding
annual capacity additions for the previous 6 years. 34 The long-term outlook for offshore wind (OSW)
energy generation is similar – the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) reports a total project pipeline of
25,434 MW as of June 2018, of which 3,892 MW is in project-specific capacity and 21,542 MW of
undeveloped lease area potential capacity. 35 As of the date of this Report, only one utility-scale wind
energy facility is in operation in NC; the 208 MW nameplate capacity Amazon Wind Farm near Elizabeth
City.
32F

33F

34F

The states of Virginia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York are advancing offshore wind
projects. In Virginia, Dominion Energy began construction of a two-turbine OSW as a demonstration
project in the second quarter of 2019. 36 New Jersey selected a company in June 2019 through a request
for proposal (RFP) to build a 1,100 MW wind farm off the coast of Atlantic City. In July 2019, New York
35F

NCSEA
The PTC provides operators with a tax credit per kWh of renewable electricity generation for the first 10 years a
facility is in operation.
34
U.S. EIA. Tax Credit Phase Out Encourages More Wind Power Plants to be Added by End of Year.
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=39472#. Accessed on May 17, 2019.
35
2017 DOE Offshore Wind Technology Market Update.
36
Washington Post. Utility taking cautious approach as Virginia offshore wind project gets underway. July 1, 2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/utility-taking-cautious-approach-as-virginia-offshore-windproject-gets-underway/2019/06/28/540493c6-99c3-11e9-916d9c61607d8190_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.ac52d8c0fb89. Accessed July 31, 2019.
32
33

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

32

State reached an agreement to build two large OSW projects off the coast of Long Island, the largest
combined OSW contracts executed by any state to date, totaling 1,696 MW, 37. 38
36F

37F

2.1.2 Distributed Generation
Distributed generation represents electricity that is generated on the customer side of the electric meter or
near the point of use instead of at central power plants. Examples of distributed renewables include smallscale solar systems, rooftop solar, and small wind turbines. EIA forecasts that small-scale solar
generating capacity will grow by 44% between 2018 and 2020, or 9 GW. The increased deployment is
partly due to the plummeting costs of distributed solar, with residential system prices dropping more than
60% since 2010. Additionally, advanced inverters (devices that convert the direct current that solar
panels provide into the alternating current that flows on the power grid) are improving the performance
and management of small-scale distributed generation by handling unanticipated grid conditions.

2.1.3 Energy Efficiency and Demand Response
Energy efficiency (EE) measures are technologies and processes that use less energy to perform the same
function (e.g., energy-efficient lightbulbs and major appliances). Demand response activities are
performed by customers to reduce electricity use at times of high-priced peak electricity consumption.
Both of these demand side management approaches decrease the overall electricity demand from the grid,
which in turn, avoids the cost of building new generation and transmission lines, saves customers money,
and lowers pollution from electric generators. EIA’s annual survey of electric utilities tracks the
incremental annual electricity savings and costs from utility-run EE programs. Incremental energy
savings are the additional energy savings from new participants in EE programs during the current
reporting year. The amount of incremental energy saved through EE programs increased from 26.5
million MWh in 2014, to 29.9 million MWh in 2017. At the same time, incremental spending on EE
programs has remained flat in recent years.
Demand response programs typically offer customers a rebate or lower energy costs for reducing energy
use during specified hours or allowing the utility to cycle its air-conditioning systems when needed.
These programs are increasingly being implemented through price signals and advanced software systems
that can automatically reduce energy consumption across building fleets at periods of peak energy
demand. However, since implementation of EE is a customer choice and not a requirement, the electricity
system may not be able to fully rely on customer behaviors to reduce demand.

2.1.4 Battery Storage
Lithium ion batteries currently dominate the world of advanced energy storage. Other forms of storage
technologies include compressed air, thermal storage, and pumped hydro storage. Energy storage systems
reduce the need for peaker power plants, improve the resilience of the power grid, and can be paired with
37
New York Times. New York Awards Offshore Wind Contracts in Bid to Reduce Emissions. July 18, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/18/business/energy-environment/offshore-wind-farm-new-york.html. Accessed
July 31, 2019.
38
Utility Dive. New York awards record 1,700 MW offshore wind contracts. July 19, 2019.
https://www.utilitydive.com/news/new-york-awards-record-1700-mw-offshore-wind-contracts/559091/. Accessed
on July 31, 2019.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

33

intermittent renewable generation systems to operate as virtual power plants. The use of utility-scale
battery storage units (1 MW or greater power capacity) has grown in recent years. Operating utility-scale
battery storage power capacity has more than quadrupled from the end of 2014 (214 MW) through March
2019 (899 MW). Assuming planned additions are completed and no existing operating capacity is retired,
EIA predicts that utility-scale battery storage power capacity could exceed 2,500 MW by 2023 (see
Figure 7). The total deployment of utility and non-utility energy storage is projected to reach 4,500 MW
and represent a $4.8 billion market by 2024. 39
38F

Figure 7: Battery Storage Capacity Additions

The growth in utility-scale battery installations is the result of supportive state-level energy storage
policies and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s (FERC) Order 841 that directs power system
operators to allow utility-scale battery systems to engage in wholesale energy, capacity, and ancillary
services markets. Rapidly declining costs are also increasing deployment of these systems.
As of March 2019, the largest utility-scale battery storage sites operating in the US provide 40 MW of
power capacity, and are located in Alaska and California. Based on the current inventory of battery
storage projects planned for construction, EIA reports that a 409 MW facility in Parrish, Florida will start
commercial operation in 2021. This project will be the largest solar-powered battery system in the world
and will store energy from a nearby Florida Power and Light solar plant.
In NC, only about 1 MW of battery storage capacity has been installed as of 2018, however several
battery projects are planned. The 2018 IRPs for Duke Energy Carolinas (DEC) and Duke Energy
Progress (DEP) indicate that a combined total 291 MW of battery storage is expected to be installed by
2033. Cypress Creek, a large NC solar developer, plans 12 MWh of battery storage facilities coupled
with solar for the Brunswick Electric Membership Corporation. As part of a community solar project, a
500 kW Li-ion battery combined with a 1 MW solar project is planned for the Fayetteville Public Works

Wood Mackenzie P&R/ESA, U.S. energy storage monitor Q2 2019,
https://www.woodmac.com/research/products/power-and-renewables/us-energy-storage-monitor/
39

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

34

Commission. 40 Duke Energy recently received approval for a solar PV plus storage project in Hot Springs
by the NC Utilities Commission (NCUC). This project will include 2 MW of solar and a 4 MW battery
and is intended to improve electric reliability in the town, which is on a constrained transmission line. 41
39F

40F

NC does not have any programs specifically designed to facilitate energy storage installations. However,
there are policies in place that have energy storage deployment implications. HB589 includes a number
of PV deployment program goals for NC. 42 In addition, NCUC dockets implementing one of HB589
programs – Competitive Procurement of Renewable Energy (CPRE) – have topics relevant to energy
storage. One docket in particular deals with energy storage protocol that is a part of the CPRE power
purchase agreements. In docket hearings, it was noted that electric grid ancillary services, like frequency
regulation and voltage control which are particularly suited to batteries, have no transparent market value
in NC, making it difficult to monetize the value of these services for a developer considering installing
battery storage. 43 Comments made by the NCUC Public Staff regarding the lack of energy storage market
transparency state that market participants and Duke Energy generally agree that energy storage can
provide many grid benefits, such as frequency regulation, operational reserves, and firm capacity;
however, there is no mechanism to pay market participants for these services. Further review would be
needed to determine how market participants can be compensated for those services, recognizing that they
are bundled in the payment system that Duke Energy uses today. Although price declines will contribute
to increasing energy storage in NC, policies may also be necessary to integrate energy storage onto the
NC electric grid supporting a timely shift to clean energy.
41F

42F

2.1.5 Microgrids
Localized grids that can disconnect or “island off” from the utility power grid are called microgrids.
Microgrids consist of distributed energy resources (DERs) and control systems that operate autonomously
when called upon, increasing grid flexibility and resiliency. 44 The types of technologies used in
microgrid applications include solar PV, battery storage, fossil fuel generators, fuel cells, combined heat
and power systems and smart controls. There are roughly 160 microgrids with 1.6 GW of capacity
operating in the US today, and capacity is estimated to reach 4.3 GW by 2020. According to the third
quarter report, U.S. Microgrids 2016: Market Drivers, Analysis and Forecast, GTM sees US microgrid
market opportunity doubling from $836 million in 2016, to $1.66 billion in 2020. 45
43F

44F

Figure 8 shows the owners and application types of microgrid installations. The military is pursuing
microgrids for energy security or to achieve RE goals, and is estimated to contribute to 52% of microgrid

NC State University, DeCarolis et al. (2018). Energy Storage Options for NC. p.4. Retrieved from
https://energy.ncsu.edu/storage/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/02/NC-Storage-Study-FINAL.pdf.
41
Utility Dive. (2019). NC approves Duke’s first solar+storage residential microgrid. Accessed at
www.utilitydive.com/news/north-carolina-approves-dukes-first-solarstorage-residential-microgrid/554770/ .
42
HB589 is discussed in the Clean Energy Plan section NC Energy Policy Landscape.
43
NC Utilities Commission. May 1, 2019. Docket E-2 Sub 1159, E-7 Sub 1156 Hearing, p. 14.
44
U.S. Department of Energy. (n.d.). The role of microgrids in helping to advance the nation’s energy system.
https://www.energy.gov/oe/activities/technology-development/grid-modernizationandsmart-grid/role-microgrids-helping
45
US Mircrogrid Market Growing Faster than Previously Thought: New GTM Research, August 29, 2016, Elisa
Wood, https://microgridknowledge.com/us-microgrid-market-gtm/
40

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

35

capacity deployed as of July 2019. 46 The second largest users of microgrids are data centers in
commercial applications, representing 26% of capacity added to date. 47 Community microgrids are also
on the rise, especially in the Northeast and Alaska, influenced by societal and environmental needs.
45F

46F

Figure 8: Microgrid Applications and Ownership Types

2.1.6 Electric Vehicles
The car industry is also undergoing a transformation, with almost every automaker planning to introduce
more electric vehicle (EV) models and citing 2025 as the projected year when the upfront cost of an EV
will reach parity with internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles. In 2017, EVs represented 1.1% of new
U.S. vehicle sales, or 200,000 vehicles. By 2025,
J.P. Morgan estimates that EVs and hybrid EVs
(HEVs) will account for an estimated 38% of all
new vehicle sales (see Figure 9). 48 The U.S. DOE
projects that by 2040, EVs could make up over
50% of new car sales, largely driven by
plummeting battery costs. 49
47F

48F

High rates of EV adoption present an opportunity
to reduce GHG emissions, grow and smooth
electricity demand, and cut fuel costs for
consumers. However, there is growing concern
that if not managed adequately, accelerated EV

Figure 9: Projected Growth in Vehicle Sales

US Mircrogrid Market Growing Faster than Previously Thought: New GTM Research, August 29, 2016, Elisa
Wood, https://microgridknowledge.com/us-microgrid-market-gtm/
47
Ibid.
48
Ibid
49
U.S. Department of Energy. (2014). Evaluating electric vehicle charging
impacts and customer charging behaviors—experiences from six smart
grid investment grant projects. Retrieved from https://www.smartgrid.
gov/files/B3_revised_master-12-17-2014_report.pdf
46

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

36

growth could significantly affect electricity usage and peak demand. Many states are exploring
innovative planning approaches to deploy charging infrastructure and develop rates and utility business
models to accommodate their residents’ and business needs.

2.2 Digitization Driving Grid Operations and Grid Flexibility
With the continuous supply of smart devices and digital communications entering the market, a growing
number of electricity customers are demonstrating interest in the ability to control their usage, control
their bills and source their energy. Technology is enabling participation by customers through new
capabilities and controls into homes, buildings, and end-use equipment. With the proliferation of electric
devices, appliances, heat pumps, and EVs, customers can participate in a range of services by
participating in smart charging programs or shifting their use to off-peak times. This increased use of
technologies and DERs is moving from the traditional one-way system to one that is bi-directional and
more complex. DERs are physical and virtual assets that are deployed across the distribution grid,
typically close to load, and usually behind the meter. They include solar, energy storage, EE, combined
heat and power (CHP/cogen), and demand management, and can be used individually or in aggregate to
provide services to the electric grid. 50
49F

In a well-designed system, DERs can provide positive net value to the grid, such as avoided infrastructure
investments, improved resilience, and increased integration of clean energy. Through these capabilities,
customers can help mitigate or in certain cases, reduce electricity cost when they offer services to the
utility. For example, customers who choose EE measures that shape their load to complement grid
resource availability are contributing to keeping costs down for all customers because peaking loads
contribute to grid infrastructure investment. 51
50F

At the heart of digitization and DER integration is distribution system planning (DSP). DSP is a process
that identifies and characterizes areas of the grid that must adapt to changing technologies and markets,
and serves as a valuable planning tool to guide utility investment, foster customer and marketplace
activity, and provide value to the grid and the entire system. Utilities are already being asked to use DSP
to reveal value opportunities on the system. NC’s rural electric cooperatives have been early adopters of
advanced technology, and are leading the way to increased reliability, two-way communication, load
management, and grid operation. Service providers are also recognizing that new electric loads are
flexible, and can be managed as grid resources by establishing the right price signals (e.g., customer
choosing to use equipment during off-peak hours). However, since the use of DERs and EE are a
customer choice and not a requirement, the electricity system may not be able to fully rely on these DER
assets or behaviors to reduce demand.

Distributed Energy Resources 101: Required Reading for a Modern Grid, Advanced Energy Economy, February
2017, https://blog.aee.net/distributed-energy-resources-101-required-reading-for-a-modern-grid
51
Trends in Technology and Policy with Implications for Utility Regulation, Regulatory Assistance Project, C.
Linvill, J. Shernot and J. Shipley, April 2018.
50

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

37

2.2.1 Smart/Connected Devices
Homes and businesses are increasingly connecting devices
and appliances to the internet or allowing them to
communicate. This function allows for more frequent and
user-specified control of the devices—resulting in greater
system EE and demand response operation. Over the next few
years, millions of new households are expected to install smart
thermostats, smart light bulbs, and smart home controllers.
Figure 10 illustrates the projected growth for three types of smart devices (connected lighting, smart
thermostats, and voice assistant devices) between 2018 and 2023. The number of households with smart
home devices is expected to more than double in the next two years.

Figure 10: Projected Growth in Smart Home Devices

2.2.2 Smart Grid - Advanced Metering and Sensor Technologies
Throughout the country, advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) is enabling two-way communication
between customers using smart devices and electric utilities (or third-party providers). AMI is an
integrated system of smart meters and data-management systems. Transmission and distribution
automation technologies are using data to change how electricity flows through the power grid, reshaping
and modernizing the traditional grid. Figure 11 illustrates the AMI penetration levels for residential
customers as of 2016. According to 2017 EIA data, 51% of NC residential customers have AMI, and an
additional 30% have automated meter reading which provides one-way meter-to-utility data flow. 52 As a
result of the trend towards a more customer-centric grid, NC utilities are implementing more AMI; the
way these advanced technologies are transmitted, distributed, and managed accommodate the desire for
two-way energy flow.
51F

EIA Annual Electric Power Industry Report, Form EIA-861 detailed data files, available from
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia861/
52

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

38

Figure 11: AMI Adoption Rates as of 2016

Advances in sensor technologies are enabling accurate, real-time conditions of the grid to be monitored,
and are quickly becoming a fundamental component of the smart grid. Utilities employ sensors to monitor
real-time two-way flow of electricity on the grid, improve reliability, provide real-time alerts about
system disruptions, enhance responsiveness to outages, and support the integration of clean energy
technologies. 53
52F

2.2.3 Big Data Systems and Communication Tools
Advanced meters, sensors, and devices operating on the power grid generate large amounts of digital data,
many transmitting readings in small time intervals and requiring a significant volume of data storage
capacity. As the number of smart devices increases, the data collection, management and interpretation of
the modern grid will increase the role and value of big data and analytic software systems and services.
The estimated economic growth opportunity in North America for this transition is estimated to triple
from $390 million in 2016 to about $1.2 billion in 2025. 54
53F

Digital communication systems are providing the foundational infrastructure to support the technologies
in a modernized grid. Advanced communication networks provide not only the capability to use the
traditional electric power infrastructure to deliver data, but also enable utilities or grid operators to
receive, interpret, and act on the data in near-real time. This flexibility enables assets across the grid to
communicate with one another and respond to dynamic changes in electricity demand and supply.

53
U.S. Department of Energy. (n.d.). Synchrophasor applications in transmission systems. Retrieved from
https://www.smartgrid.gov/recovery_act/program_impacts/applications_synchrophasor_technology.html; Southern
California Edison. (n.d.). Remote fault indicators. https://www.edison.com/content/dam/eix/
documents/innovation/RFIFactSheet-R2.pdf
54
Utility analytics. Use cases, platforms, and services: Global market analysis and forecasts. (2016). Retrieved from
Navigant Research website: https://www.navigantresearch.com/research/utility-analytics

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

39

2.3 Decarbonization Driven by Customer Desires
There is no doubt and scientific consensus supports the fact that GHGs emissions, which include carbon
dioxide and methane, are contributing to global climate change. The effects of climate change pose
significant risks to the communities, economies, and the environment. In the 2018 National Climate
Assessment, 13 federal agencies concluded that: (1) the most recent decade was the nation’s warmest on
record; (2) human activities, especially emissions of GHGs, are the dominant cause of the observed
warming since the mid-20th century; (3) human-induced climate change is projected to continue and it
will accelerate significantly if global GHG emissions continue to increase; and (4) the widespread and
potentially irreversible impacts of a changing climate require an urgent effort to both reduce emissions
and build resilient communities. North Carolinians understand that climate change is underway and are
concerned about its impacts on current and future generations. 55
54F

The electric power sector is the leading emitter of GHGs in our state, contributing to about 35% of
statewide emissions in 2017. 56 The power sector will continue to be NC’s leading GHG emitter until
about 2025, when transportation-related emissions are expected to surpass the power sector. NC’s Clean
Smokestacks Act, REPS, and market drivers have decarbonized the electric power sector at a faster pace
than many other states. US power sector emissions have declined by 28% since 2005, due primarily to
achievements in energy conservation, as well as switching among fossil fuels (coal to gas) and adding
non-carbon sources. 57 According to the most recent statewide inventory, GHG emissions from the electric
power sector have declined 34% relative to 2005 levels. It is estimated that with full implementation of
HB589, the GHG emissions will decrease by about 50% by 2025, and remain at this level until 2030. To
continue on the decarbonization path, many states have implemented market-based carbon reduction
programs and/or adopted aggressive renewable energy and EE standards. Some states have established
100% renewable energy goals by 2040 or 2050.
55F

56F

Recognizing the urgency to take action to reduce GHGs and the desire to reduce power bills, North
Carolinians are asking for more options to procure and deploy clean energy technologies and invest in EE
measures. From rooftop solar to electric vehicle chargers, customers have more choices now than ever
before – and this technology trend is projected to continue. The appetite for acquiring residential roof top
solar continues to be unmet as evidenced by the recent sellout of the rebates within hours of being offered
by Duke Energy as part of HB589 implementation.
Corporate priorities have also been driving increased customer demands. Today, 17 of the state’s 30
largest private employers have set targets to procure more RE or reduce their energy consumption, and 37
companies doing business in NC have set a goal to be powered by 100% RE. These companies cross a
wide range of industries, including major technology, service, and manufacturing companies. These
businesses have moved beyond soft factors such as community relations and good publicity, and instead
adopt fundamental strategic drivers to achieve their clean energy goals, including customer and
USGCRP, 2018: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment,
Volume II [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C.
Stewart (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.
56
NC Greenhouse Gas Inventory (1990-2030), January 2019, NC Department of Environmental Quality,
deq.nc.gov/GHGinventory
57
EIA Today in Energy, October 28, 2018. https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=37392
55

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

40

shareholder demand, competitive advantage, attracting and retaining talent, operational efficiency, supply
chain disruption, lower costs, and core values. For example, Apple is driving its entire supply chain to
run on clean power, and announced that by 2020, it and 44 of its suppliers will generate or procure at least
5 GW of clean energy. In August 2019, Fifth Third Bank opened its 80 MW Aulander Holloman Solar
Facility in eastern NC, adding to the company’s announcement at the Nasdaq opening bell on March 7,
2018, to be the first Fortune 500 company to commit to purchase 100% solar power. Access to
inexpensive, reliable, clean energy impacts decisions made by these companies about where they locate
and expand, and whether they close existing facilities.
Many local governments across the State are setting environmental goals based on the interests of their
constituents. In 2018, Asheville passed a resolution to transition municipal operations to 100% renewable
energy by 2030. The Charlotte City Council unanimously passed a low-carbon resolution in 2018, and
approved a Strategic Energy Action Plan to achieve it. In 2019, the city of Raleigh adopted a communitywide goal to reduce GHG emissions 80% by 2050, and began preparing an action plan to support this
goal. Over 30 municipalities in the state have made public commitments to GHG reduction goals and/or
clean energy targets. Local governments are motivated to reduce their carbon emissions because they see
how infrastructure is suffering from being repeatedly battered and flooded during climate changeintensified hurricanes. They see how bad air and water quality is triggering health conditions in their
jurisdictions. They also see how transitioning to a clean energy can provide a much-needed economic
boost in their areas. Clean energy jobs in NC have been growing at nearly twice the state average and
employ veterans at nearly twice the economy-wide rate. There is great interest in the manufacturing
industry, as components of wind turbines and solar panels are constructed in NC. Cities see how
electrifying our vehicles creates opportunity by supporting new business ventures for EV charging
stations and ancillary infrastructure, while also improving local air quality.
Low-income and energy-burdened customers and communities are not able to take advantage of existing
programs for clean energy or EE due to up-front costs and financing challenges, physical challenges
related to the quality of the building or ownership status of their housing, or simply a lack of access to
high-integrity service providers. Energy burdened communities are paying a disproportionately high
amount of their income on energy bills and simply struggle to pay unaffordable energy bills. For those
living with incomes below 50% of the federal poverty level (FPL), 33% of their annual income is spent
on energy bills (energy burden), of which about 20% goes to pay electric bills. Many of the energy
burdened communities are directly impacted by the health and pollution impacts resulting from energy
production, generation, transportation. These compounding factors mean that these communities are the
least able to reap benefits of investments in clean energy and EE while being most impacted by the legacy
energy industry. Programs such as community solar and home weatherization offer some opportunities to
directly reduce electric bill; however, public policy focusing on energy rates and an equitable and just
transition to a clean energy economy is needed.
The agriculture community is also interested in responsible farmland management, creating solar energy
benefits education and incentive program, and ensuring value to the farmer to optimize the use and
sustainability of farms, forests, and solar production/decommissioning in NC. Significant potential exists
to increase EE of agricultural operations and buildings, leading to reduced operating costs for NC’s
farmers.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

41

2.4 Economic Development Driven by the New Energy
Economy
NC has experienced rapid population increase (18.5% from 2000 to 2010, and an additional 10% from
2010-2018) and a large economic shift over the past 20 years from manufacturing towards a more serviceoriented industry. These trends are likely to continue; the NC Department of Commerce projects that the
service economy will contribute more than 90% of the new jobs in NC from 2017 to 2026.
As the electric power industry evolves from a highly centralized, capital-intensive industry to a more
decentralized, distributed industry featuring independent power producers, rooftop solar installers,
distributed clean energy aggregators, and other new businesses and business models, economic
development can come from both jobs and investments that drive tax revenue in local communities.
NC is one of the 10 top states for clean energy jobs in the nation.37 According to one of the most
comprehensive national energy-related employment survey, NC had a total of 110,913 clean energy jobs
in 2018 including solar (8,912), wind (908), clean vehicles (7,280), and EE (86,559).38 Energy storage
now represents 1,477 jobs in NC and “grid technology/other” claims 7,607 jobs (note some overlap in
total numbers).39 Reflecting national trends, the majority of NC’s clean energy jobs are in construction
(44%) followed by professional services including education and consulting (21%) and manufacturing
(17% of total jobs).40 Meanwhile, the NC Department of Commerce estimates that nearly 300,000 people
in NC currently work in related clean economy industries, including clean energy generation, EE, and
clean transportation. While not all of the industries in the Commerce study are 100% “clean,” these
industries employ the workforce needed to transition to a clean economy and employ workers in a wide
range of occupations, with jobs available at all education, skill, and wage levels.41
While jobs are important to all communities, the revenues generated by clean energy investments and
infrastructure projects can have even longer lasting benefits in both rural and urban counties. New RE
projects and facilities can create ongoing revenue streams in their local communities.
Additional revenue can also be generated from exports. More than 20% of the clean energy goods and
services generated in NC are exported to other states or nations, bringing new revenue into our state.
Firms engaged in clean energy product manufacturing or production lead out of state exports, with
approximately 53% going to other markets. 58 Research and development activities also have a strong outof-state presence, with 38% of work destined for broader markets. 59 Moreover, NC can reduce its energy
imports through clean energy generation and locally-driven EE projects.
57F

58F

The total economic impact of clean energy development in NC is estimated at $28.2 billion over the
period of 2007-2018 including direct impact of $14.8 billion investment in clean energy development
(which includes labor costs) and secondary impacts of $14.5 billion which include $2.9 billion in energy

NCSEA. (2016). 2016 Clean Energy Census. Retrieved from https://energync.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/03/NC_Clean_Energy_Industry_Census_2016.pdf
59
Ibid
58

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

42

costs savings. 60 The cumulative contribution to NC’s Gross State Product from 2007-2018 is $16.9
billion, including $1.4B tax revenue over this period. 61
59F

60F

Going forward, employers in NC are projecting 5% growth in employment over the next twelve months,
driven largely by 8.3% growth in the EE sector. 62 Through the CEP stakeholder engagement process and
collaborative partnership efforts, businesses have expressed a number of factors they deem important to
achieve robust growth of NC’s clean energy economy, and the role that clean energy and clean
transportation play in attracting talent and industry to the state. For example, the burgeoning OSW
industry alone is expected to create a new supply chain that is estimated at approximately $70 billion by
2030. 63
61F

62F

Business interest in clean energy aligns with the need for cost savings, return on investments, risk
management, attracting talent, meeting shareholder and customer expectations, driving innovation and
staying competitive. 64 Business leaders have called for increased investment in EE programs, increased
customer access to clean energy, accelerated deployment of electric vehicles and advanced development
of energy storage. These companies believe that NC can leverage these recommended actions to attract
new investment to the state, spur innovation, save money for ratepayers, attract new businesses and create
jobs in NC. 65
63F

64F

These recommendations must be balanced with maintaining NC’s attractive lower energy costs. The
business sector is keen to preserve low energy rates to reduce the cost of doing business in NC, especially
energy-intensive sectors such as manufacturing, as the state navigates the path towards a clean energy
future.
Today many states are surpassing NC with more aggressive REPS, renewables adoption, EE policies,
utility regulatory reforms, and investment activity The corporate drivers alongside the national rankings
create an opportunity for NC to take new steps to sustain and grow the economic benefits that clean
energy can afford, while continuing to attract businesses, talent and investment to the State.

RTI. (2019). Economic Impact Analysis of Clean Energy Development in NC—2019 Update.
Ibid.
62
Wood Mackenzie/SEIA. (2019). U.S. Solar Market Insight Report, Q2 2019.
63
Special Initiative on Offshore Wind. Supply Chain Contracting Forecast for U.S. Offshore Wind Power,
http://www.ceoe.udel.edu/File%20Library/About/SIOW/SIOW-White-Paper---Supply-Chain-Contracting-Forecastfor-US-Offshore-Wind-Power-FINAL.pdf. Accessed on May 31, 2019.
64
Ceres. (2019, April 2). Letter to Governor Cooper.
65
Ibid
60
61

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

43

44

3. CEP Development: Stakeholder Process
In preparation of the plan, the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) created an open and inclusive
process to engage stakeholders. DEQ sought their input to generate a series of policy recommendations
that addresses the needs of NC communities. Participants included elected officials, private citizens,
industry groups, utilities, technology developers, businesses, non-governmental organizations, and leaders
of the academic and faith communities. All of them offered solutions and a shared vision for NC’s
energy future.
The public engagement process, carried out from February to July 2019, was comprised of four types of
events, referred to as methods. Method 1 was a series of facilitated stakeholder workshops, which were
day-long events attended by 60-80 experts and key stakeholders with a vested interest in clean energy.
Method 2 involved more general public outreach, achieved through regional listening sessions. These
events were half-day sessions intended to educate members of the public about the CEP development
process and to receive feedback and comments. Method 3 involved combining CEP-related activities
with existing venues or events to collect feedback. Method 4 was the online comment portal, where
members of the public who were unable to attend any of the in-person events could respond to specific
questions and submit general comments.
This section summarizes the outputs of the facilitated workshops and other engagement methods, and is
structured around three central themes shown in Figure 12. The six facilitated workshops in Raleigh
provided the structural framework for the CEP. The workshops were designed and executed based on
successful energy planning activities conducted in other states. Technical support was provided by the
internationally-recognized utility regulatory experts, Regulatory Assistance Project (RAP), and
facilitation support was provided by the Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI). Each workshop was organized
to obtain feedback on specific topics identified by the participants.

Vision
Building &
Current
Landscape

What is NC’s vision of a clean energy future, how
different is it from the current direction, and how well
do current policies, regulatory and business practices
help achieve that vision?

Changing
Landscape

Actions
to take

What policy and technology trends are influencing
how we foster clean energy use?

What policy or regulatory actions should be taken to
achieve the clean energy vision?

Figure 12: Facilitated Workshop Themes of Discussion

DEQ engaged with stakeholders from a variety of backgrounds and disciplines to understand their vision
for NC’s clean energy future. Throughout the series of workshops and public meetings, DEQ and
participating stakeholders identified needs, issues, barriers, solutions, unrealized opportunities, equity

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

45

concerns and required actions. Stakeholders and members of the public engaged in the process, which
helped DEQ better understand their vision for a clean energy future in NC. Throughout the stakeholder
and public engagement process, participants were given information about future energy demand,
generation and supply strategies, and national trends in power grid modernization to help frame the
discussion around issues relevant in NC. Rate impacts, economic and job opportunities, environmental
and health impacts were also considered. The public engagement process culminated with stakeholders
recommending and prioritizing policy, regulatory, administrative, local government, public, and business
actions for achieving NC’s clean energy future.
The draft CEP was released on August 16, 2019. The public comment period ran through September 9,
2019. DEQ received 660 comments, including 35 letters and 625 responses submitted through the online
process. DEQ reviewed and evaluated all of the comments submitted and incorporated responses relevant
to the goals of the CEP and priorities identified by the stakeholders.

3.1 Stakeholder Views on NC’s Electricity System
During the 20th century, NC’s electricity system consisted of large, centralized, fossil fuel-based plants
that were owned and operated by electric utilities. During this period, strong growth in electric
consumption necessitated the investments in continuously operating, large and long-lasting generating
assets. The developing electricity system quickly became an essential service affecting the public
interest. Under The Regulatory Compact, a single vertically
integrated provider that owned and operated all three elements of the
electricity system (generation, transmission, and distribution) was
of CEP
allowed to serve all consumers at lower cost with greater efficiency
stakeholders
and reliability than multiple competing providers offering the same
AGREED that NC’s
service. The result was a system of for-profit utilities operating in
current electricity
system
is set up to
defined geographic service areas as protected monopolies, serving
achieve what it was
customers at a just and reasonable price that covered operating costs,
intended to achieve
in the last 100
plus a return on the capital invested in rates set by the NCUC. In
years.
return, the utility is required to serve anyone located within its service
territory in a manner that is safe, reliable, and nondiscriminatory. The
system allows the opportunity to recover reasonable operating costs
and to earn a return on prudent capital investment, but not on operating costs. This arrangement has
enabled build-out of generation capacity to meet peak-load demand, and a one-way flow of electricity
from suppliers to customers.

75%

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

46

The 21st century electric grid is seeing declining load growth due to customer-enabled EE measures,
demand response measures, a shift to less energy-intensive industries, and proliferation of behind the
meter generation systems. The average annual growth in electricity consumption in the U.S. has declined
from about 10% in the 1950s to less than 1% over the past decade. Data shows that economic growth
indices have decoupled from the electricity generation sector at both
state and national levels. This flexibility has opened doors for
66% of CEP
innovation, energy and environmental policy-making, greater
stakeholders
AGREED that
customer choice, and new deployments in RE and DERs.
NC’s current
Combined with declining technology prices and societal interests in
electricity
system can
addressing climate change, social equity and inclusion of
accommodate
increasing levels
underrepresented communities, the new electricity system is
f
becoming much more transactional, bi-directional, and enabling
customers to not only be recipients of services, but also suppliers of
57% of CEP
stakeholders
services to the grid.
DISAGREED that
NC’s current
electricity system
supports
procurement of
clean energy from
a regulatory/utility

In this new era, the traditional electricity system is facing aging
infrastructure, decline in utility revenue linked to generation
investments and quantity of energy sales, growing demand for clean
energy and data services, and reliability and resiliency concerns due
to natural and physical threats such as weather related events and cyber-attacks. There is concern that the
traditional regulatory framework will not continue to serve the public interest, could push consumer
prices upward without a corresponding increase in value for customers, and potentially expose the State to
excessive risk, costs and environmental damage.
Historically, NC has taken progressive and bold policy actions related to the electricity sector. As one of
the first states in the nation to address air pollution from coal-fired power plants in 2002, NC enacted
landmark legislation, the Clean Smokestacks Act, to cap emissions of nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide.
The compliance strategy deployed by the affected utilities resulted in the closure of inefficient coal units
and the operation of technologically advanced, well-controlled and most efficiently operated units in the
nation. The legislation provided additional co-benefits such as decreased fine particulate emissions,
carbon dioxide emissions, mercury emissions, and other hazardous air pollutants. In 2007, NC became
the first state in the Southeast to enact a REPS. 66 Along with state and federal renewable energy tax
credits, and favorable PURPA conditions, the REPS program propelled NC to become a solar industry
leader, bringing associated jobs and economic development opportunity in rural areas of the state. In
2017, HB 589: Competitive Solutions for NC was enacted, which requires competitive procurement of
renewable energy, creates a Green Source Advance program for large businesses, universities and the
military to directly procure renewable energy, and creates a solar rebate and leasing programs program
among other things.
65F

66

SB3

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

47

Through these policy actions, the State has
created a robust clean energy industry that
71% of CEP
continues to evolve. However, despite the
60% of CEP
stakeholders
planned reforms under HB589, uncertainty
DISAGREED that
stakeholders
NC’s current
DISAGREED that
exists over increased investments in new natural
electricity system
NC’s current
gives customers
electricity system
gas facilities, how solar will be developed in the
options for
suitably addresses
controlling energy
equity concerns.
state going forward, unclear direction on the
use / source.
scope of large scale battery storage, wind
generation, and electric vehicle programs, lack
of options for rooftop solar, and concerns over
inequitable access to clean energy, energy burden to low-income communities, and a just transition from
traditional energy jobs. Customers are also raising questions about the power sector being the largest
contributor of NC’s GHG emissions and how much carbon reduction is technologically feasible while
maintaining affordability and reliability.
The CEP stakeholders have communicated that the cost of electricity will continue to increase if nothing
changes, while the current regulatory frameworks will inhibit the utility from pursing new technologies
and limit the ability of third-party businesses from selling innovative technologies and services to
customers. Furthermore, the stakeholders conveyed that a new regulatory framework can change the
trajectory of costs by avoiding system costs and by forcing the utility to find more value from the electric
distribution system and creating additional revenue streams from innovation and technology deployment.

3.2 Stakeholder Vision and Values to Uphold in a 21st
Century Electricity System
Executive Order 80 (EO 80) and DEQ define clean energy resources to include solar, EE, battery storage,
wind, efficient electrification, and other zero-emitting technology options capable of quickly
decarbonizing the power sector and modernizing the electric power sector. The stakeholders involved in
the public engagement process agreed with this direction, and outlined a vision aligned with this
definition. The vision for NC’s energy future is a clean, affordable, modern, resilient and efficient energy
system, through the increased deployment of both grid scale and distributed energy resources, such as
solar, EE, battery storage, wind, electrification, and other innovative solutions while giving customers
more options and control, providing equitable access to clean energy opportunities, and helping customers
reduce and control energy use at fair rates. In order to achieve a clean energy future that achieves this
vision, NC’s energy policy and regulations should work toward an integrated energy system that:
•
•
•
•
•

Properly incentivizes the utilities, independent power producers, and consumers
Recognizes the combined benefits of bidirectional flow of energy between the central grid and
distributed energy resources
Serves as a catalyst for innovation, new business development, and economic growth in the state
Invests and retains capital in local communities, creates a 21st century workforce, and justly
transitions to clean energy jobs
Strengths out resiliency to natural threats and decarbonizes the electric power sector

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

48

In achieving this vision, the stakeholders prioritized the values to uphold and promote going forward,
shown in Figure 13. Responses were submitted by 459 individuals across all engagement events, who
were asked to rank their top three values from a list of 27. Participants emphasized community and social
values in many comments and points of discussion during public engagement events, and stressed the
need for a CEP that addresses decarbonization of the electricity sector. Among these stakeholders that
represented business and industry groups, local government sector, private citizens, environmental
groups, higher education, utilities, trade associations, and others, there was overwhelming consensus
around the Environment and Carbon Reduction value, at 20%. It was ranked in the top three values in all
submitted surveys from all events, and was prioritized by all sectors that were involved in the stakeholder
process, including business groups, manufacturing, environmental organizations, educators, and members
of the public. Affordability, Reliability, and Environmental Justice were also of high priority to
participants, each at 7%.

Figure 13: Stakeholder Voting Results on Values to Uphold in the Electricity System

459 respondents

To help achieve this vision and maintaining our core values, the stakeholder conveyed that NC should
work toward an integrated energy system that:
1.
2.
3.
4.

recognizes the combined benefits of the central grid and DERs,
invests and retains capital in local communities,
creates jobs of the 21st century, and
serves as a catalyst for innovation, new business development and continued economic development
in the state.

Future energy policy and regulations should strengthen our resiliency to natural threats, quickly
decarbonize the electric power sector, and properly incentivize utilities, independent power producers,
and consumers to make this vision a reality.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

49

50

4. Detailed Policy and Action Recommendations
The CEP examines a time horizon of about ten years, with an outlook to 2030. This period was selected
because the availability of technologies and energy resources are generally well known, and market trends
can be reasonably predictable. The uncertainty of forecasts increases greatly beyond ten years; it is
recommended that a similar planning process be carried out in periodic intervals in the future (e.g., every
3-5 years) as new technologies are developed, cost information is updated, and results of past actions can
be evaluated to chart potential paths to take in the future.
The CEP defines three goals to achieve, as shown in Figure 14 on the next page. Each of these goals is
based on clean energy’s ability to reduce GHG emissions, grow NC’s economy, and foster long-term
energy affordability. These goals will not be achieved overnight, nor through implementation of one or
two actions; rather it will require a collection of actions to set us on a path of modernization that prepares
our residents, governments, and businesses to be competitive, proactive, and responsible stewards of our
environment.
The policies and action recommendations identified here are intended to provide policy-makers,
regulatory bodies, local governments, higher education entities, and the private sector with a high-level
implementation plan for achieving the long-term goals and performance measure targets listed below.
The recommendations generally represent the collective input of stakeholders from a wide range of
perspectives. When viewed collectively, these strategies should help develop a clear picture of the steps
that can be taken to maximize the economic and environmental benefits of clean energy. Decisionmakers should use these strategies to inform their policy agendas and their investments. In summary, the
CEP serves as a playbook of viable energy policies, and a roadmap to where NC wants to go.
Three overarching recommendations, listed below, are considered critical to the transition to a 21st
century regulatory model that incentivizes business decisions that benefit both the utilities and the public
in creating an energy system that is clean, affordable, reliable, and equitable. These key
recommendations are considered central to the transformational shift that is necessary to lay a new
foundation for a clean energy future, and will also enable successful implementation of many other
related recommendations identified in the CEP.

•

•

•

Develop carbon reduction policy designs for accelerated retirement of uneconomic coal
assets and other market-based and clean energy policy options (Recommendations A-1
and B-3).
Develop and implement policies and tools such as performance-based mechanisms,
multi-year rate planning, and revenue decoupling, that better align utility incentives with
public interest, grid needs, and state policy (Recommendations B-1 and B-2).
Modernize the grid to support clean energy resource adoption, resilience, and other public
interest outcomes (Recommendations D-1, E-1, G-1, and I-1).

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

51

NORTH CAROLINA CLEAN ENERGY PLAN

GOALS

Reduce electric power
sector greenhouse gas
emissions by 70% below
2005 levels by 2030 and
attain carbon neutrality
by 2050.

Foster long-term
energy affordability

Accelerate clean energy
innovation, development

for North Carolina’s
residents and

and deployment to create
economic opportunities

businesses by
modernizing

for both rural and urban
areas of the state.

regulatory and
planning processes.
52

Figure 14: CEP Goals

The remaining portion of this section discusses recommendations organized into six strategy areas. For
each strategy, the following information is provided: Background, Recommendation(s), Action(s)
corresponding to each recommendation, implementing entity, and action schedule. The recommendations
are grouped into six strategies shown in Figure 15 and summarized below.
•
•
•
•

•
•

Carbon Reduction: focuses on the development of greenhouse gas mitigation policy designs for
the electric power sector
Utility Incentives and Comprehensive System Planning: addresses recommendations related to
utility compensation methods, regulatory processes, and long-term utility system planning
Grid Modernization and Resilience: identifies pathways to modernize the electric grid to support
clean energy resources, and ways to establish and maintain grid resilience and flexibility
Clean Energy Deployment and Economic Development: focuses on methods to increase
customer access to clean energy resources, regulatory processes related to the way clean energy
resources are valued, and emerging areas that can create economic opportunities
Equitable Access and Just Transition: addresses methods to relieve the energy burden on low
income communities, provide job training, and develop a clean energy workforce
Energy Efficiency and Electrification Strategies: identifies approaches to electrify the
transportation sector and end-use sectors

Figure 15: CEP Strategy Areas

The CEP presents short-term (less than 12 months), mid-term (1-3 years), and longer-term actions (3-5
years) to work towards the goals identified above. These time periods, shown in Figure 16, serve as
indicators of priority items and activities that need to occur before related action(s) can take place.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

53

Figure 146: CEP Action Schedule

•

Short term actions: considered essential to enable other positive outcomes to occur and are
within the existing ability or authority of the implementing organization.

•

Medium term actions: considered just as important but may take longer to initiate or implement.

•

Long term actions: recognizes that it may take several years to take effect due to the level of
complexity, difficulty or authority needed to implement. Some long-term actions also consider
resources required for the implementing organization to carry out the activities.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

54

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.1 Carbon Reduction

Carbon Reduction

A-1

A. Decarbonize the
electric power
sector
A-2

Strategy Area

Carbon
Reduction

Deliver a report that recommends carbon-reduction policies and the specific design of such policies that
best advance core values, such as GHG emission reductions, electricity affordability, and grid reliability. The
report will evaluate policy designs for the following carbon reduction strategies:
1. Accelerated coal retirements,
2. Market-based carbon reduction program,
3. Clean energy policies, such as an updated REPS, clean energy standard, and EERS, and
4. A combination of these strategies.

Require integrated resource plans and distribution system plans to use portfolios and action plans that
incorporate a cost of carbon into the portfolio or plan that is selected for use by the utility.

Recommendation

A.
Decarbonize the
electric power sector

A-1
A-2

SHORT TERM

Legislature

Utilities
Governor's
State
Office
Agencies
Commission

•

IOU

CO-Ops / Public
Local
Academia Businesses
Utilities
Government

•
•

•

•
•

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

55

A. Decarbonize the electric power sector
Background and Rationale
NC’s GHG emissions goal under EO 80 is to reduce emissions by 40% from all economic sectors by
2025. During the CEP public engagement process, NC stakeholders recommended setting an additional
goal to “decarbonize” the electric power sector by 2050. While this goal is a steep challenge, many other
US cities and states have set this same decarbonization target. In fact, several electric utilities have set this
same goal. 67, 68 Duke Energy currently has a goal of reducing CO2 emissions from their electricity
generation fleet by at least 50% from 2005 levels by the year 2030 and net-zero carbon emissions by
2050. 69 Duke Energy generates most of the electricity consumed in NC. Dominion Energy serves over
120,000 customers in northeastern NC, and has set a goal to reduce CO2 emissions 80% by 2050 and
methane emissions from natural gas assets 50% by 2030. 70
66F

67F

68F

69F

NC has already reduced significant amounts of GHG emissions from the electric power sector. The
State’s Clean Smokestacks Act, REPS, PURPA and market drivers have decarbonized the electric power
sector at a faster pace than many other states. According to the most recent statewide inventory, GHG
emissions from the electric power sector have declined 34% relative to 2005 levels. 71 These reductions
have been achieved in the absence of explicit carbon policies in the State. DEQ estimates that with full
implementation of HB589, the GHG reduction level from the electric power sector will reach roughly
50% by 2025 and remain at this level out to 2030.
70F

In order to further decarbonize the electricity generation sector as recommended by the CEP stakeholders,
NC could choose (1) clean energy programs that remove uneconomical fossil generation and increase the
use of cleaner energy resources, (2) carbon policy driven approaches that include targets for emission
reductions and create a market for generating revenue, or (3) a hybrid approach that combines both clean
energy and carbon policies. 72 Many states have proposed and implemented similar policies and programs
that increase clean electricity generation while also reducing emissions of CO2.
71F

Table 4 shows the different approaches evaluated in support of the CEP. These approaches are based on
the results of high level, predictive, electricity sector modeling exercises conducted by Resources for the
Future, Georgetown Climate Center, Natural Resources Defense Council, and NC State University. DEQ
conducted an analysis using the Eastern Regional Technical Advisory Committee’s (ERTAC’s) Electric
Generating Unit Tool. These modeling exercises and analysis projected the impacts to the electricity

Xcel Energy. (2018). “Xcel Energy aims for zero-carbon electricity by 2050”. December 4, 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.xcelenergy.com/stateselector?stateSelected=true&goto=%2Fcompany%2Fmedia_room%2Fnews_rele
ases%2Fxcel_energy_aims_for_zero-carbon_electricity_by_2050
68
Southern Co. (2018). “Planning for a low-carbon future”. Southern Company. April 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.southerncompany.com/content/dam/southern-company/pdf/corpresponsibility/Planning-for-a-lowcarbon-future.pdf
69
https://news.duke-energy.com/releases/duke-energy-aims-to-achieve-net-zero-carbon-emissions-by-2050
70
Dominion Energy comment letter to DEQ on the draft Clean Energy Plan.
71
NC Greenhouse Gas Inventory (1990-2030), NC Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Air Quality, January
2019, accessed at https://deq.nc.gov/energy-climate/climate-change/greenhouse-gas-inventory.
67

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

56

sector from applying five different program and policy scenarios that reduce CO2 emissions. The
scenarios are described in Table 4.
Table 4: Policy Scenarios Modeled for the Electricity Sector
Scenario Name

Description

Accelerate Fossil Retirement

All coal power plants retire by 2030 and
the generation shifts to non-emitting
sources

Expand REPS or Clean
Technology Standard

Requires a certain percentage of a utility's
retail electricity sales must come from
non- or low-emitting resources, energy
efficiency, or demand side measures.

Market-Based Carbon
Reduction Program

NC establishes a carbon reduction
program that is linked with similar
programs in other states and sets an initial
CO2 budget that declines each year by
3.0%.

Market-Based Carbon +
Clean Tech

A linked market-based carbon program in
a combination with a clean energy
technology standard.

Part 5 of the CEP Supporting Documents, titled Energy and Emissions Modeling, discusses in detail the
electricity sector modeling, the scenarios modeled, and the resulting impacts on the electricity sector. This
includes 2030 CO2 emissions estimates, electricity price impact (where available), and expected clean
energy generation levels for each scenario identified above. Key highlights are discussed below.
Highlights from Electricity Sector Modeling
Modeling analyses seek to answer key questions for evaluating potential policy actions. Given
assumptions about the future (e.g., costs of new technology, fuel prices, electricity demand), models first
establish a reference or business-as-usual case that projects how the electricity sector would evolve in the
absence of new policy. Will carbon emissions increase or decrease and by how much? What power plants
are likely to serve electricity demand in the future and will new generation sources be required? Are
existing power plants economical to retire? What share of the generation mix will be provided by each
type of generation? What are the expected impacts on electricity prices? Reference cases are important
because they provide a point of comparison for policy scenarios that project the impacts of new policy
actions.
While a reference case gives policy makers and stakeholders a sense of the future electricity sector
assuming least-cost decision-making, policy cases seek to identify the benefits and costs of new
programs, policies or actions. The modeling efforts detailed in Part 5 examined three types of policy
actions, alone or in combination:

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

57

1. Clean technology standard, renewable energy standard, or energy efficiency resource standard
aimed at increasing the amount of electricity purchased and produced by specified technologies
or increasing the amount of energy savings;
2. Carbon trading program limited to NC or linked to other similar state programs that make up the
multistate Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI); and
3. A policy that requires coal retirements and requires replacement capacity to be met with
renewables.
Each of the modeling organizations completed at least one reference case, and at least one policy case to
help understand the potential benefits and costs of specific policy actions. While the models and modeled
inputs vary across the different analyses, it is nevertheless possible to make some general, overarching
observations:
●

●
●

●

To achieve significant reductions beyond business as usual, the modeling suggests additional
action will be needed. The modeling indicates that without additional policy action, NC’s carbon
emissions are likely to increase or decrease slightly by 2030, depending on the analysis.
Emissions reductions can be achieved at low cost through a market-based carbon reduction
program, especially when the program is linked to those in other states.
Market-based carbon policies combined with policies to increase energy efficiency and renewable
energy can further reduce carbon emissions and increase deployment of clean energy resources in
NC.
The particular design of new policies is important and has noticeable impacts on potential
emissions reductions, wholesale and retail electricity cost impacts, capacity needs, generation
mix, increase in clean energy resources, implementation costs, electricity imports, and economic
benefits for the State.

Additional modeling analysis would help identify the particular policy designs of a market-based carbon
reduction program and complementary policies--such as updating NC’s REPS, establishing a clean
energy standard, or passing an energy efficiency resource standard--to maximize benefits and minimize
costs. Policy design includes elements such as level of stringency, parties covered by the policy,
compliance timeline, mitigation of imported fossil generation, and strategies for investing any revenue
generated.
NC Carbon Reduction Goal for the Electricity Sector
Based on the urgent need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, quantitative and qualitative analyses, and
stakeholder input, the CEP recommends an electricity-sector goal of 70% reduction in GHG emissions
relative to 2005 levels by 2030 and carbon-neutral by 2050. In achieving this goal, NC’s values such as
electricity affordability, equity, and reliability should be fully considered.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

58

Recommendations
A-1. Deliver a report that recommends carbon-reduction policies and the specific design of
such policies that best advance core values, such as GHG emission reductions, electricity
affordability, and grid reliability. The report will evaluate policy designs for the following
carbon reduction strategies:
1. Accelerated coal retirements,
2. Market-based carbon reduction program,
3. Clean energy policies, such as an updated REPS, clean energy standard, and
EERS, and
4. A combination of these strategies.
Based on current and projected operations of NC’s power plants, emissions of CO2 may decrease by 47%
by 2030. Electricity sector modeling (summarized in Part 5 of this Clean Energy Plan) provided during
development of the CEP indicates that NC will not reduce power sector greenhouse gas emissions 70%
below 2005 levels by 2030 without new policies. New policies are needed to achieve the levels of
greenhouse gas emissions required to meet this goal and a carbon-neutral power sector by 2050. The
policy design of carbon-reduction policies is critical to achieving outcomes consistent with the core
values of a significant and timely decline in greenhouse gas emissions, affordable electricity rates,
expanded clean energy resources, compliance flexibility, equity, and grid reliability.
Identifying the policy design of potential carbon and clean energy policies for NC involves consideration
of the following, informed by modeling as well as stakeholder input and analysis: projected impacts on
emission reductions of carbon dioxide and other pollutants, monitoring and record keeping requirements,
wholesale and retail prices, grid reliability, compliance flexibility, shifts in generation between fossil fuel,
clean energy and imports, equity, compatibility with federal regulatory requirements, legal authority, and
timeline for implementing the strategies identified.
In addition to the design elements discussed above, the individual policies have unique design elements
that should be addressed as discussed below.
An accelerated coal retirement policy design must consider uneconomical fossil fuel resources,
incremental benefits of retirement compared other options, whole sale and retail rate impacts, planned
lifespan of fossil resources at issue, cost-recovery associated with early retirements, economic and
environmental impacts of replacement energy resources, effects on electricity imports and exports, and
requirements for approval of new fossil fuel units. The elements of this policy should consider the NCUC
Order of August 27, 2019 (described below) and outcomes from recommendations B-1 and B-3 that
examines utility financing tools to accelerate retirement of uneconomic generation assets.
Key policy design elements for a market-based carbon reduction program include level of emission limit,
the scope of covered sources, distribution of emission allowances, investment of revenue generated from
the program, linking the program with similar programs in other states, technical platforms for
administering the program, and mechanisms for protecting ratepayers.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

59

Clean energy policy design elements for complementary policies include the type of applicable
technologies, the level of adoption required, compliance flexibility, any incentives for particular
technologies, compliance timelines, duration of the policy, and mechanisms for protecting ratepayers.
On August 27, 2019, the NCUC ordered DEC and DEP to conduct several different analyses related to its
IRPs which must be submitted by November 4, 2019. 73 The first involves modeling of 2030 CO2
reduction goals to be performed for their IRPs. Duke Energy is required to analyze carbon reduction
strategies including, 1) the implementation plan that results from DEC and DEP’s current CO2 reduction
goals, 2) modeling of the draft CEP reduction goal, and 3) a comparison with Duke’s current plans for
CO2 emissions reductions to the Governor’s EO 80 which states that “The State of NC will strive to
accomplish the following by 2025: Reduce statewide GHG emissions to 40% below 2005 levels.” The
NCUC also ordered DEC and DEP to provide an analysis showing whether continuing to operate each of
its coal plants is the least cost alternative compared to other supply side and demand side resource options
or fulfills some other purpose. The order also requires a more thorough analysis in its IRPs related to the
benefits of purchased power, alternative supply side resources, DSM and EE programs, batteries, and a
comprehensive set of resource options and combinations of resource options. Considering the timing
associated with this order, the policy design recommendations should fully consider the utility’s
submissions and related NCUC decisions when developing any policy designs.
72F

Electricity sector modeling indicates that market-based carbon reduction programs, clean energy policies
or a hybrid of both approaches are effective policies for achieving emission reductions in a low-cost
manner as well as other core values for the electricity sector. The design of these policies is critical to
their impact on emissions, generation, costs, equity, and other factors.

Table A-1: Actions for Recommendation A-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
medium, or long term)

DEQ / Academia

DEQ will enlist assistance from academic institutions Short term
to deliver a report to the Governor by December 31,
2020, that recommends carbon reduction policies and
the specific design of those policies to best advance
core values—including a significant and timely
decline in greenhouse gas emissions, affordable
electricity rates, expanded clean energy resources,
compliance flexibility, equity, and grid reliability.
The report will evaluate policy designs for the
following: (1) accelerated coal retirements, (2) a
market-based carbon reduction program, (3) clean
energy policies such as an updated REPS, an EERS

Order of August 27, 2019, “In the Matter of the Biennial Integrated Resource Plan and Related 2018 REPS
Compliance Plans”, NCUC Docket E-100, Sub 157
73

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

60

and clean energy standard, and a (4) a combination of
these policy options.
Legislature/DEQ

Take legislative and regulatory action to implement Medium term
the policy designs recommended in the above report.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

61

A-2. Require integrated resource plans and distribution system plans to use portfolios and
action plans that incorporate a cost of carbon into the portfolio or plan that is selected for
use by the utility.
Investor owned utilities in NC must submit an IRP on a regular basis. An IRP is a plan for meeting future
electricity needs that reviews all available supply-side and demand-side options and shows how the
resource portfolio for electricity generation, transmission and distribution is expected to evolve over a
specified planning period, typically 15 years. The resource portfolio chosen for the plan must result in a
least cost system. In other states, utilities have recently begun to develop distribution system plans. These
plans examine how DERs, including EE, demand response, distributed generation, batteries, and electric
vehicles, may impact the grid, including providing reliability and resiliency services.
The utility commissions of multiple states are now requiring the use of a carbon price, a social cost of
carbon, or a zero emissions credit in order to facilitate a resource planning process that accounts for the
global impact of GHG emissions from fossil fuel combustion. This type of approach allows market based
decision making in the resource planning process. States using this type of approach include California,
Minnesota, Washington, New York, Colorado, and Illinois. Each state has a different approach to
estimating and including these costs.
On September 17, 2019, Duke Energy announced new goals of reducing carbon emissions from their
electric generation fleet by 50% by 2030, and achieving “net-zero” carbon emissions by 2050. At the
time that this Plan was finalized, the details of how the company’s new goals would affect future resource
plans and other actions taken by the company were not clear. 74
73F

In recent years, the IRPs submitted by Duke Energy Carolinas (DEC), Duke Energy Progress (DEP) and
Dominion have included planning scenarios that contain a cost of carbon in response to proposed federal
carbon regulations. Since June of 2014, the US EPA has been in the process of writing and finalizing
regulations regarding CO2 emissions from fossil fuel power plants. The current EPA methods have a very
low social cost of carbon, ranging from $1 to $8 per ton. This low cost does not significantly impact the
IRP process. When a carbon price of sufficient value is included in the planning process, low-emitting or
zero-emitting resources are favored over higher emitting resources.
Duke Energy and Dominion are investing considerable amounts in the construction of new natural gas
pipeline infrastructure. The cost of this infrastructure will be passed onto electricity ratepayers in NC.
These costs are currently not accounted for in the IRP process. Also not accounted for are the costs of
carbon emissions associated with the construction and use of the pipeline itself. The IRP process could be
modified to include these costs in the costs for building natural gas power plants.
The base price and high price for CO2 used in the 2018 IRPs for DEC and DEP are as follows:

74

•

Base CO2 Price – Intrastate CO2 tax starting at $5/ton in 2025 and escalating at $3/ton annually
that was applied to all carbon emissions ($20/ton in 2030).

•

High CO2 Price – Intrastate CO2 tax starting at $5/ton in 2025 and escalating at $7/ton annually
that was applied to all carbon emissions ($40/ton in 2030).

https://news.duke-energy.com/releases/duke-energy-aims-to-achieve-net-zero-carbon-emissions-by-2050

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

62

The 2018 DEC and DEP IRPs present two base cases for planning; a carbon constraint resource portfolio
and a no carbon constraint resource portfolio. While Duke Energy develops these two different resource
portfolios, the NCUC requires a least-cost resource portfolio. The cost of carbon is not consistently
incorporated into this least cost planning.
Table A-3: Actions for Recommendation A-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
medium, or long
term)

NCUC and Duke Energy

1) Establish a method to monetize CO2 emissions to meet
a CO2 emission reduction goal of 70% by 2030. Begin
including this carbon cost in IRPs starting in 2020.

Short term

2) Require the use of carbon pricing in any selected
resource or action plan starting in 2020. This is
occasionally being done voluntarily; for example, in the
2018 IRP, DEC selected a preferred portfolio with a
carbon price, but DEP did not.
3) Include any costs associated with building a natural gas
pipeline that will be passed on to NC electricity rate payers
by the electric utilities.
DEQ

Serve as technical resource to the NCUC regarding above
activities.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

Short term

63

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

64

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.2 Utility Incentives &
Comprehensive System Planning
Utility Incentives &
Comprehensive
System Planning

B. Modernize
utility tools &
incentives

B-1

Launch a North Carolina energy process with representatives from key stakeholder groups to design policies that
align regulatory incentives and processes with 21st Century public policy goals, customer expectations, utility
needs, and technology innovation.

B-2

Encourage use of pilot programs or other methods for testing and evaluating components of a performancebased regulatory framework.

B-3

When authorizing “securitization” as a utility financing tool, include uneconomic generation assets in the scope
of what can be securitized.

B-4 Initiate a study on the potential costs and benefits of different options to increase competition in the electricity
generation, including but not limited to joining an existing wholesale market and allowing retail energy choice.

C-1

C. Comprehensive
utility system
planning

C-2
C-3

Establish comprehensive utility system planning process that connects generation, transmission, and
distribution planning in a holistic, iterative and transparent process that involves stakeholder input throughout,
starting with a Commission-led investigation into desired elements of utility distribution system plans.

Expand cost-benefit methodologies used to make decisions about resources and programs to include societal
and environmental factors.
Implement competitive procurement of resources by investor-owned utilities.

Strategy Area

Legislature

Recommendation

B-1

Utility Incentives
and Comprehensive
System Planning

B.
Modernize utility
tools and incentives

C.
Require
comprehensive
utility system
planning processes

Utilities
Governor's State
Commission
Office
Agencies

•

B-3

•

B-4

•

Local
Academia Businesses
Government

•

•
•

C-1

•

C-2

•

C-3

•

SHORT TERM

CO-Ops / Public
Utilities

•

•

B-2

IOU

•

•

•

•

•

•

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

65

•

B. Modernize utility tools and incentives
Background and Rationale
The traditional utility regulatory model in the US effectively achieved many of the policy objectives it
was meant to. The ability to raise low-cost capital allowed regulated IOUs to build out a nationwide
electric grid, and the regulatory model in use for the past 100+ years has led to reliable, nearly universal
service, at generally stable rates. However, new public policy priorities and emerging trends are forcing
reconsideration of the utility’s responsibilities, now expanding to include new expectations for
environmental performance, carbon reduction, customer choice, resilience, equity, and adapting to (or
enabling) sector-wide innovation, among others, while retaining long-standing responsibilities such as
reliability and affordability. These new demands are highlighting the limitations of the traditional utility
incentive methods, forcing the industry to rethink how regulations can be updated to achieve new policy
goals, as well as meet evolving grid and customer needs.
In NC, as in many other states, the existing regulatory structure encourages utilities to sell more kilowatthours of electricity and to invest in utility-owned capital infrastructure. These incentives do not
necessarily lead to the least-cost and highest-value solution for customers. For example, distributed
technologies now have the potential to substitute for conventional utility infrastructure solutions, but the
current utility business incentive structure discourages utilities from selecting those options even if it
would save customers money. The combination of declining load growth in the state, 75 significant cost
declines for distributed resources, and necessary upgrades to system infrastructure is putting increasing
strain on the current utility business. The state’s utilities need a way to maintain their financial health and
ability to access low-cost capital in a future where customers have growing options to reduce energy use,
shift to on-site energy production, and are demanding more control over where their energy comes from.
For example, in recent years the cost of clean energy has fallen so much that there is now evidence that
existing utility coal assets in NC are no longer economic, meaning that customers would actually save
money if the utility was able to accelerate the closure of those units and invest in renewable generation to
meet demand instead. 76
74F

75F

These trends are not unique to NC. A growing number of states are investigating the appropriate steps to
take to move toward a regulatory model that better aligns utility profit-making incentives with societal
objectives and removes the bias toward capital investments. 77 Revisiting how a utility earns revenues is a
foundational step that can impact the successful implementation of all other strategy areas in this report.
Indeed, many stakeholders in the CEP process identified the successful implementation of actions in this
strategy area as enabling most of the other recommendations in the Plan.
76F

The NC Utilities Commission reported that between 2016 and 2017, electricity sales from the State’s three
investor owned utilities declined by 2.7% while the growth rate of new customers increased by 0.34 – 1.57%. NC
Utilities Commission, Major Activities Through December 2018 With Statistical And Analytical Data Through
2017, Volume XLIX, 2018 Report.
76
Gimon, Eric, et al. The Coal Cost Crossover: Economic Viability of Existing Coal Compared to New Local Wind
and Solar Resources, Energy Innovation and Vibrant Clean Energy, March 2019. Available at:
https://energyinnovation.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Coal-Cost-Crossover_EnergyInnovation_VCE_FINAL.pdf
77
States include Hawaii, Minnesota, New York, Illinois, Rhode Island, Colorado, and Nevada.
75

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

66

Recommendations
B-1. Launch a NC energy process with representatives from key stakeholder groups to
design policies that align regulatory incentives and processes with 21st Century public
policy goals, customer expectations, utility needs, and technology innovation.
Updating NC’s energy regulatory framework for 21st Century public policy goals, customer
expectations, utility needs, and technology innovation will help the state realize its clean energy future.
NC faces challenges on issues such as regulatory incentives, integration of distributed generation,
transparent and efficiency regulatory processes, and holistic resource planning. Through the course of
meetings and conversations for development of this Clean Energy Plan, some stakeholders called for an
ongoing process outside traditional legislative and energy regulatory forums to work through large
energy policy topics.
This energy process can involve an ongoing series of meetings among representatives of key
stakeholder groups to find common ground on transformative energy-related topics. Through this
process, stakeholders can tackle pressing issues by identifying shared principles and priority action
areas and then working together to develop specific policy recommendations for delivery to the NC
General Assembly, NC Utilities Commission, and other bodies, as appropriate. The group should
address performance-based ratemaking as an action area and develop specific objectives and
implementation recommendations for a new outcome-driven regulatory framework in NC. Under this
action area, multi-year rate planning, 78 performance incentive mechanisms, 79 revenue decoupling, 80
shared savings mechanisms, 81 and retirement of uneconomic generation assets 82 should be addressed.
77F

80F

78F

79F

81F

Multi-year rate plans (MYRP) fix the time between utility rate cases and compensate utilities based on forecasted
efficient expenditures or external market factors rather than historical costs of service. Multi-year rate plans use an
attrition relief mechanism (ARM) to provide timely, predictable rate escalation during the period between rate cases.
This escalation is based on cost forecasts, industry cost trends or both, rather than the utility’s specific costs. MYRP
are an effective tool at incentivizing utilities to control costs between rate cases and have been used successfully by
a variety of jurisdictions. See citation below for examples. While MYRP can be implemented in isolation, they are
often paired with performance incentive mechanisms, which can help ensure that undesirable outcomes are avoided
(e.g., utilities cutting costs that are actually beneficial to ratepayers in an effort to increase profits) and that desirable
outcomes are achieved (e.g., reduced interconnection time, carbon emissions reductions, etc.). See Lowry, Mark, et
al. State Performance-Based Regulation Using Multiyear Rate Plans for U.S. Electric Utilities, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory. July 2017.
78

Performance incentive mechanisms create a financial incentive for a utility to achieve performance outcomes and
targets consistent with customer and public policy interests.
80
Revenue decoupling breaks the link between the amount of energy a utility delivers to customers and the revenues
it collects. Decoupling mechanisms help to remove the utility’s current incentive to sell more energy in order to
increase revenue by making adjustments based on actual sales to ensure that the utility earns its revenue
requirement.
81
Shared savings mechanisms reward the utility for reducing expenditures from a baseline or projection by allowing
the utility to retain some of the savings as profit, while passing some savings to consumers.
82
Tools to accelerate retirement of uneconomic generation assets adjust rates to speed up the depreciation of an asset
so the utility and its customers are not left with stranded costs when an asset retires early; securitization can
79

refinance uneconomic utility-owned assets by creating a debt security or bond to pay down an early-retiring plant’s

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

67

Additional priority action areas may include energy sector planning, regulatory processes, and customer
options around clean energy generation and energy savings. Additional priority action areas may
include energy sector planning, regulatory processes, and customer options around clean energy
generation and energy savings.
The energy process can be facilitated by an objective third-party with extensive experience in the
energy sector, involvement with similar processes in other states, and an understanding of NC’s energy
sector. To develop recommendations with broad buy-in, the process can include representatives from
various stakeholder groups and produce work products for public input before submission to the
applicable body.
Table B-1: Actions for Recommendation B-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or Long
term)

Governor’s Office

Convene an energy process to align energy
regulatory incentives with 21st Century public
policy goals, customer expectations, utility
needs, and technology innovation, by
addressing topics such as performance-based
ratemaking, multi-year rate planning, and
revenue decoupling.
Implement legislation recommended by the
stakeholder process.

Short term

Legislature

Short to medium term

undepreciated capital balance. There are potentially multiple ways to define “uneconomic” and a decision
to pursue retirement of utility assets will need to be closely analyzed by the NCUC. For purposes of the
discussion in this report, uneconomic assets are those that could have their output replaced by other resources (or a
combination of resources) at an all-in cost that is lower than the existing resource’s current costs (both capital and
operating costs). That is, ceasing operation of an existing power plant and replacing it with another resource would
result in lower costs and risks to ratepayers.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

68

B-2. Encourage use of pilot programs or other methods for testing and evaluating
components of a performance-based regulatory framework.
Shifting to a more performance-based regulatory framework will require some extent of flexibility.
Depending on the outputs that result from the investigatory process described in the prior
recommendation, pilot programs and phased approaches to policy implementation provide opportunities
to test and refine specific regulatory mechanisms, such as performance incentive mechanisms and new
procurement practices. In order to be adaptive, there should be processes for evaluation built in to ensure
new mechanisms are working as intended. Performance metrics that measure and track utility data for
certain outcomes are a key, no-regrets tool to ensure that utility performance is improving after
implementing a given regulatory change. For example, testing a shared savings mechanism before fullscale implementation will provide an opportunity to ensure that the savings retained by the utility and
given to customers are well-balanced. Alternatively, using a phased approach to the development of new
performance incentive mechanisms could result in better informed targets and incentive levels that don’t
under- or over-compensate the utility.
Table B-2: Action for Recommendation B-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or Long
term)

NCUC

Require utilities to design pilots or other
phased approaches to testing regulatory
mechanisms that result from investigatory
process on utility business model reform*

Medium term

IOUs

Co-develop pilot proposals or phased
implementation approaches to test new
regulatory mechanisms with NCUC and
stakeholders

Medium term

*Depending on the approaches recommended by the stakeholder process, the NCUC may need to be
given explicit authority by the legislature to pursue this recommendation.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

69

B-3. When authorizing “securitization” as a utility financing tool, include uneconomic
generation assets in the scope of what can be securitized
As of the writing of the Clean Energy Plan, pending legislation (Senate Bill 559), would create a new
financing tool known as securitization that may be used to recover storm restoration costs. Using this
financing tool, the utility could issue storm recovery bonds with lower financing costs that are secured
through a dedicated storm recovery charge that is separate and distinct from the utility's base rate.
Securitization typically benefits utilities and customers. Utilities benefit because they receive an
immediate source of cash from the bond proceeds and customers benefit because the cost of securitized
debt is lower than the utility's cost of debt, which reduces the impact on their monthly bills.
As described in the recommendation above, states are allowing securitization to be used to accelerate the
retirement of uneconomic generation assets. 83 Instead of issuing storm recovery bonds, a bond that is
equal to a retired plant’s undepreciated capital balance would be sold to the public market. Proceeds from
bond sales could then be invested in clean energy projects that still earn a return for the utility or invested
in assistance for communities’ transitioning away from generating fossil fuels.
82F

Stakeholders in the Clean Energy Plan process identified securitization as an effective tool to help the
state meet the carbon reduction goals included in this plan. Any legislation allowing securitization to be
used as a financial tool by the utility should therefore include generation assets as eligible for cost
recovery and require utilities to use freed-up capital to invest in clean energy. Legislation should direct
NCUC to initiate a rulemaking to determine securitization details, such as:
•
•
•
•

Requirements for utility applications and approval
Which utility costs should be able to be recovered by securitization bonds
How certain percentages of freed-up capital should be spent, subject to legislative direction
regarding investments in clean energy
Restrictions on bond terms (e.g.,15–20 year term length, 3% interest rate)
Table B-3: Action for Recommendation B-3

Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature

Expand scope of costs eligible for
securitization in legislation to include
uneconomic generation assets; direct NCUC to
initiate and oversee proceeding focused on the
uses of securitization

Short term

NCUC

Initiate and oversee rulemaking to determine
details of securitization use cases

Short term

83

States include Colorado, New Mexico, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Montana.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

70

B-4. Initiate a study on the potential costs and benefits of different options to increase
competition in the electricity sector, including but not limited to joining an existing
wholesale market and allowing retail energy choice.
Since the 1990s, states across the country have been looking at ways that greater competition in electricity
generation can provide customers more reliable energy at lower costs. This has led to the emergence of
competitive wholesale and retail markets in several regions, sometimes referred to as the movement
toward “restructured” or “deregulated” markets. Wholesale markets can be found in Texas, California,
the Mid-Atlantic, parts of the Midwest, and the Northeast, covering approximately two-thirds of the US
population. At the retail level, thirteen states and the District of Columbia have implemented some form
of electricity consumer choice.
However, states do not necessarily need to have both competitive wholesale and retail electricity markets.
A number of states that are part of restructured wholesale markets do not have full retail access, such as
Kansas, Oklahoma, and Minnesota. It is also possible for states to have retail electricity choice but not
participate in a wholesale electricity market. For example, Georgia and Oregon both have retail
electricity choice for large commercial and industrial consumers, but those states are not part of any
restructured wholesale power market. 84
83F

In the 1990s, federal lawmakers introduced wholesale electricity markets following a period of poor
generator performance and escalating prices as new, high-cost generating plants came online. 85 The
wholesale markets were designed to meet short- and long-term requirements for grid reliability at the
lowest cost. Federal policymakers saw competition among electricity suppliers as a means to control
prices by attracting new sources of private investment for newer, less expensive technologies. 86 The
clearing price for electricity in wholesale markets is determined by an auction in which generation
resources offer a price at which they can supply a specific number of MWh of power. This results in
lowest-cost power sources, wherever they are located, providing electricity to wherever it is needed,
spanning over a wide region.
84F

85F

Many states that pursued restructuring of the generation aspect of the utility business also required that
utilities divest their ownership in generation capacity. That capacity was converted from utility ownership
to independent power producer status, effectively transitioning those assets from the traditional cost-ofservice regulation model to a market-based model under which they earn a market price for their output. 87
86F

Zhou, Shengru. An Introduction to Retail Electricity Choice in the United States. United States: N. p., 2017. Web.
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/68993.pdf
85
A wholesale market refers to the buying and selling of power between generators and resellers. Resellers include
electricity utility companies, competitive power providers, and electricity marketers. For most regions within the
United States, the operation of and transactions in wholesale markets are regulated by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission. A wholesale market allows generators to connect to the grid and generate electricity after
securing the necessary approval. The electricity produced by generators is bought by an entity that will often, in
turn, resell that power to meet end-user demand.
86
PJM Factsheet, “The Value of Markets”, downloaded from: https://www.pjm.com/-/media/aboutpjm/newsroom/fact-sheets/the-value-of-pjm-markets.ashx
87
Borenstein, S, Bushnell, JB. The U.S. Electricity Industry after 20 Years of Restructuring. Annu. Rev. Econ. 7:
Submitted. Doi: 10.1146/annureveconomics-080614-115630.
Available at: https://ei.haas.berkeley.edu/research/papers/WP252.pdf
84

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

71

It is not necessary to require divestiture of generation assets by utilities in order for a state to pursue
membership in a wholesale market, but it is an option that increases competition.
Increased competition in the supply of energy could potentially benefit North Carolina’s utilities and
customers by driving down electricity prices and generating innovation through increased competition
among power generators, maintaining a more reliable grid by expanding generation options, and
advancing a cleaner grid by leveraging regionally available renewable resources. However, these
outcomes are not a given and therefore any action taken by the state to deregulate aspects of the utility
industry should be studied, as recommended below.
NC explored deregulation in the early 2000s and determined to be in the state’s best interest to remain in
a regulated market. The NC Association of Electric Cooperatives and its members do not support
deregulation due to its potential impact to serving members and contributing to a rural-urban divide.
States and utilities have widely used quantitative assessments to evaluate whether joining wholesale
markets could be net beneficial for affected utilities and customers. Examples include:
•

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and Entergy’s retail regulators held a
technical conference in Charleston, South Carolina in 2009 that was attended by Entergy and
many of the entities that purchase and/or sell energy in the Entergy region. FERC agreed to fund
a study on the costs and benefits of Entergy and Cleco Power joining the Southwest Power Pool
(SPP). The cost-benefit analysis was performed over a seven-month period, and included an open
and collaborative discussion with stakeholders on the study framework, modeling approach, input
assumptions, interim results, and qualitative issues. Based on the analysis performed, the study
concluded that Entergy and Cleco Power joining the SPP RTO will yield significant economic
benefits to the collective SPP/Entergy region. 88
87F

•

The Mountain West Transmission Group (MWTG) is an informal collaboration of electricity
service providers that are working to develop strategies to adapt to the changing electric industry.
Based on the results of extensive evaluations, MWTG decided to focus its attention on seeking
membership in an existing RTO. In January 2017, MWTG announced it was entering into
discussions with SPP as the next step in exploring potential RTO membership. As part of the 5stage new member integration process, SPP staff performed an analysis of the costs and benefits
resulting from MWTG membership impacts to current SPP members. 89
88F

•

Multiple utility-specific assessments of the costs and benefits of joining the Western Energy
Imbalance Market (EIM) have been conducted since the EIM was created in 2014. 90 The EIM is
a real-time power market in the Western United States that balances supply and demand over a
large geographic area, finding the lowest-cost energy to serve demand. Individual utilities can
decide to join the EIM and many have conducted studies of the costs and benefits of doing so.
89F

“Cost-Benefit Analysis of Entergy and Cleco Power Joining the SPP RTO.” Prepared for the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission by Charles River Associates and Resero Consulting. September 30, 2010. Available at:
https://www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/rto/spp/spp-entergy-cba-report.pdf
89
“10-Year Costs and Benefits to SPP Members of Integrating Mountain West Transmission Group.” Prepared by
SPP Staff. March 19, 2018. Available at:
https://www.spp.org/documents/56652/mwtg%20cba%20report%20for%20spp%20members%20mar-19-2018.pdf
90
Recent examples of utility studies of joining the EIM can be found on the EIM website:
https://www.westerneim.com/Pages/JoinEIM.aspx
88

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

72

The Legislature could authorize a study that assesses the costs and benefits of different options the state
has to increase competition in electricity generation, to determine which if any, could provide greater
benefits to NC customers than the status quo. It will be important for any such study to carefully examine
the potential trade-offs of various options and the possible impacts of those options on NC’s priorities,
such as increasing clean energy deployment, enhancing affordability, and maintaining reliability.
The consultant-led study could also look at other options for increasing competition in electricity supply,
such as in retail energy supply. Retail electricity choice in the United States allows end-use customers
(including industrial, commercial, and residential customers) to buy electricity from competitive retail
suppliers. 91 Similar to wholesale markets, retail electricity choice was introduced with the idea that
increased competition would result in lower prices, improved service, and innovative product offerings.
Some argue that a competitive environment also results in suppliers offering more clean energy options to
customers as a way to differentiate themselves from their competitors.
90F

Table B-4: Actions for Recommendations B-4
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature / DEQ

Authorize a consultant-led study that assesses
the costs and benefits of different options the
state has to increase competition in electricity
generation, to determine which if any, could
provide greater benefits to NC customers than
the status quo.

Medium or long term

Zhou, Shengru. An Introduction to Retail Electricity Choice in the United States. United States: N. p., 2017. Web.
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/68993.pdf
91

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

73

C. Require comprehensive utility system planning processes
Background and Rationale
Across the country, states are reforming the utility planning process. As the electricity system becomes
more dynamic, there is a growing need to move towards more comprehensive planning processes that
take into account the different layers of the grid. Streamlining traditionally disparate and serial tasks
related to planning and procurement into a unified process can allow system planners to optimize
investments in generation, distribution, and transmission.
Utilities and their customers, as well as third parties, can derive substantial benefits from comprehensive
planning, including:
•
•
•

Lowered system costs to reduce rate pressure in a low load growth environment;
More cost-effective programs and procurements; and
Enhanced utility, customer, and DER provider relationships as interest in DER continues to
grow. 92
91F

Improved planning can give customers and developers the opportunity to propose, provide, and be
compensated for grid services, while experiencing more efficient and predictable interconnection
processes. Regulators can benefit from increased transparency and data access for optimal solution
identification and more meaningful engagement with utilities and other stakeholders. 93
92F

NC’s current path of incremental improvements to a traditional planning process is not adequate to meet
the challenges of integrating high renewable and distributed energy penetrations, which are, in turn,
necessary for the state to achieve goals set out in this plan related to economic growth, long term
affordability and price stability, and carbon reductions. The state’s current IRP process does not include
explicit clean energy goals, 94 which could inhibit the ability of the energy sector to achieve clean energy
and environmental goals. Additionally, the current IRP process does not include transparency in its goalsetting and lacks rules governing stakeholder involvement prior to IRP submissions. 95 The NCUC is
currently looking at ways to expand the scope of utilities’ IRP processes, but there are more holistic
approaches to planning for generation, distribution, and transmission resources that should be considered.
93F

94F

Duke Energy has acknowledged it needs to update its planning processes and has already begun
developing an Integrated System Operations Plan (ISOP). 96 Duke Energy has stated that it is important to
95F

Volkmann, Curt. Integrated Distribution Planning: A Path Forward, GridLab, April 2019. (Volkmann, Integrated
Distribution Planning: A Path Forward)
93
Id.
94
Notable legislative exceptions include HB 589 and Clean Smokestacks.
95
Utility System Planning and Investment Stakeholder Group Memo.
96
Duke Energy introduced its Integrated System Operations Planning (ISOP) initiative in its 2018 Integrated
Resource Plans. ISOP is focused on developing modeling tools and analytical processes that will complement the
existing IRP processes and tools and ultimately allow for optimizing capacity and energy resource investments
across Generation, Transmission, Customer Delivery and Customer Solutions. An important objective of this effort
is to enhance modeling of non-traditional solutions for Distribution and Transmission Planning so that multiple
types of value can be captured. Duke indicates that they plan to hold stakeholder engagement sessions to share
92

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

74

get input from customers and other stakeholders as they seek to enhance and further integrate planning
processes and are working toward launching a stakeholder process focused on an ISOP model, as
announced at the Grid Modernization stakeholder webinar in April of 2019. 97
96F

NC can look to states already developing and implementing holistic planning processes, which balance
the goals of the state, utilities, and stakeholders. Key examples include Minnesota, Nevada, and Hawaii:
•

In 2015, the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission opened an inquiry into distribution planning
(Docket 15-556), aiming to incorporate DER with the appropriate optimization tools and create a
transparent grid leading to an enhanced grid, reduce costs, and a more flexible and DER capable
system. Ultimately, the multi-year process now requires the regulated utilities (Xcel Energy) to
develop DER growth scenarios for 10 years, evaluate non-wire alternatives, detail DER queue
status, and file annual updates on their 5 and 10-year distribution investment plans. 98
97F

•

Nevada’s legislature passed a bill in 2017 (SB 146) to address distributed resources along with
their cost, benefits, financial compensation mechanisms, integration, and barriers to adoption. The
Public Utilities Commission began the rulemaking process in 2017 (Docket 17-08022) leading to
an adopted Distributed Resource Plan regulation. The regulation requires a system load/DER
forecast, locational net benefit analysis, hosting capacity analysis, and grid needs assessment,
filed every 3 years with the IRP. 99
98F

•

Hawaii’s IOU (Hawaiian Electric) started developing its Integrated Grid Planning (IGP) process
in 2018 (Docket 2018-0165), a program which incorporates generation, distribution, and
transmission planning. The IGP process includes utilization of a capacity expansion model, a
substation load and capacity analysis, hosting capacity analysis, and extensive stakeholder input.
The IGP process will produce a 5-year action plan and a long-term pathway to achieve the
legislative goal of 100% renewable energy. 100
99F

information regarding ISOP with stakeholders and gather input regarding the approach, using a third-party facilitator
selected jointly by Duke and the NCUC Public Staff.
97
Utility System Planning and Investment Stakeholder Group Memo, Addendum: Duke Energy’s Ongoing
Integrated System Operations Planning (ISOP) Efforts.
98
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, “Order Approving Integrated Distribution Planning Requirements for
Xcel Energy,” August 30, 2018 (“Order Approving Integrated Distribution Planning Requirements for Xcel
Energy”).
99
Nevada Public Utilities Commission, “Order on Commission’s Investigation and Rulemaking to Implement
Senate Bill 146.” September 6, 2018.
100
Hawaiian Electric, Integrated Grid Planning. Accessible at: https://www.hawaiianelectric.com/clean-energyhawaii/integrated-grid-planning
NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

75

Recommendations
C-1. Establish comprehensive utility system planning process that connects generation,
transmission, and distribution planning in a holistic, iterative and transparent process that
involves stakeholder input throughout, starting with a Commission-led investigation into
desired elements of utility distribution system plans.
To respond and adapt to the many trends and forces changing the electricity sector today, it is necessary
that NC move to a more holistic, iterative, and transparent planning process that incorporates nontraditional market solutions, which could lower generation and infrastructure costs while still maintaining
a clean, reliable, and affordable electricity system. Planning processes should be consistent, data-driven,
and involve stakeholders’ input and feedback throughout.
An improved planning process could be enabled by the NC legislature and overseen by the NCUC.
Legislation could define goals, necessary steps, and what roles the NCUC will play, giving explicit
authorization where it is currently vague or lacking under existing law.
One feasible way to get started on a process to move toward a more holistic electricity sector planning
process would be to initially begin an investigation into the desired elements of an Integrated Distribution
Plan (IDP). The links between IDP, IRP, and transmission planning could be explored throughout this
investigation. 101 Options and best practices to consider through an IDP include:
100F

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Explicit consideration of the impacts from all DER types, including EE and demand response, in
load forecasting and transmission, distribution and integrated resource planning.
Enhanced forecasting to reflect the uncertainties of DER growth and its impact on load and peak
demands.
Analysis of the distribution systems’ constraints and needs, as well as the ability to accommodate
DER without requiring upgrades (i.e., hosting capacity analyses).
Identification of locational value for nodes on the distribution system where DER deployment
could provide grid services. 102
Consideration of third-party DER or portfolios of DER to address grid needs as non-wires
alternatives (NWA).
Acquisition of NWA grid services from customers and third parties using pricing, programs or
procurement.
Active monitoring, management and optimization of DER.
Streamlined DG interconnection processes using insights from the distribution system capacity
analyses.
Increased external transparency through enhanced data availability and meaningful stakeholder
engagement. 103
101F

102F

The connections between these three types of planning processes, and ways to find synergies and streamline the
processes in order to make them more efficient and effective are currently the subject of a Task Force of states
convened by NARUC and NASEO. NC’s NCUC, DEQ and Public Staff are participants in this Task Force and may
have ideas and lessons learned from that process to bring to bear on any IDP process launched by the state.
102
Analysis of locational value should include both the costs and benefits of the resource where it exists on the
system and any impacts it might have on the bulk electric system.
103
Volkmann, Curt. Integrated Distribution Planning: A Path Forward, GridLab, April 2019. (Volkmann,
Integrated Distribution Planning: A Path Forward)
101

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

76

Ultimately, the State should move towards an Integrated System Operations Plan (ISOP) approach, which
combines resource, transmission, distribution planning. The ISOP processes should include regularly
scheduled plan submissions to allow for stakeholder intervention early and throughout the process. These
submissions should utilize existing analytical tools, as well as improved data and modeling access for
industry and stakeholders.
While the NCUC is addressing some of these new planning approaches in its current IRP proceeding
(Docket No. E-100, Sub 157), 104 and the NC Transmission Planning Collaborative (NCTPC) 105 is
focusing on enhancing transmission planning in the state, the NCUC should initiate a separate process to
create the guidelines for future comprehensive system planning, initially focusing on distribution
planning. The outputs of this process can then feed into existing processes, such as NCUC’s IRP
proceeding, Duke’s ISOP efforts, and NCTPC’s discussions, as appropriate.
103F

104F

Table C-1: Actions for Recommendation C-1
Entity Responsible

Actions

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

NCUC

Initiate and oversee comprehensive system
planning process with meaningful stakeholder
participation, starting with integrated
distribution planning, including identifying key
steps and timelines

Medium term

All

Work with NCUC in designing and
implementing comprehensive system planning
process

Medium term

Co-ops and Municipal
Utilities

NCEMC and ElectriCities develop a process and
guidance for member companies to undertake
more comprehensive planning

Medium term

NCUC has scheduled a Technical Conference in late August 2019 that will focus on expanding the scope of the
IRP process, including ways to identify the locational value of DERs.
105
NC Transmission Planning Collaborative: http://www.nctpc.org/nctpc/
104

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

77

C-2. Expand cost-benefit methodologies used to make decisions about resources and
programs to include societal and environmental factors.
State public utility commissions have typically employed a ‘least cost’ framework for assessing whether a
utility’s investment is prudent. Under the least cost framework, the optimal choice is the least cost
investment after accounting for other factors such as reliability, state renewable energy or EE mandates,
other legal obligations, and a range of risk factors. Least cost is not a rigid standard, however. The
approach allows utility regulators to exercise discretion to choose among sources of information,
desirable outcomes, and risk assessments. New information, changing market conditions, more stringent
regulations, and emerging technologies can all alter the math. 106
105F

Identifying least cost investment options that will be in service over the next one to two decades is
particularly complex due to the increased level of uncertainty regarding technology, markets, and
regulation. If projections used in long-term planning do not consider the potential cost impacts of
changing policy circumstances, such as the potential for policy shifts to require utilities to internalize
environmental externalities, the planning process may not be producing the least-cost outcomes in the
long-term.
To achieve NC’s carbon reduction goals, utilities need to update planning assumptions, as well as
program cost-effectiveness methodologies, to allow for more complete quantification of the operational
benefits of energy and technology resources, including societal and environmental factors that may be
hard to monetize. Benefit-cost analyses also should take into account locational and temporal values,
when available, to provide a more granular assessment of proposed investments.
For resources to be more accurately accounted for in utility planning and programs, regulators should
consider a range of non-energy benefits, including the following list. A final list of non-energy benefits
will be derived from a process that includes stakeholder input and involvement
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Increased system resilience, reliability, and safety
Reduced customer costs; especially for low-income, disadvantaged communities
Increased customer satisfaction
Health impacts
Increased customer flexibility and choice
Enhanced social equity or environmental justice
Environmental benefits, such as avoided GHG emissions
Economic development benefits, such as job growth
Physical and cyber security

Rhode Island and California both have recently updated what benefits and costs should be considered in
program evaluation and planning and could be considered by NC in an investigation into this topic: 107
106F

Public Comments submitted by Jonas Monast, UNC Chapel Hill, School of Law
In addition, Arkansas, Connecticut, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, and Washington all are exploring
how to update current cost-effectiveness procedures to account for an expanded set of benefits and costs. See:
106
107

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

78

•

In 2016, the Rhode Island Public Utilities Commission opened a docket to get stakeholder input
on (a) new rate design principles and concepts, and (b) cost-effectiveness for EE and other types
of DERs. 108 One of the reasons for opening the docket was to develop a cost-effectiveness
framework that can be applied consistently across different types of ratepayer-funded resources
and programs. After months of stakeholder discussions, the Working Group recommended
expanding the Rhode Island Total Resource Cost (TRC) Test to include a broader range of
benefits to better align with its applicable state policies. The new cost-effectiveness test was
named “the Rhode Island Test” and includes: risk impacts, environmental impacts (including
GHG emissions reductions), jobs and economic development impacts, societal low-income
impacts, public health impacts, and energy security impacts. The Commission accepted the
recommendations of the Working Group, and directed the utility company to use the new Rhode
Island Test, to the extent possible, for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of EE, DERs, other
Company investments and spending.
107F

•

California utilities’ annual Grid Needs Assessment (GNA), which is part of its distribution
planning efforts, describes the performance requirements for any DER solution identified,
including the magnitude, duration and frequency of resources required to address each grid
need. The GNA uses a Locational Net Benefits Analysis (LNBA) framework, which includes a
broad range of system and societal benefits as the basis for determining the range of value at
each location. These benefits include: reliability and resiliency, avoided GHG emissions, and
other safety/societal benefits. 109
108F

Other resources are available to NC as it considers revisions to benefit-cost methodologies. For example,
the National Standard Practice Manual (NSPM) is a framework for cost-effectiveness assessments of
energy resources and is designed to help jurisdictions determine what resources meet their specific goals
and standards. 110 Another resource is the newly released US EPA “health benefits per-kilowatt hour”
tool which lays out region-specific values (in $/kWh) of the outdoor air quality-related public health
benefits of investments in EE and clean energy (wind and solar). 111
109F

110F

Table C-2: Actions for Recommendation C-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

American Council for an Energy Efficiency Economy [ACEEE], A New Tool to Improve Energy Efficiency
Practices: The Database of State Efficiency Screening Practices [DSESP], July 2019.
108
Rhode Island Public Utilities Commission, Investigation into the Changing Electric Distribution System and the
Modernization of Rates in Light of the Changing Distribution System (Docket 4600), “Report and Order 22851,”
July 31, 2017.
109
California Public Utilities Commission, Order Instituting Rulemaking Regarding Policies, Procedures and Rules
for Development of Distribution Resources Plans Pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 769
(Rulemaking 14-08-013), “Decision on Track 3 Policy Issues, Sub-track 2,” March 22, 2018.
110
https://nationalefficiencyscreening.org/national-standard-practice-manual/
111
https://www.epa.gov/statelocalenergy/estimating-health-benefits-kilowatt-hour-energy-efficiency-and-renewableenergy
NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

79

NCUC

Initiate and oversee a process that is transparent
and open to all relevant stakeholders to update
benefit-cost methodologies used in decisionmaking about resources and programs; this
process could be a separate PUC
proceeding/investigation or be part of the
comprehensive planning process referenced in
the recommendation above and involve
opportunities for stakeholder input and
engagement*

Medium term

Co-ops and Municipal
Utilities

Initiate and oversee a process involving the
public and/or members to update benefit-cost
methodologies used in decision-making about
resources and programs

Medium term

* It is assumed that the NCUC has existing statutory authority to pursue this recommendation. In the event that it is
determined that the NCUC does not have sufficient authority, legislation would be needed to provide the appropriate
authority.

C-3. Implement competitive procurement of resources by investor-owned utilities
Many states, and the federal government through passage of laws like PURPA, the Energy Policy Act of
1992 and the Energy Policy Act of 2005, have recognized that the power generation aspect of electric
utility services is a competitive industry, and no longer ought to be viewed as a “natural monopoly.”
Some states have chosen to deregulate the power generation side of the utility business, which has
resulted in the creation of retail energy providers and regional transmission and generation dispatch
entities such as PJM Interconnection. Others have modified their integrated resource planning processes
to require utilities to consider non-utility generation in their planning processes by conducting
competitive procurement of needed resources. In this instance, a completed IRP becomes the precursor
for approval of the utility’s proposed means for meeting identified resource needs. A competitive
procurement model means that utility self-build options will be one option among many, with the utility
pursuing the option (which may come from a competitive supplier) that meets the identified need at the
least cost. This competition should result in the lowest cost investment being made, ensuring consumers
benefit from ultimately lower bills.
Oklahoma and Colorado are two states that have moved to a competitive procurement model for
resources. Oklahoma’s utility regulations governing IRPs set out procedures for “establishing the need
for additional resources serving as the basis for long-term competitive procurement of resources,
including, but not limited to, utility construction of new electric generation facilities, the utility purchase
of existing electric generation facilities, and the purchase of long-term power supplies.” 112 Similarly,
Colorado stipulates that an IRP filed by a utility shall include “the proposed RFP(s) the utility intends to
111F

112

Oklahoma Corporation Commission, Subchapter 37. Integrated Resource Planning.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

80

use to solicit bids for the resources to be acquired through a competitive acquisition process.” 113 NC
currently does not require utilities regulated by the Utilities Commission to undertake competitive
procurement of identified system needs in the IRP process.
112F

Table C-3: Actions for Recommendation C-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

NCUC

Amend IRP rules to include a requirement for
regulated utilities to utilize competitive
procurement processes to meet identified system
needs

Medium term

* It is assumed that the NCUC has existing statutory authority to pursue this recommendation. In the event that it is
determined that the NCUC does not have sufficient authority, legislation would be needed to provide the appropriate
authority.

Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies, Part 3: Rules Regulating Electric Utilities, 3064. Contents of the
Least-Cost Resource Plan
113

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

81

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.3 Grid Modernization and Resilience

Grid Modernization
and Resilience
D-1

D. Grid
modernization to
support clean
energy resources

D-2 Use comprehensive utility planning processes to determine the sequence, needed functionality, and costs
and benefits of grid modernization investments. Create accountability by requiring transparency, setting
targets, timelines and metrics of progress made toward grid modernization goals.

E-1

E. Grid resilience
and flexibility

When evaluating proposals for grid modernization, consider whether the following outcomes are
supported:
• Demonstrated net benefits for all proposed investments, including presentation of all costs and benefits
used in utility analyses,
• Enhanced transparency of regionally appropriate DERs, grid needs and opportunities for DERs to
interconnect,
• Increased customer access to their usage data and sources of energy,
• Facilitation of greater utilization of storage, demand-side resources, grid operation/management,
devices, and the bi-directional flow of power,
• Measurement of performance to ensure anticipated benefits are delivered and accounted for, and
• Increased deployment of clean energy.

Require utilities to develop projects focused on DERs, community solutions, and microgrids at state facilities
and critical infrastructure locations (e.g. hospitals, shelters) to enhance resilience.

E-2 Coordinate resilience planning with disaster recovery operations center and require NC Emergency

Management’s Recovery Support Functions to address cybersecurity concerns in conjunction with energy
resiliency issues.

E-3

Develop a method to quantify the human costs of power outages, and integrate these costs when
evaluating grid modernization plan components related to resiliency.

Strategy Area

Legislature

NCUC

Governor's
Office

State
Agencies

IOU

CO-Ops /
Local
Academia Businesses
Public Utilities Government

Recommendation

D.
Modernize the grid to
support clean energy
resources

Grid Modernization
and Resilience

E.
Strengthen the
resilience and flexibility
of the grid

D-1

•

•

D-2

•

•

E-1

•

•

•

•

E-2

•

•

•

•

E-3

•

•

SHORT TERM

•

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

•

82

D. Modernize the grid to support clean energy resources
Background and Rationale
Distributed energy resources, including EE, demand-side management, solar, and storage have the
potential to provide valuable services to the electricity grid and lower costs on the system while providing
customers with cleaner power and more control over their energy usage. These benefits along with the
falling costs of the technologies themselves are increasing customer and third-party interest in purchasing
or investing in these resources. In response, utilities across the U.S. are taking steps to modernize their
electric grids, which includes augmenting the grid with software and communications technologies to
help the grid meet the new customer, technological, and societal demands.
While NC’s adoption of distributed solar generation is still at modest levels, there is growing concern that
the grid needs to be upgraded and improved in order to accommodate DER growth and new load from the
electrification of end-uses in a way that supports what customers want, maintains reliability, and keeps
customer costs down. To carry this out, a thoughtful and methodical approach to grid modernization is
needed due to the significant capital expenditures and potential risks proposals may carry. While
investments to improve grid capabilities will likely be necessary to enable a clean and resilient electricity
system, transparency in grid planning processes can help ensure third parties and customers understand
why these investments are needed and what added value they provide to the system.

Recommendations
D-1. When evaluating proposals for grid modernization, consider whether the following
outcomes are supported:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Demonstrated net benefits for all proposed investments, including presentation of
all costs and benefits used in utility analyses,
Enhanced transparency of regionally appropriate DERs, grid needs and
opportunities for DERs to interconnect,
Increased customer access to their usage data and sources of energy,
Facilitation of greater utilization of storage, demand-side resources, grid
operation/management devices, and the bi-directional flow of power,
Measurement of performance to ensure anticipated benefits are delivered and
accounted for, and
Increased deployment of clean energy.

Duke Energy is currently working on a Grid Improvement Plan which they intend to file in 2019
alongside their next rate case. The NCUC will be the entity responsible for approving the plan and
granting cost recovery. The above outcomes emerged through the Clean Energy Plan’s stakeholder
process as important conditions to consider when evaluating grid modernization plans to maximize the
potential benefits of grid modernization investments and to protect against potential utility capital bias.
For an investment to be net beneficial, the benefits (which can include both monetized and non-monetized
benefits) from a particular investment should outweigh its complete set of costs. Transparency in cost

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

83

benefit analyses that shows what costs and benefits are accounted for and their magnitude allows for a
more diligent assessment of different technologies’ cost-effectiveness. Some proposed investments, such
as communication networks and grid automation equipment, may be necessary in order to enable other
desired functionality of the grid. In evaluating the costs and benefits of such investments, the importance
of sequencing and enabling future functionality should be considered.
As customers transform from mere consumers of energy to active participants in the electricity system,
utilities are expected to facilitate additional choices and options for customers as they seek out DER and
other services to manage their energy use and costs. Increasing access to data can provide customers with
the granular information they need to make more informed decisions about their energy consumption and
supply. A more distributed and diverse system will require utilities integrate both customer- and gridfacing technologies to enable a more dynamic grid, such as storage and programmable thermostats.
Operating a dynamic grid will require an increase in availability of transmission and distribution data to
enable adequate system monitoring, control, and protection. Transparency of current and anticipated grid
needs can streamline interconnection processes and better ensure that new technologies and distributed
resources are connected to the grid in areas that can most benefit from them.
Moreover, grid modernization plans should integrate mechanisms for accountability that ensure new grid
investments deliver optimized benefits to the grid, customers, and the industry as a whole.
While the NCUC is responsible for approving Duke Energy’s Grid Improvement Plan, the same criteria
can be applied to co-ops and municipal utilities, who are beginning to consider what grid modernization
investments may be necessary on their own systems.
Table D-1: Actions for Recommendation D-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

NCUC

Use recommended outcomes listed above to guide
evaluation of Duke’s Grid Improvement Plan

Short term

Co-ops and Municipal
Utilities

Take into consideration the recommended outcomes
listed above when developing grid modernization
plans

Medium term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

84

D-2. Use comprehensive utility planning processes to determine the sequence, needed
functionality, and costs and benefits of grid modernization investments. Create
accountability by requiring transparency, setting targets, timelines and metrics of progress
made toward grid modernization goals.
Establishing formal procedures and requirements for future grid modernization plans will result in a more
streamlined and transparent process. For IOUs, providing a set of planning requirements prior to the
submission of a grid modernization plan will ensure that technologies are deployed strategically and on an
as-needed basis. Grid modernization should be directly linked to and informed by the more holistic
planning process described above and should include needed improvements to both the distribution and
transmission systems. 114 For example, requiring development of different DER penetration scenarios or a
more granular system assessment (e.g., at the circuit level) can help identify which new investments are
necessary to maintain reliability. Alternatively, improving the linkage between transmission, resource,
and grid modernization planning may better identify solutions to transmission system constraints that
could be prohibiting greater levels of renewable generation on the system in the eastern part of the
state. 115
113F

114F

Directing utilities to include detailed and clear analysis of cost and benefits in planning processes will
ensure approved investments are net beneficial. 116 Making sure utilities establish performance metrics,
targets, and accompanying timelines, will allow regulators to hold utilities accountable for plan
implementation and ensure that new investments are delivering expected benefits in a timely manner. For
municipal utilities and co-ops, these methods can be directly integrated into system planning processes.
115F

California and Minnesota are looking for opportunities to better integrate their planning and grid
modernization processes, as described below:
•

California has established a Grid Modernization Guidance framework that defines the scope of
what can be considered as grid modernization and establishes a structure and timing of grid
modernization planning process, including the submission of a Grid Needs Assessment that
results from the state’s distribution resource planning process. The framework also provides
guidance on how to evaluate the cost effectiveness of grid modernization investments and
establishes submission requirements. 117
116F

See “B: Require comprehensive utility system planning processes”
The low cost of land in the eastern part of the state has led to large volumes of solar development to concentrate
in one area of the state where the electrical infrastructure is constructed with smaller conductors. The demand for
electricity in this area is low due to the absence of large commercial and industrial customers. According to Duke
Energy, this has resulted in significant transmission congestion in the eastern area the state and is now causing an
expectation for thermal overloads on the existing transmission lines which move power from east to the load centers
west of the coast. Duke Energy states that at least 123 substations have the potential to back feed to the transmission
system on certain days throughout the year due to solar systems on the distribution system, and 60% of the projects
queued in the Duke Energy Progress service territory are currently interdependent to required transmission network
upgrades. Relieving this congestion will require significant investment in the transmission network system.
116
In reality, for various reasons utilities will request cost recovery for investments that do not come up in a
comprehensive planning process. As with all utility investments, regulators will need to evaluate those investments
carefully. By having clear expectations for an integrated planning process and explicitly linking grid modernization
to the outcomes of that planning process, regulators can better assess the merits of future utility investment
proposals.
117
Ibid.
114
115

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

85

•

Minnesota combined its grid modernization and distribution planning processes into one multiyear effort. Xcel Energy is required to file 5-year Action Plans for distribution system
developments and investments in grid modernization based on internal business plans and
insights gained from a DER futures analysis, hosting capacity analysis, and NWA analysis. 118
117F

Table D-2: Actions for Recommendation D-2
Entities Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

NCUC

Determine how grid modernization can be linked to
and informed by comprehensive system planning
processes; develop submission requirements,
including expectations for grid needs assessments
and clear cost-effectiveness parameters.

Long term

Co-ops, Municipal Utilities

Determine how grid modernization can be linked to
and informed by other system planning processes

Medium term

118

Order Approving Integrated Distribution Planning Requirements for Xcel Energy.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

86

E. Strengthen the resilience and flexibility of the grid
Background and Rationale
New definitions and metrics have been developed to monitor the properties of the electric power system
as it undergoes its dramatic evolution now and into the future. Two properties that have been important
in the past and will be increasingly important in the future are resiliency and flexibility. The Department
of Energy’s Grid Modernization Laboratory Consortium (GMLC) has developed definitions of several
key indicators. 119 The GMLC defines resiliency as “the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing
conditions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to
withstand and recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents.”
118F

Flexibility, on the other hand, is defined as “The ability of the grid (or a portion of it) to respond to future
uncertainties that stress the system in the short term and may require the system to adapt over the long
term.” Flexibility can generally be viewed from two perspectives. First, from an operational viewpoint,
flexibility can be thought of as the agility of the electrical network to adjust to known or unforeseen shortterm changes, such as abrupt changes in load conditions or sharp ramps due to errors in renewable
generation forecasts. Second, from a strategic investment perspective, flexibility can be considered as the
ability to respond to major regulatory and policy changes and technological breakthroughs without
incurring stranded assets. All of these factors are at play in NC.
In the United States generally and in NC specifically, there is a growing frequency and intensity of
weather-related disasters. Between 1980 and 2019, more than 241 separate $1 billion disasters have cost
the United States $1.6T, with nearly half of the cost coming in 2005, 2012, 2017, and 2018. 120 NC’s
distinctive geography – with mountains in the west and the Atlantic Ocean to the east – make it
particularly susceptible to weather-related disasters in both the winter and the summer. NC is one of the
four states 121 most heavily impacted by hurricanes, with the state impacted by a tropical cyclone every
1.3 years. 122
119F

120F

121F

The state of NC – like any state in the US – is also prone to cyberattack. This is a growing concern as the
state becomes more reliant on third-party owned distributed generation.

“Grid Modernization: Metrics Analysis Reference Document, Version 2.1,” Grid Modernization Laboratory
Consortium, May 2017.
https://gmlc.doe.gov/sites/default/files/resources/GMLC1%201_Reference_Manual_2%201_final_2017_06_01_v4_
wPNNLNo_1.pdf
120
Bloomberg, “U.S. Hurricane Season Is Unnecessarily Dangerous”, 6/11/19,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-11/u-s-hurricane-season-is-unnecessarily-dangerous
121
Hurricane Research Division (2008). "Chronological List of All Hurricanes which Affected the Continental
United States: 1851–2005". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.,
https://web.archive.org/web/20080921102626/http:/www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/hurdat/ushurrlist18512007.txt
122
NC State Climate Office, https://web.archive.org/web/20100330154058/http://www.nc-climate.ncsu.edu/print/8
119

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

87

Recommendations
E-1. Require utilities to develop projects focused on DERs, community solutions, and
microgrids at state facilities and critical infrastructure locations (e.g. hospitals, shelters) to
enhance resilience.
A microgrid is a small electric system that combines local energy resources and control technologies to
provide power to a defined area. Microgrids typically remain connected to the main grid, but they can
operate independently. They are typically deployed at critical infrastructure locations such as hospitals,
but they can also be deployed for all or part of a community. These microgrids allow entities to operate
as small islands when the larger grid is experiencing a major outage, and thus they represent an excellent
opportunity for providing greater resiliency in the face of weather-related disasters.
There are several interesting examples in NC. Ocracoke Island, which is accessible only by boat or plane,
is powered by a small microgrid connected to the main electrical system through a transmission line fed
from Cape Hatteras Electric Cooperative under the Pamlico Sound. 123 If a storm takes down the
transmission line for any reason, the island can continue to function. The local microgrid, a cooperative
venture between NC Electric Membership Corporation and Tideland Electric Membership Corporation,
includes a 3 MW diesel generator and 62 rooftop solar panels that have a 17 kW capacity and are built to
withstand winds up to 140 mph. Ten cabinets of Tesla batteries sit on a concrete platform built 4-feet
high to stay out of the reach of storm surge. Fully charged, the batteries store 1,000 kWh and dispatch up
to 500 kW. An inverter takes the DC power from the batteries to AC power for the grid. Homes and
businesses throughout the community also have controllable HVAC and water heaters to help curtail and
balance load.
122F

Duke Energy was recently approved for a pilot microgrid in Hot Springs, NC, a remote town with a
population of about 600 that is served by a feeder with a history of long-duration outages. Given that
Duke Energy anticipated high costs for necessary equipment upgrades, it was proposed to construct a
small microgrid that would allow the community to be islanded. The Hot Springs microgrid design
includes a 2 MW ground-mounted solar array, a 4 MW battery storage system, and a microgrid
controller. 124 The battery is sized to meet 100% of the town’s peak load and to provide power for the
90th percentile of load for approximately four hours without any contribution from the solar panels.
123F

Microgrids – used for both community-scale applications and critical infrastructure – could have
significant benefits in many parts of NC. In many cases, these microgrids can utilize renewable
resources and battery-based energy storage. As noted above, there are already excellent examples in
which both IOUs and cooperatives have been able to benefit from the distributed resources installed as
part of a larger microgrid. The state should encourage its IOUs and co-ops to consider additional
microgrid projects to improve recovery from storm-related issues.

123
124

https://www.cooperative.com/remagazine/articles/Pages/electric-co-op-transforming-microgrid.aspx
https://microgridknowledge.com/hot-springs-microgrid-approved/

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

88

Currently, combined PV and energy storage are probably not economical in NC under most traditional
cost-benefit calculations as confirmed by the recent energy storage study in NC. 125 If one places a value
on the losses incurred from grid disruptions; however, PV+storage can potentially become a fiscally
sound investment. 126 The state should examine the viability and benefit of installing several projects at
state or locally owned facilities that are in particularly storm-prone areas. As these projects proceed, the
state should disseminate the results to promote similar thinking in the private sector.
124F

125F

Table E-1: Actions for Recommendation E-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium,
or Long term)

NCUC

Initiate a docket to require utilities to develop additional
projects focused on DERs, community solutions, and
microgrids at critical infrastructure locations

Medium term

IOUs, Municipal utilities,
co-ops

Consider locations for adoption of microgrids
considering factors such as long-term maintenance cost
and cost of recovery after major storms

Medium term

Local governments

Consider the full cost of outages when performing costbenefit analysis for PV+Energy storage. Encourage
projects for schools, first-responder facilities, etc.

Medium term

DEQ and Division of
Emergency Management

Assist project implementation and leverage federal
government infrastructure funding for state projects

Medium term

125
126

https://energy.ncsu.edu/storage/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/02/NC-Storage-Study-FINAL.pdf
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/03/f49/Valuing-Resilience.pdf

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

89

E-2. Coordinate resilience planning with disaster recovery operations center and require
NC Emergency Management’s Recovery Support Functions to address cybersecurity
concerns in conjunction with energy resiliency issues.
The NC Disaster Recovery Framework (NCDRF) was developed by NC Emergency Management
(NCEM) and is updated on an annual basis. The Framework describes the role of state agencies and their
partners in assisting with recovery efforts and is designed to address the complex and unique nature of
disasters. Successful recovery efforts rely upon the Whole Community. The NCDRF considers the
impacts of grid-related disasters, including threats from tropical cyclones, winter storms, and
cyberattacks. The framework is an evolution from the operational plan previously maintained by the
state. 127
126F

The current framework is focused on how the state should respond to and recover from disasters.
Inherently, the approach is focused on recovery. Recent studies have shown that every dollar spent on
disaster preparedness can offset as much as six dollars spent on recovery efforts. 128 The state should thus
consider how to integrate resiliency planning – both for storm-related outages as well as cyberattacks –
into its disaster recovery planning, including how assets can best be deployed to reduce recovery efforts.
127F

For example, microgrids installed at critical infrastructure such as hospitals and first-responder facilities
can potentially make first response efforts more effective. The state should study the impact of such
investments and potentially consider several pilots. Ultimately, such planning should be incorporated into
the NCDRF.
Table E-2: Actions for Recommendation E-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

NC Division of
Emergency Management
and Office of Recovery
and Resiliency NCORR

Investigate the impacts of resiliency planning as part of
the NC Disaster Recovery Framework. Determine if
appropriate resiliency efforts can offset costs for
disaster recovery.

Short term

DEQ, NCUC, Utilities,
NCDOT

Participate and support in updating the NC Disaster
Recovery Framework as needed.

Short term

127
128

https://files.nc.gov/ncdps/documents/files/2018%20NC%20Disaster%20Recovery%20Framework_Final_0.pdf
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-11/u-s-hurricane-season-is-unnecessarily-dangerous

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

90

E-3. Develop a method to quantify the human costs of power outages, and integrate these
costs when evaluating grid modernization plan components related to resiliency.
The economic and human impact of recovery from a major storm can be incredibly significant. It has
been estimated, for instance, that the true cost of Hurricane Katrina was over $250 billion once one
includes damage and economic impact. Further, Katrina displaced some 770,000 residents. 129 Such
events can have an extremely negative long-term impact on the economic health and culture of a region.
As recent storm seasons have shown, NC is also prone to potential major impacts as well. The state is
also susceptible to potential cyber threats, and the growing deployment of third-party owned, distributed
energy resources potentially makes the state more vulnerable to cyber threats.
128F

Investing in resources that provide greater resiliency can be very expensive. For example, grid-hardening
measures and selective installation of microgrids may be excellent for preventing major long-term
outages, but the cost must be borne by the ratepayers and those costs may be deemed too high for
ratepayers to bear. If one begins to consider the total cost of outage prevention – including the regional
economic impact and the impact on individual families that come from large storms – it is possible that
the upfront cost of targeted resiliency measures can become more palatable. Similar arguments can be
made for efforts to harden the grid against cyber threats. The state should encourage a deeper
investigation into this question, and this investigation should be based on the true social and economic
impacts of recent events in NC. This analysis should be conducted in a way that promotes social and
economic equity, for example by being careful not to calculate the human cost of outages differently for
communities of different economic means. The study should also include the impacts of potential cyber
threats. DEQ has received a recent award from the US DOE that should help in this area.

Table E-3: Actions for Recommendation E-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium,
or Long term)

DEQ, UNC-Charlotte,
NC State University,
NCUC

Investigate the inclusion of the impact of storms and
cyberattacks on the economy and society as a whole.
Determine if this analysis can be used to modify the
regulatory structure to encourage greater investment in
DERs, microgrids, and grid-hardening approaches.

Medium term

129

https://www.thebalance.com/hurricane-katrina-facts-damage-and-economic-effects-3306023

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

91

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.4 Clean Energy Deployment &
Economic Development
Clean Energy
Deployment and
Economic
Development

F-1
F-2
F-3

F. Customer
access to clean
energy

F-4
F-5

Consider revisions to clean energy programs authorized by HB 589 to ensure successful delivery of desired
outcomes, such as increasing customer access to clean energy.
Enact a statewide commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) and Pay as You Save Program.
Develop a green energy bank or statewide clean energy fund to catalyze the development and expansion of
clean energy markets by connecting private capital with clean energy projects.
Require utilities to offer virtual or group net metering to enable greater access to community solar.
Increase the existing REPS or create a new policy with zero-emitting resource targets without carve-outs for
specific resources.
Develop rates that provide accurate price signals to demand-side resources about costs and value to the grid,

G. DER
interconnection
and compensation
for value added to
the grid

G-1 such as Time of Use (TOU) or real time pricing. In the long term, consider establishing new rate and

compensation structures for DERs based on the value of grid services that can be provided by DERs, such as a
“value of DER” tariff.

G-2 Consider ways to provide greater transparency of system constraints and optimal locations for distributed
resources.

H-1

H. Clean energy
economic
development
opportunities

H-2
H-3
H-4

Identify and advance legislative and/or regulatory actions to foster development of North Carolina’s offshore
wind energy resources.
Create and foster statewide and regional offshore wind collaborative partnerships with industry, the public,
stakeholders, and neighboring states to bring economic growth to North Carolina.
Conduct an assessment of offshore wind supply chain and ports and other transportation infrastructure to
identify state assets and resource gaps for the offshore wind industry.
Develop pathways to expand renewable natural gas recover and usage.

Strategy Area

Recommendation

F-1
F.
Enable customers to
choose clean energy

Clean Energy
Deployment and
Economic
Development

F-2

H.
Clean energy economic
development
opportunities

Utilities Governor's
Commission Office

•
•

F-4

IOU

•

CO-Ops / Public
Local
Academia Businesses
Utilities
Government

•

•
•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

•

G-1

•

G-2

•

•

H-1
H-2

•

H-3
H-4

•

SHORT TERM

State
Agencies

•
•

F-3
F-5

G.
DER interconnection and
compensation for value
added to the grid

Legislature

•
•
•

•

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

92

•
•

F. Enable customers to choose clean energy
Background and Rationale
Utility customers in NC are increasingly demanding access to clean energy and EE options for meeting
their electricity needs. Cities and counties across the state have adopted clean energy and carbon
mitigation goals. Corporations and businesses continue to push utilities and policymakers to make it
easier for them to meet their power needs with clean energy. Throughout the Clean Energy Plan public
engagement process, participants reiterated and restated the desire for access to clean energy in different
ways. Participants generally do not feel that the existing regulatory structure in NC gives customers
sufficient and equitable access to clean energy. 130
129F

NC has made progress toward expanding customer access to clean energy in recent years. In particular,
the passage of HB 589 created several new programs that have opened up new avenues for customers to
choose clean energy, including community solar programs, solar rebates, solar leasing, and the Green
Source Advantage program, which allows large businesses, the military, and universities to directly
procure renewable energy. The Competitive Procurement of Renewable Energy (CPRE) program ensures
that cost-competitive renewable energy is being brought onto Duke Energy’s system which will increase
the amount of renewable energy that all of the utility’s customers receive through their standard utility
service. 131 Participants in the CEP process acknowledged that improvements have been made in recent
years to increase customer choice and access to clean energy, while also highlighting areas for continual
improvement.
130F

Some of the existing tensions regarding customers’ ability to choose clean energy center around the
affordability and accessibility of the existing programs. Some examples include:

130
131

•

Solar rebate program: due to its popularity and the total capacity limits established under HB 589,
this program became fully subscribed very quickly. In order to get a rebate, customers had to
sign up within a narrow time window which meant that many potential customers were unable to
access a rebate.

•

Green Source Advantage program: the bill credit that participants receive under this program is
revised every 5 years, which can make it challenging for participants to determine the economics
of participating in the program. Further, this program is available exclusively to large commercial
customers (based on specific demand thresholds), the UNC system, and military installations.

•

Businesses do not have the ability to enter into their own on-site third-party PPAs for renewable
energy. However, as established by HB 589 they do have the ability to enter into a lease
agreement with a similar financing structure to a third party PPA.

•

Community solar: HB589 required Duke Energy to develop a community solar program, but
there is no statewide program in place meaning that customers of other utilities only have access
to community solar if their utility opts to provides it. The state also does not allow virtual net
metering, which would expand customer access to shared renewable energy.

See CEP participant survey responses.
The CPRE program is discussed in greater detail in the next section.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

93

The upfront cost of investing in customer-sited resources, like solar and EE, continues to present a barrier
to adoption for many NC residents. In particular, low and moderate income residents face many
challenges when trying to adopt clean energy. On top of that, many of these same communities face
disproportionate burdens from energy production, generation, and use, and would benefit especially from
measures that increase non-emitting sources of energy. Some of the recommendations included in this
section address issues related to access to capital. Other recommendations directed at specifically
enhancing equitable access to clean energy are included in the next section.
Customers in areas served by cooperatives and public utilities expressed similar desires to choose clean
energy that is affordable. The programs being implemented under HB589 do not apply to these areas,
although several cooperatives are creative in developing and implementing community solar programs for
their members.

Recommendations
F-1. Consider revisions to clean energy programs authorized by HB 589 to ensure
successful delivery of desired outcomes, such as increasing customer access to clean energy.
HB 589 created new ways for NC customers of Duke Energy to purchase clean energy as the source of
their electricity, such as community solar programs, solar rebates, solar leasing, and the Green Source
Advantage program. The NCUC has been taking action on utility proposals within each of these
programs. Some of the programs are already being implemented, such as the solar rebate program. The
Green Source Advantage Program was recently approved by the Commission and but has not yet been
implemented by the utility. 132
131F

Participants in the CEP process, both within the facilitated workshops and through other means,
expressed concern that the manner of implementation of these programs will not achieve the full potential
for customers to participate. The reasons for this concern vary by program, and, given the early stage of
implementation, it is too early to definitively determine whether changes to the programs are needed in
order to achieve successful outcomes. The Legislature should revisit these programs in the future, assess
whether the desired outcomes are materializing, and consider revisions if needed.
It should also be noted that successful implementation of these programs could be aided by addressing
some of the underlying structural challenges built into the existing utility incentives and tools, as
discussed in the prior section. In short, existing utility incentives to increase sales and to build utilityowned generation are in conflict with measures designed to increase customer-, third-party-, or
community-owned generation resources or to reduce sales of electricity through conservation or behindthe-meter generation. If entities in the state are successful at implementing changes to address these
existing challenges, the underlying incentives of utilities can be better aligned with the overarching goals
of clean energy programs such as those created by HB 589.

See NCUC August 5, 2019 Order approving Duke Energy’s compliance filing:
https://starw1.ncuc.net/NCUC/ViewFile.aspx?Id=a6e3fb12-1347-476d-b612-b35a077ffa85
132

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

94

Table F-1: Actions for Recommendation F-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium,
or Long term)

Legislature / DEQ

Revisit HB 589 programs and consider
whether revisions are needed to ensure desired
outcomes are achieved.

Short-term

F-2. Enact a statewide commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) and Pay as
You Save Program
The inability to finance EE upgrades and distributed renewable energy projects was identified by
stakeholders in the Clean Energy Plan process as a major barrier that the state should address. The
financing difficulties arise from a number of causes: the split incentive between landlords and tenants
means that neither entity has the incentive to invest in EE or clean energy; for commercial customers,
investments in the core business are often prioritized over energy upgrades even when they are cost
effective; and external financing can be hard to come by, particularly for small businesses. 133 For
132F

residential customers, particularly lower income customers, the inability or unwillingness to take on
personal debt in order to finance upgrades or new measures is a major barrier. Two financing
mechanisms, Pay As You Save (PAYS) and Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (C-PACE),
were identified as promising mechanisms to help address some of the barriers.
Pay As You Save is the name of a voluntary program design through which a utility can offer to make
site-specific investments in EE upgrades at a customer’s property. The utility recovers its cost for the
investment with a charge on the customer’s electricity bill, with the charge being lower than the estimated
savings that result from the EE upgrade. As a result, the customer gains the benefit of net savings from
the start of the program. A key feature of the PAYS model is that the cost recovery for the upgrades is
tied to the utility meter, rather than an individual person. The PAYS model has been used successfully
around the country as a way to remove barriers affecting customer segments that are hard to reach like
renters and customers without access to upfront capital. One electric co-op in NC, Roanoke Electric, has
been successfully using PAYS to upgrade roughly 200 homes per year. To date, no other NC utilities
have offered an on-bill tariffed program like PAYS. Stakeholders identified the need for some kind of
loss protection for utilities that might be concerned that their programs would not perform well, and thus
they would need risk mitigation in order to offer such a program. A clean energy fund, discussed in the
next recommendation, could offer a reserve fund to provide loss protection for utility tariffed on-bill
programs like PAYS.
C-PACE is a mechanism targeted at the commercial sector and is strictly property-based financing,
requiring no personal or corporate guarantees. A property owner works with a contractor to determine
which clean energy upgrades make sense, and 100% of the financing (for both hard and soft costs) is
Third-party financing often requires personal guarantees and/or some equity investment, both of which can be
prohibitively difficult for small business owners.
133

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

95

provided as a loan through the PACE program. A local government entity (occasionally regional or
statewide entities) sets up the program and services the loan, placing an annual assessment on the
property for debt collections. With PACE, the financing is repaid as a line item on the property tax bill,
which means that the obligation to repay the financing can transfer to a new owner upon sale of the
property. C-PACE can remove or greatly reduce several of the barriers to investing in EE or clean energy
that commercial property owners might face. PACE is already legislatively authorized in NC, but the
state does not have any active programs. The NC Cities Initiative identified a few reasons for this, one
being that NC local governments lack familiarity with using this kind of financing, and would benefit
from the ability to delegate the administration of such a program and the financing mechanism to a central
third party. In addition, state-level approval is needed for all local debt.
Table F-2: Actions for Recommendation F-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Utilities (IOU, Co-ops,
Public utilities)

Develop voluntary on-bill pay as you save tariff,
using Roanoke EMC as an example of successful
application in NC

Short term

Legislature

If needed to ensure access for customers, direct
utilities to develop a tariffed on-bill financing
program like PAYS and make it available as an
option for customers

Long term

Legislature

Consider setting up a loss reserve fund or a
revolving loan fund to speed up implementation of
PAYS

Medium term

Legislature

Re-authorize NC PACE law, which currently
sunsets in July 2020

Short term

Legislature

Give local governments authority to delegate
administration of C-PACE to a statewide or
regional third party entity

Short term

Legislature / DEQ

Evaluate the feasibility of easing the requirement
for state-level approval of local debt

Medium term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

96

F-3. Develop a green energy bank or statewide clean energy fund to catalyze the
development and expansion of clean energy markets by connecting private capital with
clean energy projects.
Throughout the Clean Energy Plan stakeholder process, a diverse group of individuals and other energy
collaborators identified a need for an NC clean energy fund. 134 A clean energy fund could bring capital
dollars to clean energy projects in areas and markets that are not yet attractive to large investors. By
helping to structure and underwrite deals with a reasonable return, a clean energy fund could
simultaneously spur new projects and catalyze investment markets.
133F

Participants in the CEP process identified particular needs for project funding in clean energy, EE,
electric vehicle infrastructure, and other measures that reduce emissions. They noted particular need in
rural and poorer communities of the state that otherwise lack access to necessary capital. Similar funds in
other states have supported the installation of residential, community, municipal, and commercial
solar systems; EE upgrades in public schools and homes; and infrastructure deployment for
alternative fuel vehicles.
Table F-3: Actions for Recommendation F-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

NGOs and Academia

Determine how to establish a NC Clean
Energy Fund 135

Short term

Publicly support a NC Clean Energy
Fund if established

Short term

134F

Governor’s Office

134
These collaborations included the Cities Initiative and the EE roadmap process. The need for such a fund was
also identified by the CEP stakeholder breakout group focused on Equitable Access and Just Transition.
135
As of the writing of the Clean Energy Plan, DEQ is aware that the Nicholas Institute at Duke University is
intending to engage with the Coalition for Green Capital, a leading expert and implementer of green banks, in Fall of
2019 to produce an in-depth report on the creation and design of a NC Clean Energy Fund.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

97

F-4. Require utilities to offer virtual or group net metering to enable greater access to
community solar.
Many customers want access to solar energy but they do not have the ability to put solar panels on their
roof or property, or the ability to pay the significant upfront costs for an individual solar system. The
community solar model allows customers to subscribe to a portion of a solar facility’s output through
their utility, or be a joint owner of such a facility, without having the facility physically located on their
property. House Bill 589 required Duke Energy to offer at least 20 MW of community solar in each of its
territories. These programs are under development and review at the Utilities Commission. Eleven of
NC’s electric co-ops offer a community solar program to their members. 136 Community solar can expand
equitable access to clean energy by allowing individuals and businesses to participate regardless of
whether they own their home, their income level, or the suitability of their property for solar
development. CEP stakeholders attending the workshops as well as private citizens participating in the
regional listening sessions expressed a strong desire to make these services available to communities
interested in these programs.
135F

One of the key elements of community solar programs is the subscriber compensation, which determines
the value that subscribers are paid for their share of the generation from the project. Typically, this
compensation is provided through a credit on the electric utility bill. The methodology for determining
the credit to subscribers greatly affects the overall economics of the community solar project from the
subscribers’ perspective, and thus also affects the cost to subscribe and overall market demand for the
program. If the result of the crediting methodology is that subscribing to community solar requires
paying a premium on electric bills, it will make access to the program much more difficult for low- and
moderate-income customers.
States and utilities are taking a variety of approaches to subscriber compensation within community solar
programs but the majority are using some form of retail rate compensation or a value-of-solar
methodology. 137 In order for retail rate compensation to be feasible, “virtual net metering” must be
available. This means that net metering applies to community solar subscribers in proportion to their
subscription to the solar array, and allows customers to receive credits from community solar as though
the generation were on site. In NC, customers who have solar on their rooftops are eligible for net
metering, meaning that they receive credits for the energy they send to the grid that helps to offset the
energy they consume on-site. However, subscribers to a community solar array do not have this option
because NC currently does not have a statutory requirement for utilities to provide virtual net metering.
Rather, in NC the compensation is based on the utility’s avoided cost rate, meaning that the credit
received by subscribers is lower than the cost they pay for the energy they consume.
136F

National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, see: https://www.electric.coop/wpcontent/Renewables/communitysolar.html?lipi=urn%3Ali%3Apage%3Ad_flagship3_feed%3BQhg%2BM6GlTBW3BEUMJftgjA%3D%3D&utm_
source=Insights+Jan&utm_campaign=bd960c642cEMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2017_12_14&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_d0de398254-bd960c642c-126666693
137
Cook, Jeffrey J., and Monisha Shah. 2018. Focusing the Sun: State Considerations for Designing Community
Solar Policy. Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. NREL/TP-6A20-70663.
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/70663.pdf
136

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

98

It should be noted that some states that offer a form of retail rate compensation for community solar
subscribers do not offer the full retail rate. They do this to reflect the fact that some elements of the
utility’s costs to serve subscribers, such as some aspects of transmission and distribution, are not offset by
the generation from the community solar array. For example, in Delaware the bill credit is based on the
full retail rate if the subscribers are on the same feeder as the solar array, otherwise a supply service
charge is subtracted from the credit that subscribers receive. It would be sensible for regulators and
decision makers to consider the appropriate credit for subscribers in different utility service territories.

Table F-4: Actions for Recommendation F-4
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature

Require utilities to develop virtual net metering for
community/shared solar customers and direct the
NCUC and other utility governing bodies to oversee
appropriate development of compensation rates for
subscribers

Short term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

99

F-5. Increase the existing Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard
(REPS) or create a new policy with zero-emitting resource targets without carve-outs for
specific resources
NC has been a leader on clean energy policy in the Southeast and is the only state in the region with a
renewable energy portfolio standard. This policy has helped to drive much of the clean energy
development in the state and has led NC to a #2 ranking in installed solar capacity in the US. That said,
NC’s REPS policy is one of the least aggressive in the country; several states increased their renewable
energy targets to 50% and higher by 2030 and beyond in recognition of the economic and environmental
benefits that can be realized. As modeling by DEQ and others shows, the state’s “business as usual”
policy landscape is not likely to result in clean energy development sufficient to increase deployment
beyond the amount codified in HB589 or in sufficient quantities to meet the state’s GHG reduction goals.
In addition, customers are increasingly expecting that the electricity they purchase from their utility will
come from clean sources.
Different options for increasing the amount of clean, zero-emitting generation on the grid were discussed
by stakeholders in the Clean Energy Plan process. One option is to simply increase and extend the
current REPS policy by adding targets for 2030 and 2050, maintaining the current resource carve-outs or
establishing additional resource carve-outs. Another option is to allow the REPS to coexist alongside a
new policy that would require a certain percentage of generation to come from zero-emitting resources by
2030 and 2050, without any carve-outs for specific technologies. The latter would allow all zero-emitting
generation resources to compete to be the preferred option for meeting the target.

Table F-5: Actions for Recommendation F-5
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature / NCUC

Expand the State’s REPS by setting higher targets
for 2030 and 2050 while maintaining existing
technology carveouts, or develop a technology
neutral policy that requires a certain amount of
electricity sales to come from zero-carbon emitting
sources by 2030 and 2050.

Medium term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

100

G. DER interconnection and compensation for value added to the grid
Background and Rationale
As costs for clean energy and storage continue to fall, states, regulators and utilities around the country
are grappling with ways to facilitate interconnection of these new resources to the electric grid while
maintaining reliability and fairly compensating (and charging) distributed resources for the value (and
costs) they bring to the grid. These challenges and opportunities are not unique to NC – other states and
utilities have engaged in dockets and investigations into the value of distributed resources and initiated
pilots to test out new compensation structures and rate designs. 138
137F

There is an interest among NC customers and developers for siting solar projects on the distribution grid
and getting compensated by the utility for services provided. While there has been less development of
smaller, distribution-connected projects to date, with the continuing cost declines for solar and storage it
is likely that more customers will be interested in installing DERs and interconnecting to the distribution
system. If given the opportunity, aggregators could work with multiple customers to create solar, storage
and/or demand response programs that can provide value to the utility grid and savings to the
participating customers.
NC already has significant amounts of distributed generation, primarily solar. The majority of the solar
projects in the state are utility-scale, representing 36% of all PURPA capacity in the U.S from 2008 to
2017. 139 During the early development of solar, utilities in the state were able to study and connect large
quantities of projects at low cost to the developer. As development continues, the upgrades necessary to
connect new solar resources increases and, as these costs increase, the economics of solar development
become more challenging.
138F

Another issue currently slowing down development of solar is the delay in utility interconnection
processes. As a result of projects concentrating in the same area, a serial study process (e.g., one project
studied for interconnection after another) creates a long queue with each subsequent project relying on
information related to the completion of the preceding project. Duke Energy states that at least 24
substations have 4 or more large scale projects that are requesting interconnection, with thirteen projects
requesting interconnection at one substation. The NCUC is currently considering moving from a serial
study process to a grouping study process for interconnection. Grouping studies resolve interdependency
by studying all projects at the same time, thus eliminating the multi-year delays related to the serial queue
studies. It also sets up methodologies for cost sharing between projects which is not permitted today, and
may ultimately support the economics of more projects as a result of spreading the cost of upgrades
across more volume. For example, when a project triggers an upgrade today, that project is responsible

Some suggested resources on this topic include: “The Role of Distributed Energy Resources in Today’s Grid
Transition,” authored by GridLab and GridWorks for Utah Clean Energy, August 2018. Available at:
https://gridlab.org/works/role-of-distributed-energy-todays-grid/ and
Orrell, AC, JS Homer, and Y Tang, “Distributed Generation Valuation and Compensation,” Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, February 2018. Available at:
https://www.districtenergy.org/HigherLogic/System/DownloadDocumentFile.ashx?DocumentFileKey=0103ebf12ac9-7285-b49d-e615368725b2&forceDialog=0
139
Energy Information Administration. August 2018 Monthly Data. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/
138

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

101

for all of the upgrades which could be tens of millions of dollars. Under the grouping study procedure,
numerous projects may share the costs of the upgrades.
The Competitive Procurement for Renewable Energy Program (CPRE) established under HB 589 (2017)
created a competitive bidding process for renewable energy projects. Utilities provide locational
guidance, and generators receive payments tied to the utility’s avoided cost. This process does not require
the developer to pay for the network upgrades, as these are funded by the utilities and put into rates. The
necessary upgrades are determined by grouping all of the CPRE competitive bidders to be studied
together and costs are then allocated to each of the participating projects. To receive an award, projects
must meet a two-part test. First, the project price bid added to the levelized cost of system upgrades must
be lower than the administratively determined avoided cost. Second, the project price combined with the
cost of upgrades must also be among the lowest cost of the suppliers competing for the defined
procurement volume. The CPRE process by law is administered by an Independent Administrator
selected by the NC Utilities Commission (NCUC). Duke Energy expects that 1,460 – 1,960 MW of
projects will be developed under the CPRE. Tranche 1 of CPRE was completed in July of 2019 and the
median price was about $7 below the administratively determined avoided cost. Duke Energy estimates
the expected nominal savings to customers over the 20-year term of these contracts to be over $260
million compared to relying on an administratively determined price.
The recommendations in this section focus on creating opportunities for DERs to access markets and
value streams while allowing developers and customers interested in installing DERs to better understand
the opportunities and constraints on the grid.

Recommendations
G-1. Develop rates that provide accurate price signals to demand-side resources about
costs and value to the grid, such as Time of Use (TOU) or real time pricing. In the long
term, consider establishing new rate and compensation structures for DERs based on the
value of grid services that can be provided by DERs, such as a “value of DER” tariff.
DERs, which include distributed solar, but also things like storage, EE, demand response and electric
vehicle charging, can help make the grid more flexible, resilient, reliable, and clean while also giving
customers more control over their energy use. For the efficient deployment of DERs to be feasible in the
future, rates and compensation structures will need to be in place that compensate DER customers for the
benefits DER provides to the grid, charge those customers properly for their use of the grid, and allow
utilities to recover the revenue required to maintain a safe and reliable system. Ideally, these rate and
compensation structures would send price signals that encourage customers to install and operate DERs in
a way that is beneficial to the system as a whole. Participants in the Clean Energy Plan process identified
the development of such rate and compensation structures as important for the cost-effective deployment
of these resources in the state.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

102

States and utilities are approaching these issues in different ways. Many, including California,
Minnesota, Maryland, and Arizona are moving toward time-varying rates which price electricity higher
when demand is greater and when the
Types of Time-Varying Rates
system is more stressed. See adjacent
Time-of- Different time periods throughout the day (e.g., peak
table for an explanation of the types
use
period, off-peak period, mid-peak period) have different
of time-varying rates.
These kinds of rate designs more
precisely communicate the value of
DER services, such as solar or
storage that provides power to the
grid during peak times, or demand
response programs that help shave
peaks. Time-varying rates are one
way to enhance the potential value
that DERs can provide to the system.

(TOU)
pricing

electricity prices. The time periods and prices remain the
same from day to day.

Variable
peak
pricing

Time-of-use pricing, plus a feature whereby the price for
the peak period changes daily to reflect system conditions
and cost. Prices in other periods do not change from day
to day.

Critical
peak
pricing

A limited number of times per year, the utility calls a
“critical event” during which the grid is expected to be
very stressed. Prices over the timeframe of the event
(usually limited to a few hours) increase dramatically.
Can be coupled with TOU rates or standard flat rates.

Another potentially complimentary
Critical
A limited number of times per year, the utility calls a
approach is to create a separate tariff
peak
“critical event” during which the grid is expected to be
that creates a value stream for
rebate or very stressed. During the timeframe of the event,
services provided by DERs.
peak
customers are compensated for cutting back on electricity
Implementation of such a tariff
time
use. Can be coupled with TOU rates or standard flat
would provide utilities and third
rebate
rates.
parties with more information about
RealPrices vary hourly throughout the day to reflect actual
areas where EE and other DERs are
time
fluctuating electricity costs determined by wholesale
valuable and send price signals to
pricing
prices.
encourage the development of DERs.
Development of such a tariff is a
complex and technical process that involves a myriad of considerations. Some of those considerations
include:
•
•
•
•

how and whether to determine locational and temporal values,
the number of years to offer compensation under such a tariff,
what values to include in the methodology, and
what resources should be eligible for the tariff. 140
139F

A foundational challenge for developing a value of DER tariff is the need for data that illuminates the
surrounding distribution grid needs and potential value streams that DERs can provide. This type of
advanced distribution system data can be made available through a variety of processes as deemed

Hall et al, “Locational and Temporal Values of Energy Efficiency and other DERs to Transmission and
Distribution Systems,” Synapse Energy Economics, 2018. Available at:
https://www.synapse-energy.com/sites/default/files/ACEEE-Paper-Values-EE-DER.pdf
140

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

103

appropriate by regulators, and requires investments in grid modernization equipment that are currently
being discussed by other stakeholder initiatives in the state.
One approach to such a tariff, being taken in New York, bases the value on the utility’s avoided costs plus
other DER values including wholesale energy and capacity, distribution capacity, and environmental
values. Depending on the structure of the tariff, other potential values that could be included are avoided
losses, generation capacity, energy, ancillary services, transmission capacity, and distribution services
such as voltage support, reliability and resilience. 141 It should be noted that in New York (and in other
states, as well), net metering continues to be in place for solar customers while the value of DER
methodology is being developed. 142 This approach for solar customers is appropriate for NC as well.
Stakeholders and regulators will need to grapple with the considerations and data issues outlined above in
determining whether and how net metering for solar customers can and should evolve.
140F

141F

Table G-1: Actions for Recommendation G-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

NCUC

Ensure utilities are offering time-varying rates that
encourage DER deployment that is beneficial to the
system and allows customers to take advantage of
cost-saving benefits of DERs

Short term

NCUC

Open a docket to consider the need for the
appropriateness, feasibility, and structure of a
“value of DER” tariff

Short to medium term

Co-ops and Municipal
Utilities

Encourage DER deployment by evaluating the
feasibility and effectiveness of time-varying rates
and implement and develop appropriate programs

Medium term

For more information, see NYSERDA’s website at:
https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/All%20Programs/Programs/NY%20Sun/Contractors/Value%20of%20Distributed%20E
nergy%20Resources
142
State of New York Public Service Commission, (2017, March). Order on Net Energy Metering Transition, Phase
One of Value of Distributed Energy Resources, and Related Matters.
http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId=%7BA04D9EF3-9779-477E-9D9843C7B060DAEB%7D.
141

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

104

G-2. Consider ways to provide greater transparency of system constraints and optimal
locations for distributed resources
Information and transparency about grid needs and constraints is a foundational requirement in order for
non-utility actors to compete fairly in the provision of clean energy and grid services. In the current
regulatory framework, information asymmetry means that third party providers of distributed resources
like solar, storage, or electric vehicle charging face difficulties in choosing locations, types, and sizes of
projects to propose or develop. These resources could provide tangible benefits to the utility system in
the form of increased flexibility and cheaper and cleaner generation sources, and to individual customers,
in the form of clean energy and reduced bills.
As discussed in the recommendations around comprehensive system planning, analyses to develop more
detailed, location-specific information about grid needs and constraints is considered a central feature of
integrated distribution planning and in determining grid modernization needs. 143 Equitable access to
relevant information not only helps smaller scale developers of solar (under 1 MW) determine the best
locations to propose projects, it can help customers who wish to install solar PV better understand the
right size of a system to install in their particular location to avoid grid upgrade costs. It can also help
third party installers of electric vehicle charging infrastructure determine the best locations for charging
stations from the perspective of limiting impacts on the grid. The Commission could consider requiring
an assessment of the full costs and benefits of conducting such an analysis in the context of an
investigation into distribution system planning, as recommended above.
142F

More detailed, location-specific information about grid needs and constraints also benefits developers and
providers of larger scale DERs, such as those entities that wish to participate in the CPRE program.

Duke Energy agrees that locational information is important for finding the right place on the
grid for a new project, and if done right, this can save customers money. 144 More detailed
143F

information about the current capacity of substations and transmission lines to accommodate additional
solar development would make proposals to the CPRE more precise and valuable to the utility system,
making them potentially more likely to be chosen through the competitive process.
Projects developed outside of the CPRE would also benefit from increased transparency about grid needs
and constraints. For those projects, the NCUC is currently considering moving to a grouping study
process similar to that which is utilized in CPRE. There are likely multiple benefits from moving to a
grouping study process, including eliminating multi-year delays and allowing cost sharing between
projects.
It may also be worth considering other solutions in areas where the transmission system is so constrained
by generation development that neither CPRE nor grouping studies can improve the economics. In this
case the legislature could provide guidance to the NCUC to establish a process for utilities to build out
clean energy transmission solutions, which could ultimately be put into rates for all customers while
expanding the delivery of clean energy within the state.

Volkmann, Curt. Integrated Distribution Planning: A Path Forward, GridLab, April 2019. (Volkmann,
Integrated Distribution Planning: A Path Forward)
144
See Duke Energy comments to DEQ
143

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

105

Table G-2: Actions for Recommendation G-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

NCUC

Consider conducting a full assessment of the costs
and benefits of requiring utilities to undertake
analyses that would provide customers and third
parties with greater transparency of grid constraints
and needs (e.g., hosting capacity analysis) in the
context of distribution system planning

Medium to long term

NCUC

Require Duke Energy to provide more detailed
information about the current capacity of
substations and transmission lines to accommodate
additional solar development in the context of the
CPRE program

Short term (e.g., before
the next tranche)

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

106

H. Clean energy economic development opportunities
Background and Rationale
Similar to the economic growth experienced in the solar sector, significant opportunity exists to build the
clean energy economy through the development of offshore wind energy projects and supply chain.
Additionally, NC’s potential to produce renewable natural gas (RNG) from swine waste, food and solid
waste operations, landfills and wastewater treatment plants offer an opportunity to grow the rural
economy and reduce GHG emissions.
Offshore wind energy (OSW) represents a low-cost, clean, and reliable energy resource for NC. Our state
has the second-highest average wind speeds on the Atlantic coast and is well-positioned to participate in
this rapidly growing global industry. OSW development provides an opportunity for hundreds of millions
of dollars in economic development and thousands of new jobs in eastern NC, as well as a significant
increase in clean energy generation and energy diversification for the state. State commitments to OSW
in the Northeast have led to record-breaking bids of more than $100 million each for the right to further
assess wind energy areas (WEAs) leased to OSW industry giants by the federal Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management (BOEM) for development. Applying the best practices and lessons learned from over 18
GW of OSW installation within the European Union, this industry is expected to create a $70 billion
supply chain and tens of thousands new jobs in the United States by 2030.
Development of OSW energy resources is underway off NC’s coast. The Kitty Hawk WEA, located 24
nautical miles from Corolla, is over 122,000 acres in size and is under lease by Avangrid Renewables.
According to the developer, the Kitty Hawk project will boast a capacity of 2,400 MW. Avangrid is
finalizing its planning, assessment, and stakeholder outreach necessary to submit its formal Site
Assessment Plan (SAP) to BOEM in the summer of 2019. 145 After receiving approval of the SAP,
Avangrid will prepare a detailed plan for the construction and operation of a wind energy project and
conduct environmental and technical evaluations. Construction and installation of the Kitty Hawk project
could begin as early as 2023, and plans anticipate operations at the facility beginning in 2025. BOEM has
identified two additional WEAs off the coast near Wilmington, and new OSW would increase interest in
the OSW industry of developing those areas.
144F

Executive and legislative mandates are in effect in many Atlantic states to attract OSW development.
Mandates in the following states establish OSW procurement goals and in some cases timelines. 146 These
procurement requirements, combined with any state-offered incentives, send clear market signals that
both leverage and attract OSW industry investment.
145F

Despite strong leadership on OSW from our northern neighbors, additional OSW development has stalled
in NC in part because of a lack of strong pro-OSW market signals by the state. Additional OSW-related
topics for further attention include local concerns around visibility and the need for onshore transmission
145
For more information about the BOEM WEA selection and development process, see:
https://www.boem.gov/Renewable-Energy-Program-Overview/ and the wind energy chapter in the
accompanying Supporting Document on NC’s Energy Resources.
146
New York (by executive order, 9000 MW by 2035); New Jersey (by executive order, 3500 MW by 2030);
Maryland (by legislation, 1200 MW); Connecticut (by legislation, 2000 MW); Massachusetts (by legislation and
executive order, 3,200 MW by 2030); and Virginia (by legislation, 12 MW; by executive order, 2500 MW by 2026)

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

107

infrastructure to bring OSW-generated energy inland to load centers. The state should engage with Duke
Energy and Dominion Energy on transmission infrastructure needs, addressing expedited siting, and
permitting for right-of-ways to prepare NC’s grid in order to deploy this valuable energy resource. In
addition, the Utilities Commission could fast-track the process for determining the Certificate of Public
Convenience and Need for OSW-generated wind resource development and necessary transmission.
Other Atlantic Coast states are gaining a competitive advantage and creating and sustaining high-wage
jobs that could, and should be, available to NC’s businesses and workforce. To capture these
opportunities and ensure NC’s competitive edge, the state must take proactive steps on OSW. A
comprehensive assessment of state infrastructure (ports, rail, etc.) as well as supply chain assets and
potential is a key next step. This assessment will provide a clearer picture of NC’s capabilities and inform
the state’s path forward on OSW-related investments and economic development. In parallel, DEQ and
other agencies will evaluate best practices from other states and identify OSW policy actions that make
sense for NC.

Recommendations
H-1. Identify and advance legislative and/or regulatory actions to foster development of
NC’s offshore wind energy resources
A common characteristic among U.S. states realizing industry investment in development of offshore
wind projects and the associated supply chain is the presence of state action incentivizing OSW. Capital
flows toward certainty. OSW developers and manufacturers are attracted to states that have a high
potential wind resources as well as a predictable and hospitable business environment.
While multiple Atlantic states have established strong OSW-related policies, the form of the policies vary.
Several states have legislative mandates that require specific OSW procurement on a designated time
frame. Virginia’s legislature, for example, determined that OSW development is in the “public interest,” a
conclusion that enabled the state public utility commission to authorize an OSW pilot program. DEQ will
work with other agencies and stakeholders to identify the design of legislation and/or regulatory action
appropriate for NC.
Table H-1: Actions for Recommendation H-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
medium, or long-term)

DEQ

Based upon an evaluation of best practices for legislative
and regulatory action that promote business certainty for
the OSW industry, identify and advance strategic actions
for NC.

Short term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

108

H-2. Create and foster statewide and regional offshore wind collaborative partnerships
with industry, the public, stakeholders, and neighboring states to bring economic growth to
NC.
NC and its neighboring states seeking offshore wind development and economic opportunities would
benefit from a regional effort to coordinate regional resources in a way that fosters development of a
robust OSW industry and energy market in the Southeast. NC and partner states could evaluate their
collective assets for OSW development, streamline state regulatory requirements, collaborate on
educational programs and requirements for job training, and create a forum for sharing information and
best practices related to OSW development. The partner states also could also coordinate engagement
with federal agencies, such as BOEM.
Table H-2: Actions for Recommendation H-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Governor’s Office or
Cabinet-level executives

Work to establish a regional agreement for multi-state
cooperation on OSW

Short term

OEMs, energy developers,
IOUs, local government,
research institutions,
academic and training
entities, etc.

Engagement with industry which may include: regional
promotion of OSW assets for supply chain investment;
developing and implementing best practices; coordinating
communications; and identifying funding streams to facilitate
research and other activities that enhance OSW and industry
recruitment

Short term

OSW developers

Location of OSW component manufacturing, supply chain
investment, facility, and jobs in NC

Medium term

H-3. Conduct an assessment of offshore wind supply chain and ports and other
transportation infrastructure to identify state assets and resource gaps for the offshore
wind industry.
An assets and capabilities analysis specific to the needs of the OSW industry would signal to developers
and original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) that NC wants to participate in this industry. Such an
analysis would evaluate existing supply chain and port infrastructure assets, assess NC business
advantages and economic climate, evaluate current workforce readiness – building on the Department of
Commerce’s clean energy workforce assessment completed pursuant to §5 of EO 80. Additionally, the
analysis would identify potential infrastructure and other investments necessary to provide services for
cargo, transportation, trade related to OSW, and the transmission required to accommodate OSWgenerated energy. Results of the study could include estimated manufacturing and supply chain jobs that
could be created to serve the OSW industry, opportunities for rural economic development, benefits to
NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

109

local and state tax bases, and other economic benefits. The objective of conducting this type of analysis is
to determine how NC can successfully position itself to compete in OSW as well as pinpoint our state’s
advantages to attract industry segments, such as blades, towers, and wind turbines (nacelles). More
specifically, the assessment would evaluate:
1. The State Ports at both Wilmington and Morehead City to determine what infrastructure upgrades
are needed to support OSW industry
2. The workforce assets in place, expected employment needs, and training requirements
3. The needs of industry partners related to manufacturing facilities
4. Items identified by the multistate partnership contemplated in Recommendation H-2.
Table H-3: Actions for Recommendation H-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Cabinet agency

Retain a consultant for a supply chain
infrastructure assessment for the OSW in NC.

Short term

Dept of Commerce, NC Ports,
Dept of Transportation,
chambers of commerce,
economic developers, local
government
Cabinet Agency and academia

Engage key stakeholders in assessment and
leverage assessment findings to recruit industry

Short to medium
term

Conduct an economic impact analysis for OSW
energy development in NC that includes
quantifiable impacts on health, environment,
emissions, direct and indirect jobs, local and
regional tax bases, etc.

Short Term

H-4. Develop pathways to expand renewable natural gas recovery and usage.
The agricultural community sees RNG production as a new “home-grown” industry with the potential to
increase employment and revenue generation potential for rural and agricultural communities, create
more advanced, sustainable waste management solutions and produce bioenergy that offsets GHG
emissions. By 2030, emissions from the agriculture and waste management sectors are projected to be
almost 50% of the total emissions from the electricity sector. RNG projects in the State have the potential
to significantly reduce these emissions. Furthermore, RNG can reduce reliance on natural gas.
Stakeholders have expressed concerns over air and water pollution from swine operations’ use of biogas
technology that rely on lagoons and sprayfield waste management systems. Pollution to waterways,
odors, and public health concerns for nearby and downstream communities, including those felt
disproportionately by minority populations, are the reasons for opposition to biogas production.
The Research Triangle Institute (RTI), Duke University, and East Carolina University are conducting a
study to determine the extent and location of available biogas resources in the state and the percentage of
NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

110

NC’s GHG reductions that can be met with biogas. The analysis will include determining the climate,
environmental, societal, and economic effects of the use of biogas and will recommend policy measures
to accelerate biogas development, and the best uses for the gas (i.e., transportation fuel, RNG/pipeline,
on-site energy generation). Implementation pathways for policy measures identifies in this study should
address the benefits of biogas as well as environmental and societal impacts.

Table H-4: Action for Recommendation H-4
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or Long
term)

Duke University, RTI,
East Carolina University

Develop implementation pathways, including
strategies to address environmental and societal
impacts, for policy measures identified in a
study currently underway that will determine
the extent and location of available biogas
resources in the state and the percentage of
NC’s GHG reductions that can be met with
biogas.

Short term

Energy Policy Council –
Energy Infrastructure
Subcommittee

Convene a study committee to explore ways to
capture and utilize RNG in NC. Topics to study:
Ways to increase options and educate producers/
consumers; Consider what policy barriers exist;
Feasibility of micro-pipelines to attract economic
development; Application of food waste digesters;
Supporting disaster related fuel supply needs and
resiliency operations, and RNG transport
mechanisms to end users and buyers; and
evaluation of environmental, societal, and health
impacts of biogas development.

Medium term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

111

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.5 Equitable Access & Just Transition

Equitable Access
and Just Transition

I. Equitable access
and energy
affordability

I-1

Include non-energy equity-focused costs and benefits in decisions regarding resource
needs, program design, cost-benefit analyses, and facility siting.

I-2

Examine the feasibility and proper design of a low-income rate class and associated rate
structures, including but not limited to the elimination or reduction of fixed charges for
ratepayers with high energy burdens.

I-3

Expand energy efficiency and clean energy programs specifically targeted at
underserved markets and low-income communities.

J-1

J. Just transition to
clean energy
economy

J-2

J-3

Ensure inclusion and meaningful involvement of historically marginalized individuals
(people of color and people living in poverty) in decision-making regarding siting
electricity generation assets and implementing programs that would affect their energy
bills, health, and access to clean energy and energy efficiency opportunities.
Launch an EE Apprenticeship program within Apprenticeship NC to expand access to
clean energy careers.
Create long term jobs with family sustaining wages and benefits in renewables and grid
infrastructure industries for low income communities and workers displaced by the
transition to a clean energy economy.

Strategy Area

Legislature

Utilities
Governor's
State
Commission
Office
Agencies

IOU

CO-Ops /
Public
Utilities

•

•

Recommendation

Equitable Access
and Just Transition

I.
Address equitable
access and energy
affordability

I-1

•

I-2

•

J.
Foster a just
transition to clean
energy

J-1

I-3

•

•

•
•

•
•

Local
Academia Businesses
Government

•

•
•

J-2
J-3

SHORT TERM

•

•

•

•

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

•

112

•

I. Address equitable access and energy affordability
Background and Rationale
Low income and energy-burdened residents often live in older, less efficient housing which requires more
energy for heating and cooling than newer homes. In 2018, those living with incomes below 50% of the
Federal Poverty level, spent 33% of their annual income on energy bills (includes electricity, gas and
other utilities). 147 In NC, low income residents spent between 17% (homeowners) and 21% (renters) of
their annual income on electricity bills. 148, 149
146F

147F

148F

Low income households may not be able to take advantage of existing programs for clean energy due to
up-front costs and financing, physical challenges related to the quality of the building or ownership status
of their housing, or simply a lack of access to high-integrity service providers. Low-income customers
may lack savings or access to financing. They often have lower credit scores that may disqualify them
from financing or lock them into high interest rates that make the benefits of clean energy less attractive.
Many of the tax credits for clean energy, such as the federal solar investment tax credit and the EV tax
credit, are nonrefundable, which means that individuals cannot directly benefit from these incentives
unless they have a tax liability. 150
149F

Low income households have fewer choices in regard to housing options, with many low income
residents living in homes with structural deficiencies that can make EE upgrades inaccessible. 151 Low
income households are less likely to own their own homes, especially in urban areas, which makes it
more difficult to install clean energy like solar. These households are more likely to live in multifamily
buildings without access to their own roof. They often live in housing stock that is older and may be of
poor structural integrity. A roof that needs repair is unlikely to be suitable for solar PV.
150F

Energy burdened households struggle to pay unaffordable energy bills. 1.4 million people in NC are
paying a disproportionately high amount of their income on energy bills 152 which makes making any
investment in things like EE more difficult. Many of the same communities are directly impacted by the
health and pollution impacts of energy extraction, transportation and production. These compounding
factors mean that these communities are the least able to reap benefits of investments in clean energy and
EE while being most impacted by the legacy energy industry.
151F

Ibid
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. (2017). Low-Income Energy Affordability Data (LEAD)
Tool – OpenEi DOE Open Data (K. Layman, Ed.). Accessed May 2019. https://openei.org/doeopendata/dataset/celica-data
149
For more information, see CEP Supporting Document – Part 3: Electricity Rates and Energy Burden
150
The Low-Income Solar Policy Guide provides a compendium of options and reference materials for addressing
financial barriers on its “Financing” page. The recommendation included in this report regarding the creation of a
green bank focused on financing clean energy projects would also be a way to address some of these challenges.
151
Drehobl, A., & Ross, L. (2016). Lifting the High Energy Burden in America’s Largest Cities: How Energy
Efficiency Can Improve Low Income and Underserved Communities. Accessed April 2019.
https://aceee.org/sites/default/files/publications/researchreports/u1602.pdf
152
Equitable Access and Just Transition Stakeholder Memo
147
148

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

113

The recommendations in this section address some of the barriers that low income and energy burdened
communities face when it comes to energy affordability and access to clean resources.

Recommendations
I-1. Include non-energy equity-focused costs and benefits in decisions regarding resource
needs, program design, cost-benefit analyses, and facility siting.
While utilities currently have programs targeted at low income households and tracks participation, these
programs can be improved using a deeper equity analysis. By including equity considerations in these
types of decisions, utilities, local government and state agencies can better reflect broader societal costs
and benefits of energy production and use, and of EE programs or solar investments. 153 For example, in
resource planning the Utilities Commission could consider impacts to low-income, energy burdened or
historically marginalized communities when deliberating around utilities’ IRP filings. Such consideration
could lead to future resource decisions that reduce burden and even provide a benefit to these
communities.
152F

In crafting policy and regulatory responses to this recommendation, agreeing upon consistent language
and definitions used to describe impacted communities and households will be important. The appropriate
definitions for NC were not discussed in the CEP stakeholder process, however, the Nicholas Institute
suggests the following terms and definitions for the purposes of crafting equity-focused policies and
regulations:
•
•

Household energy burden: the share of a household’s income that is spent on specified utilities
and heating fuels where the numerator reflects both the household’s consumption as well as
electricity rates, and the denominator reflects total household income or budget.
Energy poor households - all those that spend on average more than 6% of their income on
meeting energy costs 154
153F

Utilities and state agencies could better incorporate equity into program design, such as EE program
design, by adding metrics that track how many energy burdened households are enrolled or creating
carve-outs designed to ensure certain percentages of program funds are dedicated to those households.
As discussed in recommendation C-2, cost-benefit testing, such as the analysis done to determine how
much and what kinds of EE should be implemented, could be expanded to include an assessment of
broader costs and benefits, often referred to as “non-energy” costs and benefits. Several states use a
variety of methods to place values on societal public health and participant health benefits, and these
methods could be explored in NC. Lastly, decisions about siting energy facilities could explicitly include
an environmental justice or equity impact analysis.

Note: elements of this recommendation were discussed in some detail in the section of this report that covers
comprehensive system planning.
154
The Nicholas Institute also suggests that a single threshold of energy burden as defined above does not capture
the full story of energy burdened households in the state. The Institute is currently analyzing household income and
energy bill data for NC in an effort to identify and characterize “tranches” of energy burden (by locations, home age
and type, and demographics) tailored to NC.
153

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

114

Table I-1: Actions for Recommendation I-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

NCUC

Consider impacts to energy burdened households
and communities in utility resource planning. In
doing so, consider the appropriate definitions of
household energy burden, energy poor households
and other key terms as discussed above.

Medium term

State agencies, NCUC,
utilities, Co-ops, public
utilities, local
governments

Add equity metrics and elements to program
delivery, such as EE programs. In doing so,
consider the appropriate definitions of household
energy burden, energy poor households and other
key terms as discussed above.

Short term

NCUC and DEQ

Consider and evaluate methodology to include
broader non-energy equity-focused elements in
cost-benefit testing. In doing so, consider the
appropriate definitions of household energy burden,
energy poor households and other key terms as
discussed above. DEQ will provide technical
assistance to NCUC regarding methods to assess
public health and societal impacts, and siting
decisions affecting environmental justice areas and
high energy burden communities.

Medium term

NCUC and DEQ

Explore methodologies for including EJ impact
analysis in siting decisions. In doing so, consider
the appropriate definitions of household energy
burden, energy poor households and other key
terms as discussed above.

Short term

* It is assumed that the agencies named in this table have existing statutory authority to pursue this recommendation.
DEQ did not conduct a thorough analysis of legal authority in conjunction with this plan. In the event that it is
determined that entities do not have sufficient authority, legislation would be needed to provide the appropriate
authority.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

115

I-2. Examine the feasibility and proper design of a low-income rate class and associated
rate structures, including but not limited to the elimination or reduction of fixed charges
for ratepayers with high energy burdens.
Low-income customers face a more significant burden in paying their energy bills than other customers of
the same “customer class” with higher incomes. Though “affordability” has been a core tenant of utility
regulation and system planning, stakeholders in the CEP process identified that there are segments of
customers for whom the cost of energy is not affordable and argued that there should be a more nuanced
treatment of affordability in utility ratemaking and rate design. This could be accomplished in a number
of different ways, such as through a bill discount, a percentage of income payment program, reduction or
elimination of fixed charges, or other ways. The NC Utilities Commission could also consider creating a
differentiated service classification for multi-family housing, where costs for the utility to provide electric
service could be lower. Affordability was not only raised as an issue for customers of IOUs. Rate
structures of co-ops and municipal utilities that emphasize fixed charges place disproportionate burden on
low-usage customers and low-income customers.
The details of this recommendation, including the proper design of a low-income rate class and the right
strategy for addressing affordability for low-income customers, were not able to be tackled by CEP
stakeholders in the limited time available. An entity such as a higher education institution could establish
a follow-up process involving stakeholders to discuss equity issues within utility ratemaking and
recommend actions for legislation and for the NCUC to pursue.
Table I-2: Actions for Recommendation I-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short, Medium, or
Long term)

Academia, Non Profits,
NCUC

Convene a stakeholder process to discuss equity
issues within utility ratemaking and recommend
actions for legislation and for the NCUC to
pursue

Short term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

116

I-3. Expand energy efficiency and clean energy programs specifically targeted at
underserved markets and low-income communities. 155
154F

Many low-income homes suffer from health, structural or safety issues, such as mold, leaky roofs or
faulty wiring, as low-income people tend to live in older buildings and have more limited income to
invest in upgrades and repairs. These conditions may prevent the installation of solar or EE measures.
Studies have found that a significant portion of low-income homes (more than 10% in one such study)
have health and safety issues that prevent providers from delivering weatherization services. 156 Equityfocused policies and programs that address some of these challenges can help ensure that vulnerable
communities will benefit from the growing clean energy economy.
155F

There are many existing EE programs in NC, and yet some sectors – including agricultural and multifamily housing – are underserved by these programs. Some existing dynamic incentive programs, such as
Duke Energy Design Assistance program, cannot serve multifamily developments due to metering
eligibility requirements. Other programs have payback schedules that do not match a sector’s situation,
or application periods that do not align with complementary funding sources. And although Duke Energy
has EE programs specific to low income customers, they do not have a specific target or carve out for
how many low income communities get access to funds, so it can vary from year to year how well these
programs reach these customers.
Some existing utility EE programs could be tailored to be a “better fit” to address the target markets of
agriculture, multifamily, mobile homes, military populations, and houses of worship, and others including
small businesses and some industrial customers that are unable to take advantage of utility-offered
programs due to the high cost of opting-in to the EE Rider. Fifty percent of low-income populations in
NC reside in multifamily residences. However, many developers may not be taking full advantage of
existing EE incentive programs in this sector. Opportunities exist to better align multifamily utility EE
incentives with new NC Housing Finance Agency projects and their refinancing cycles, and to seek out
complementary funding such as US Department of Agriculture (USDA), state weatherization and other
non-regulated sources.

Many of the ideas and some of the text for this recommendation were taken from the EE Roadmap’s
Recommendation #13 and #16. They have been combined with other ideas and shortened for the purposes of this
document. More information on these recommendations can be found in the Roadmap.
156
Refer, for example, to: (1) Carroll, D., Berger, J., Miller, C., and Driscoll, C. (2014). National weatherization
assistance program impact evaluation: Baseline occupant survey; Assessment of client status and needs. Oak Ridge,
TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ORNL/TM-2015/22. Retrieved from: https://weatherization.ornl.gov/wpcontent/uploads/pdf/WAPRetroEvalFinalReports/ORNL_TM-2015_22.pdf; (2) Rose, E., Hawkins, B., Ashcraft, L.,
and Miller, C. (2014). Exploratory review of grantee, subgrantee and client experiences with deferred services
under the Weatherization Assistance Program. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ORNL/TM2014/364. Retrieved from: https://weatherization.ornl.gov/wpcontent/uploads/pdf/WAPRecoveryActEvalFinalReports/ORNL_TM-2014_364.pdf; and (3) Green & Healthy
Homes Initiative (2010, October). Identified barriers and opportunities to make housing green and healthy through
weatherization. Prepared by the Coalition to End Childhood Lead Poisoning. Baltimore, MD: Green & Healthy
Homes Initiative. Retrieved from: https://www.greenandhealthyhomes.org/wp-content/uploads/GHHIWeatherization-Health-and-Safety-Report1.pdf. The latter report notes (on page 5) that “Health and safety issues
render homes ineligible for weatherization work though the degree may vary between [programs]. Overall, the
average number of homes deemed ineligible in the pre-auditing or auditing phase was 12.88%; however, there is a
wide variance in why programs find those homes ineligible.”
155

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

117

Other unique opportunities exist for targeted sectors, such as a Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH) rental
program for low-income households. The reduction in the upfront cost of the equipment would
dramatically increase the adoption of HPWH in low and moderate income communities helping each
household significantly reduce energy use for heating water resulting in savings to the resident. In
addition, by using HPWH as deployable demand-side management to shift loads off peak through thermal
storage, additional utility cost savings and/or funding for programs could be realized.
The NC Weatherization Assistance Program (NC WAP) in partnership with multiple NC utilities is
developing a limited community solar pilot for low income households. As discussed in the previous
section, community solar allows customers that cannot install solar on their property to benefit from solar
energy. Low income households have historically had little or no direct access to solar in NC. This new
community solar pilot will give low income households an option to use solar energy to further reduce
energy burdens for 15 years or more in addition to having their homes weatherized. The community solar
measure is designed to provide each participating low income household an additional $365 in savings
per year credited directly to their utility bills. NC WAP is working with its agencies and partner utilities
to find approximately 40 eligible low income households within the service territory of the participating
utilities. NC WAP plans to expand this low income community solar opportunity to other areas in future
years through additional partnerships.
There are existing venues in the state for discussing changes to existing programs in order to better serve
low-income and underserved communities. To the extent that new funding is needed to accomplish some
of these actions, the legislature or philanthropies could be a source of financial support.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

118

Table I-3: Actions for Recommendation I-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature

Direct utilities to work with stakeholders to identify
ways to better serve low-income and underserved
communities through existing programs or by
creating new program elements, such as a lowincome carve out using the improved cost benefit
analysis under Recommendation I-1

Short term

DEQ

Evaluate outcomes from NC WAP community solar
program and determine ways to expand the program
to reach more low income customers

Medium and long term

Duke Energy EE
Collaborative

Discuss new program ideas, how better to serve
underserved markets, and ways to administer new
offerings

Short term

Energy Policy Council EE
Committee

Discuss new program ideas, how better to serve
underserved markets, and ways to administer new
offerings and make recommendations for actions
through collaborative partnerships

Medium and long term

Low income advocates

Work with utilities to design and implement
programs. In the case of IOUs, these programs
would need to be approved by the NCUC.

Medium and long term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

119

J. Foster a just transition to clean energy
Background and Rationale
Throughout history as the economy has changed due to varying factors from trade policy to technological
innovation, workers have often suffered disproportionately from these changes. The loss of
manufacturing in the textile, tobacco, and furniture industries across NC are prime examples. As NC’s
energy system shifts toward one focused on clean resources, workers currently employed in traditional
energy industries that will be transitioning stand to be impacted. Counties with fossil fuel facilities could
lose millions of dollars from their tax base as fossil fuel facilities ramp down, for example. NC should
anticipate and manage this transition, by putting worker protections and oversight by those most affected
into the state’s plans from the beginning. 157
156F

These concerns are not unique to NC. The Paris Climate Agreement recognized “the imperatives of a just
transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs.” 158 The International
Labour Organization (ILO), a specialized agency of the United Nations, was charged with developing a
framework for implementing this principle. In its 2018 Policy brief on the subject, the ILO states that:
157F

“[t]he idea of just transition should not be an ‘add-on’ to climate policy; it needs to be an integral
part of the sustainable development policy framework. From a functional point of view, just
transition has two main dimensions: in terms of ‘outcomes’ (the new employment and social
landscape in a decarbonized economy) and of ‘process’ (how we get there). The ‘outcome’ should
be decent work for all in an inclusive society with the eradication of poverty. The ‘process,’ how
we get there, should be based on a managed transition with meaningful social dialogue at all levels
to make sure that burden sharing is just and nobody is left behind.” 159
158F

Recommendations
J-1. Ensure inclusion and meaningful involvement of historically marginalized individuals
(people of color and people living in poverty) in decision-making regarding siting electricity
generation assets and implementing programs that would affect their energy bills, health,
and access to clean energy and energy efficiency opportunities.
Historically marginalized individuals and communities have largely been left out of decisions that often
affect their economic opportunities, environmental quality, health, and wellness. This has led to a cycle of
increasing hardship and impacts for these communities, relative to individuals and communities that have
greater access and ability to influence decisions. The US EPA defines environmental justice as “the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income
with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations,
AFL-CIO comments
UNFCCC “Paris Agreement.” https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf
159
ILO Just Transition Guidelines. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/--actrav/documents/publication/wcms_647648.pdf
157
158

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

120

and policies. It will be achieved when everyone enjoys the same degree of protection from environmental
and health hazards and equal access to the decision-making process to have a healthy environment in
which to live, learn, and work.” 160
159F

In NC, as in other states, people of color and low-income people are disproportionately impacted by
decisions about siting and operating energy facilities, what types of clean energy and EE programs will be
available and how those programs will be structured, what utility costs are approved and how utility costs
will be recovered from ratepayers, among others. NC must continue to strive for the achievement of
environmental justice goals around inclusion and meaningful involvement in decisions like these.
Inclusive decision-making processes and meaningful involvement of historically marginalized individuals
means seeking input and ideas from the beginning of any given decision process, before options are being
developed. It requires concerted effort to reach out to community members, grassroots organizations, and
tribal governments to understand how different options will impact them. DEQ will report to the
Governor’s Office how it is implementing actions that ensure meaningful participation and inclusion of
historically marginalized communities and considering impacts on those communities in agency decision
making related to energy.
Table J-1: Actions for Recommendation J-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

DEQ

Report to the Governor’s Office how it is
implementing actions that ensure meaningful
participation and inclusion of historically
marginalized communities and considering
impacts on those communities in agency decision
making.

Short term

NCUC

Consult with stakeholders and explore ways to
incorporate environmental justice into decisions
and make Commission processes more inclusive.
Consider adding a required section in future IRPs
and other relevant filings that demonstrates
inclusion and meaningful involvements of
historically marginalized communities.

Short term

DEQ

Support the Environmental Justice and Equity
Advisory Board on energy issues by informing
the Board of relevant energy issues and
supporting their evaluation of those issues.

Short term

160

https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

121

J-2. Launch an EE Apprenticeship program within Apprenticeship NC to expand access to
clean energy careers. 161
160F

Apprenticeships and pre-apprenticeships provide opportunities for experiential learning through paid “on
the job” training with real companies in the industry. Allowing for both apprenticeships and preapprenticeships would ensure that anyone could participate in the program regardless of education level
or background. Part of a just transition to the clean energy economy of the future is ensuring that NC
residents of all racial and socioeconomic backgrounds have opportunities to find and keep jobs that pay
family-sustaining wages. Apprenticeship programs can help create a pipeline of skilled workers for
businesses in need of good employees, reduce operational costs by establishing a streamlined channel to
bring on new workers and advance existing workers, build employee loyalty and reduce attrition, and
foster new leaders.
NC is home to a successful state apprenticeship program. Apprenticeship NC is an economic
development-focused organization housed within the NC Community Colleges System. The U.S.
Department of Labor has described Apprenticeship NC as an agency that works “to ensure NC has an
innovative, relevant, effective, and efficient workforce development system that develops adaptable, work
ready, skilled talent to meet the current and future needs of workers and businesses to achieve and sustain
economic prosperity.” However, currently, Apprenticeship NC does not focus on EE as a career path.
Apprenticeship NC already works in collaboration with the NC Community Colleges System, the NC
Department of Commerce, and the US Department of Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and
currently recognizes building trades and energy industries as part of their apprenticeship programs. This
partnership could easily expand to include various EE trades. In order for this to happen, specific EE
careers would need to be identified and companies would need to be contacted and asked to participate in
the program. To ensure equitable outcomes, specific focus should be made to include small businesses,
Historically Underutilized Businesses, and Historically Black Colleges and Universities in this program.

This recommendation is part of the Energy Efficiency Roadmap recommendations and the text in this document
was largely copied from the Roadmap. More detail on this recommendation is available in the Roadmap.
161

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

122

Table J-2: Actions for Recommendation J-2
Entity
Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long term)

Community
Colleges System Apprenticeship
NC

Work with the following stakeholders to coordinate and
implement EE apprenticeship programs:

Medium term

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Technical and community colleges
Traditional colleges and universities
EE industry employers
K-12 institutions
NC Department of Commerce/NCWorks
Workforce Development Boards
NC Business Committee for Education Navigator Tool
Training institutions
Credentialing organizations such as Building
Performance Institute (BPI)
Local businesses
Municipalities
Utilities

J-3. Create long term jobs with family sustaining wages and benefits in renewables and
grid infrastructure industries for low income communities and workers displaced by the
transition to a clean energy economy.
Focusing job training and creation is minority and low-income communities and those where workers are
being (or likely to be) displaced by a transition away from fossil fuels will help ensure that all parts of NC
can thrive in a clean energy future. This focus is important because these communities are at the greatest
risk of suffering economic hardship and growing wealth inequality relative to the wealthier parts of the
state. A concerted effort must be made by multiple entities to ensure that these communities are made
better off with the transition to clean energy.
Stakeholders in the clean energy plan process identified a few key actions to realize this recommendation,
including creating more accessibility to the Registered Apprenticeship Programs by establishing preapprenticeship programs in partnership with high schools and community colleges. Various entities could
help drive up labor standards by prioritizing contractors that provide good wages, benefits and career
pathways. Best practices from around the state and the country for displaced workers from the fossil fuel
industry could be collected by government and shared in order to encourage private sector action.
Under direction from EO 80, the Department of Commerce completed its Clean Energy and Clean
Transportation Workforce Assessment. This assessment identified occupations, number of jobs for each
occupation, and the five-year growth rate for jobs related to the clean energy industries, EE industries,
and clean transportation industries. The assessment also provided four recommendations for action to
develop a future workforce by bringing together employers, workers, and education and training
providers to meet changing needs. The assessment recognizes that the importance of job placement and
training need of communities and workers to ensure a just transition.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

123

Table J-3: Actions for Recommendation J-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Utilities and clean energy
developers

Work with “High road” contractors or those that
provide living wages and benefits and career
pathways for workers.

Medium term

Legislature

Consider tax incentives to encourage targeted
investment in certain communities, and labor
standards

Medium term

Local and Tribal
Governments

Use economic development agencies to direct and
prioritize investment, use existing powers to direct
use of incentives for development

Medium term

Higher Education

Train contractors and workers in clean energy and
EE professions, create pre-apprenticeship programs
in partnership with the Registered Apprenticeship
Programs

Medium and long term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

124

Strategy Areas & Recommendations

4.6 Energy Efficiency & Beneficial Electrification
Energy Efficiency
and Beneficial
Electrification

K-1
K-2
K-3

K. Energy efficiency
and demand side
management
programs

Enable customers to have greater access to their energy data through new functionalities, such as those available
through Green Button “Download My Data” Button.
Establish minimum EE goals within existing REPS or establish an energy efficiency resource standard (EERS).

K-4

Enhance education and awareness around energy efficiency opportunities in K-12 schools and community colleges
through an “Energy Efficiency Everywhere (E3)” project.

K-5

Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots to encourage customer behavior that helps achieve clean
energy goals, such as peak demand reduction, better utilization of renewable resources, and strategic storage
deployment.

K-6

L-1

L. Electrification
Strategies

Establish an Energy Efficiency Advisory Council (EEAC) to oversee implementation of the EE Roadmap
recommendations.

L-2

Increase EE awareness on the North Carolina Building Code Council.

Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots for electric vehicles to encourage off-peak charging of
vehicles and to test effectiveness of different rate structures at shifting customer usage of the grid and encourage the
adoption of electric vehicles.
Conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits of using electrification to reduce energy burden and GHG emissions in
end-use sectors in NC, such as in homes, buildings, transportation, industrial, and agricultural operations.

Strategy Area

Recommendation

Legislature

Utilities Governor's State
Agencies
Commission
Office

Electrification

K-2

•

•

K-3

•

•

SHORT TERM

•

•
•

K-4

•

K-5
K-6

L.
Create strategies for
electrification

CO-Ops / Public
Local
Academia Businesses
Government
Utilities

•

K-1
K.
Increase use of energy
efficiency and demand
Energy Efficiency and
side management
Beneficial
programs

IOU

L-1

•

•
•

•

•
•

L-2

MEDIUM & LONG TERM

125

K. Increase use of energy efficiency and demand side management
programs 162
161F

Background and Rationale
EE is widely considered a least cost option for meeting energy demand, while reducing energy costs and
carbon emissions. While EE has experienced slow and steady growth in NC, much more can be done to
maximize the full potential of this least cost resource. Total retail electricity sales to NC consumers in
2017 was just over 131,000 GWh. Although the state has realized increasing annual incremental EE
savings – exceeding 1,220 GWh in 2017 – annual incremental EE savings from utility programs as a
percentage of retail sales is still under 1.0%. 163, 164 Each incremental investment in EE accrues multiple
benefits to consumers, including lower energy bills, increased grid reliability and the deferral or
elimination of expensive new generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure investments – costs
that would otherwise be borne by ratepayers.
162F

163F

Despite bipartisan support for the economic and environmental benefits of EE and an increasing focus by
advocates, utilities and big energy users, barriers remain to fully realizing EE’s potential. To discuss and
start to address these barriers, the Nicholas Institute at Duke University, in partnership with NC’s
Department of Environmental Quality initiated a process to develop a comprehensive state EE roadmap.
This initiative, launched in August 2018, convened stakeholders from separate EE working group
discussions to think collectively about this issue. 165 Some of the barriers that the EE roadmap
stakeholders identified include:
164F

End-user Barriers
•
•

Lack of reliable information about EE opportunities (particularly in rural and agricultural
communities)
EE is often confused with renewable energy

Much of the background and recommendations discussion in this section is taken from the EE Roadmap, with
slight modifications and editorial changes made by DEQ.
163
NC State Electricity Data, Energy Information Administration, Form EIA-861,"Annual Electric Power Industry
Report" for the years 2013-2017. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia861/
164
Annual incremental energy efficiency is defined as “The annual changes in energy use (measured in MW hours)
and peak load (measured in kilowatts) caused by new participants in existing DSM (Demand-Side Management)
programs and all participants in new DSM programs during a given year. Reported Incremental Effects are
annualized to indicate the program effects that would have occurred had these participants been initiated into the
program on January 1 of the given year. Incremental effects are not simply the Annual Effects of a given year minus
the Annual Effects of the prior year, since these net effects would fail to account for program attrition, equipment
degradation, building demolition, and participant dropouts. Please note that Incremental Effects are not a monthly
disaggregate of the Annual Effects, but are the total year's effects of only the new participants and programs for that
year.“ US Energy Information Administration Glossary, accessed 7/3/19.
https://www.eia.gov/tools/glossary/index.php?id=I
165
The EE Roadmap strives to include diverse voices from across the state and identify a variety of paths forward to
help all stakeholders seize the EE opportunities in the state. Some of the discussions generated substantial debate
and disagreement among various parties that could be impacted by a new paradigm for EE. Much more information
about the EE Roadmap collaboration and outcomes, including detailed discussion of the full list of outcomes, can be
found in the EE Roadmap document. The recommendations included in the Clean Energy Plan are those that were
prioritized as most important by the Clean Energy Plan participating stakeholders.
162

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

126

•
•

Longer payback period for some EE investments as the opportunities for shorter payback
investments for “low hanging fruit” (like efficient lighting) have already been realized
Lack of inclusive financing options

Building Sector Barriers 166
165F

•
•
•

NC building code cycle is six years for residential homes, twice as long as best practice in other
states, and the state’s energy conservation code is falling behind national standards
Lack of energy managers / EE champions in commercial and small business
Quantitative analysis (energy audit) of EE opportunities can be expensive

State Regulatory and Policy Barriers
•
•
•

Federal weatherization funding is limited
Lack of efficiency mandate for all utilities
Industrial and large commercial customers are allowed to opt out of utility programs provided
they implement EE on their own, making tracking and creating incentives for EE difficult for
these customers

Utility Barriers
•
•

•
•

Perception that the cost per kilowatt hour (kWh) may increase with additional EE utility
investment
Absent incentives or mandates, the current cost-of-service utility business model is not aligned
with EE; investments in EE undercut revenue to the utility in the Near term and deferred or
avoided generation, transmission, or distribution investments—while good for ratepayers—limit
opportunities for profits to shareholders in the long term.
Lower avoided costs and advancement of codes/standards create barriers to utility programs
under traditional cost-effectiveness tests
Failure to recognize all energy and non-energy benefits of efficiency in cost-effectiveness tests

Some of the identified barriers, including those related to the cost-of-service utility business model, costeffectiveness tests, addressing energy burdened communities and hard to reach sectors, and financing
options, have been addressed elsewhere in this report through recommendations related to EE and other
topics. Additional recommendations included in this section relate to ensuring implementation of EE
recommendations are overseen by an advisory committee, giving customers access to their energy usage
data, increasing education and awareness of EE opportunities, increasing the EE targets within the
existing REPS, better utilization of load flexibility to meet clean energy goals, and building codes. These
recommendations come primarily from the EE Roadmap process.

According to NCDEQ’s 2018 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Report, commercial buildings sector was the
only sector with increased energy usage between 2005 and 2017 compared to residential and industrial sectors.
166

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

127

Recommendations
K-1. Establish an Energy Efficiency Advisory Council (EEAC) to oversee implementation
of the EE Roadmap recommendations
Currently, there is no established body that is diverse and inclusive of all the many EE interests in NC
that could oversee and guarantee the implementation of the NC Clean Power Plan EE recommendations.
The EEAC would fill this gap and track implementation of the approved recommendations as well as the
emissions reductions, economic development benefits and other metrics from EE measures. With a
diverse make-up, the EEAC would ensure that balanced, consensus-driven recommendations are made,
and that new EE policies are implemented as quickly and effectively as possible. The EEAC would help
establish better communication between the EE stakeholders, and improve the sharing of best practices to
boost adoption of EE measures within the state.
The NC EEAC could be created within the Executive Branch of NC’s government, with a state-wide
purview for broadening EE programming.
•

The EEAC would target the residential and commercial sectors, but occasionally, could provide
oversight to and recommendations for industrial EE initiatives.

•

The EEAC would align with the activities of the Energy Policy Council (EPC) to the extent
possible.

The EEAC should be comprised of representatives from utilities, state agencies, higher education,
industry, advocates and other EE experts. The EEAC would be responsible for sharing information and
best practices between stakeholders in order to increase state-wide EE measures for residential and
commercial programs across the state in support of the Governor's Executive Order 80. In the near-tomedium term, the EEAC would oversee the implementation of the recommendations selected for
inclusion into the state’s Clean Energy Plan and help to monitor and report on the progress of the EE
recommendations. Long-term, the Energy Policy Council would be responsible for tracking broad EE
efficacy in NC and undertake studies and analyses that can inform future EE recommendations.
Table K-1: Actions for Recommendation K-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Governor’s office

Establish an Energy Efficiency Advisory Council,
appoint a person or entity to chair the council, and
align with the activities of the Energy Policy
Council to the extent possible.

Short term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

128

K-2. Enable customers to have greater access to their energy data through new
functionalities, such as those available through Green Button “Download My Data” Button
The ability for customers to easily access their own energy usage data and authorize that data to be
provided to third parties is an essential enabling step for identifying energy-saving opportunities. Making
customer data readily available is often viewed as one of the key customer benefits of advanced metering
infrastructure investments. While utilities in the state are currently providing access to some electricity
consumption data from smart meters, it is being provided in a variety of formats. Standardizing this data
statewide to be consistent with a nationally recognized standard like Green Button “Download My Data”
would allow for a more efficient analysis for EE and demand reduction opportunities by customers and
any consultants or third parties they choose to work with. According to MissionData, a nonprofit
dedicated to advocating for energy data access, over 55 utilities across the country have adopted the
Green Button Download my Data standard. 167 Duke Energy has committed to start implementing a data
access program equivalent to Green Button beginning in the third quarter of 2019. The NCUC has
opened a docket to seek information and establish rules related to electric customer billing data, which is
an opportunity for utilities, stakeholders and the Commission to have discussions about the desired
functionality of a tool like Green Button.
166F

In addition to the Download My Data standard, the Green Button initiative has established the Green
Button “Connect My Data” program that allows customers to provide their chosen service providers with
automatic access to their data. While Green Button “Connect My Data” has been proposed in NC,
utilities have continued to express concerns related to customer protections, liability, regulatory cost
recovery issues, and implementation cost. Utilities and interested stakeholders should continue to pursue
ways to address those issues in addition to exploring other methods for providing automatic energy data
transfers to trusted third parties such as Energy Star portfolio manager.

167
Murray, Michael and Jim Hawley, “Got Data? The Value of Energy Data Access to Consumers,” MissionData
and More Than Smart, January 2016. Pg 8.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/52d5c817e4b062861277ea97/t/56b2ba9e356fb0b4c8sb7d/1454553838241/Go
t+Data+-+value+of+energy+data+access+to+consumers.pdf

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

129

Table K-2: Actions for Recommendation K-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

IOUs, municipal, and coop utilities

Standardize existing data availability and provide
easy access to 24 months of incremental usage data

Short term

NCUC

Ensure streamlined easy access to energy usage data
for customers

Medium term

Legislature / NCUC

Review municipal and co-op utility implementation
of Green Button Download My Data standard and
determine if legislation is needed to ensure
compliance

Medium term

K-3. Establish minimum EE goals within the existing REPS or establish an energy
efficiency resource standard (EERS)
NC REPS allows energy efficiency measures to be used for meeting a portion of the purchase
requirements. The ability to use EE measures varies by year and by utility type:
●
Investor-owned utilities: 12.5% renewable energy (as % of retail sales) by 2021. EE measures can
be used to meet up to 25% of this requirement, and up to 40% after 2021
●
Electric cooperatives, municipal utilities: 10% renewable energy by 2018, and there is no limit on
the amount that may be met through EE.
REPS defines "Energy efficiency measure" as an equipment, physical, or program change implemented
after January 1, 2007, that results in less energy used to perform the same function. "Energy efficiency
measure" includes energy produced from a combined heat and power system that uses nonrenewable
energy resources; the term does not include demand-side management. Energy efficiency resource
standards (EERS) refer to policies that require utilities and other covered entities to achieve quantitative
goals for reducing energy use by a certain year. An EERS is similar in concept to a renewable enery
portfolio standard. While the later requires that electric utilities generate a certain percentage of their
electricity from renewable sources, in EERS requires that they achieve a certain amount of energy
savings from energy efficiency measures.
The current REPS Program EE component is voluntary – it allows utilities to voluntarily meet part of
their renewable energy targets through use of implemented EE Measures. This could be made more
stringent by the creation of mandatory minimums for IOUs for their REPS target to be met with costeffective EE measures beginning in 2021. A conservative target is preferred by utilities due to concern
that EE opportunities that utilities can influence are declining as more mainstream efficient equipment
becomes available to customers outside of utility EE programs. Requiring a minimum EE target ensures
that EE remains a valued resource despite the gains in renewable energy and avoided cost comparisons
that tend to make EE a less attractive component of the REPS program. Duke Energy Carolinas and
Duke Energy Progress are currently meeting a 25% target and this recommendation would ensure their
continued compliance. Dominion is not currently meeting a 25% minimum.
NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

130

Table K-3: Actions for Recommendation K-3
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature

Modify existing REPS statute to require IOUs to
meet mandatory minimum of their REPS
obligations with EE measures or establish an energy
efficiency resource standard (EERS) by 2021.

Short term

K-4. Enhance education and awareness around energy efficiency opportunities in K-12
schools and community colleges through an “Energy Efficiency Everywhere (E3)” project
Although every student in NC is directly impacted by our electricity generation and consumption, many
students do not understand the basics of how our electricity is produced, the real environmental costs, and
what actions can be taken at home and at school to reduce electricity consumption. Students and young
adults are often well-versed in everyday technology but unaware of the technologies that produce the
electricity that their devices depend upon. An understanding of NC’s energy landscape and how
consumers influence future decisions will help our students become more environmentally and
scientifically literate and thus better prepare them for the careers and jobs of the future. The best way to
bring this and similar topics into the classroom is to equip and train teachers through professional
development workshops to ensure they are able and willing to teach our students these important topics.
The NC public school curricula for K-12 do not include an EE component. Nor do schools provide
“career awareness” programming for students to learn about careers in EE. Teachers are left to learn
about these issues on their own, should they want to bring EE into the classroom. Several NC institutions
offer energy-focused trainings and certificate programs, including UNC Chapel Hill’s Institute for the
Environment and NC’s Office of Environmental Education (training here earns state teachers
Environmental Education Certification credit). DEQ and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) also
offer a rich selection of energy-related materials and activities. In addition, broader science and
technology curricula and training opportunities have been created in science-based centers 168 and
community colleges. 169 However, these opportunities are too scattered and varied for most teachers to
look through and evaluate on their own.
167F

168F

The primary goal of the Energy Efficiency Everywhere (E3) project is to support the implementation of
EE curriculum programs within the existing educational systems of NC to include K-12 public school
168
The NC Museum of Natural Sciences created the Educators of Excellence Institutes to support continued learning
for educators: https://naturalsciences.org/learn/educators-of-excellence-institutes
169
For example, Wake Technical Community College currently offers a Building Automation Certificate Program:
https://www.waketech.edu/programs-courses/credit/credit-programs/air-conditioning-heating-refrigerationtechnology/degrees-1

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

131

systems and county-based community colleges. Ideally, education programs would be developed and used
within existing curriculums appropriate for each grade level. E3 would foster excitement about EE,
educate students on the electricity consumption and generation in our state, encourage specific actions by
individuals and communities to reduce energy usage, and raise public awareness to the benefits of
pursuing EE skilled trade careers. The project would launch a professional development training program
for teachers as well as other educators in NC, create a statewide EE certification certificate, and establish
an online sharing platform for EE related activities and lessons for teachers to use in their classroom.

Table K-4: Actions for Recommendation K-4
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Academia or non-profit

Collaborate with the following entities to stand up a
program to support implementation of EE
curriculum programs within the existing
educational systems in NC:

Medium term

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

NC Community College Systems Office
(NCCCSO)
NC Department of Public Instruction (DPI)
NC DEQ
NC Community Colleges
NC K-12 County School Systems
National Energy Education Development
Project (NEED)
NC’s EE industry organizations and
corporate leaders
Accreditation organizations that oversee
curriculum programs in K-12 &
Community Colleges
School groups, science educators, state
education public information officers,
science-based centers and museums,
superintendent offices and universities that
are already involved in energy education,
nonprofits that support this type of work
and others.
Utility outreach and education programs

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

132

K-5. Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots to encourage customer
behavior that helps achieve clean energy goals, such as peak demand reduction, better
utilization of renewable resources, and strategic storage deployment. 170
169F

Two trends underway in the electricity sector make better utilization of flexible loads essential: increasing
amounts of low-cost, variable generation resources on the grid, and expanding technology options for
customer control of energy use. By encouraging or enabling customers to use power at times when clean,
cheap energy is available on the grid and avoid using it when the system is under stress, it is possible to
reduce overall costs and increase the utilization of low cost renewable resources. Technologies such as
programmable thermostats, water heaters, and electric vehicle chargers, and smart appliances that can
automatically adjust usage by following a utility or aggregator signal, are giving customers and utilities
new tools to easily manage customer energy usage to minimize system costs and save customers money
on bills. Rate design, also known as the price that customers pay for electricity at various times of the
day, season, and year, is an essential part of making this happen.
Utilities around the country are beginning to experiment with innovative rate structures and
accompanying programs to reward customers for shifting their usage in a way that is beneficial to the
grid. For example, in July 2019, Portland General Electric launched a Smart Grid Test Bed which will
work with 20,000 customers to take advantage of demand-response signals and incentives for using
smart-home technologies, helping customers control energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. In this
pilot, the utility is automatically enrolling customers in a rate design that will reward them for shifting
their energy use during times of grid stress. This approach of combining time-varying rates with
technologies and programs that make it easy for customers to shift usage and utilize technologies like
storage and smart devices, has proven effective elsewhere as well. 171
170F

In the general rate case in 2018, the NCUC directed Duke Energy Carolinas to implement innovative rate
design pilots to allow customers to take advantage of peak and energy shifting opportunities from the rollout of advanced meters. The conclusions of the Clean Energy Plan are supportive of the direction the
Commission is taking in this instance.

Note: this recommendation is not from the EE Roadmap. It was prioritized by stakeholders in the Clean Energy
Plan workshop and is included in this strategy area because of its direct link to demand-side management.
171
Other utilities with successful programs along these lines include Baltimore Gas and Electric, Oklahoma Gas and
Electric, Pacific Gas and Electric, and Hawaiian Electric Companies.
170

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

133

Table K-5: Actions for Recommendation K-5
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

NCUC

Require utilities to work with stakeholders to
develop proposals for innovative, equitable rate
design pilots that encourage customers to shift their
usage and utilize technologies like storage to help
reduce peak demand and increase utilization of
clean energy. Pilot sites, co-located with lowincome neighborhoods that have participated in the
Duke Energy Neighborhood Energy Saver program,
should be considered to further reduce energy
burden rate for those residents

Short term

Co-ops and Municipal
utilities

Work with stakeholders, customers, and memberowners to develop proposals for innovative,
equitable rate design pilots that encourage
customers to shift usage and utilize technologies
like storage to help reduce peak demand and
increase utilization of clean energy

Medium term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

134

K-6. Increase EE awareness on the NC Building Code Council
The NC Building Code Council (NCBCC) was established to oversee the state’s building codes, which
include energy code. In addition, the state legislature may update building codes at any time. The
Building Code Council is comprised of seventeen members, each representing a different area of
expertise or constituent group as detailed in the state law. 172 Currently EE is not represented on the
Building Code Council.
171F

The NCBCC has regulatory control over the sources – buildings – of more than 50% of NC’s energy
consumption. This control is authorized by law and enacted by setting and managing the minimum
energy code standards and voluntary measures for all new and existing residential, commercial and
industrial buildings. For the past several years, the 17-member council, whose positions are established
via the Legislature and appointed by the Governor, have supported weak increases in EE minimum code
requirements and approved roll-backs of moderate, yet cost-effective, energy code increases. This action
has led to NC’s energy codes becoming less stringent when compared to other Southeastern states,
national and international standards.
State-authorized energy codes play a major role in how a state acts on EE and, because NC is a Dillon
Rule state, local jurisdictions are limited in how they can implement increased stringency (above state
code) in local codes to support their own climate change and energy goals. To improve local and state
support for EE, establishing greater support, understanding and action of the NCBCC is a fundamental
starting point.
Responsible, cost-effective increases to minimum EE requirements in the NC building code would
economically benefit the owners of residential and commercial building and reduce air pollution. Prudent,
cost-effective energy code improvements could save up to $10 Billion (NCBPA, 2018) in direct avoided
energy costs over the next ten years, offer significant environmental and health impacts to the state, and
provide strong economic impacts through improved housing and property affordability, local economic
development improvement and workforce development.
Florida is one of the few Southeastern states that has an EE, clean energy or green building seat on its
code council. The Florida Building Commission includes a representative of the “green building
industry” as well as from the Florida Office of Energy.
The EE Roadmap stakeholders identified the following actions as important to pursue: Improve the NC
Building Code Council (NCBCC)’s support of EE by updating the energy conservation code to increase
the EE requirements for buildings, modernizing the building code to ensure new buildings are ready for
the installation of vehicle charging infrastructure and clean energy resources (e.g., rooftop solar and
battery storage), and adding an Energy seat to the Council’s makeup, and establishing new actionable
goals that prioritize EE in NC’s current and future building codes.

See the relevant NC Statutes here:
https://www.ncleg.gov/EnactedLegislation/Statutes/PDF/BySection/Chapter_143/GS_143-136.pdf
172

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

135

Table K-6: Actions for Recommendation K-6
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Legislature

Add Energy efficiency seat to the NCBCC

Short term

Building Code Council

Update the energy conservation code to increase the
energy efficiency requirements for buildings

Short term

Building Code Council

Modernize the building code to ensure new
buildings are ready for the installation of vehicle
charging infrastructure and clean energy resources

Short term

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

136

L. Create strategies for electrification
Background and Rationale
Electrification is the conversion to electricity of end uses of energy that are currently fueled with fossil
fuels. Beneficial electrification considers whether, in electrifying, consumers are able to save money on
their total energy bills, environmental benefits are achieved, and benefits to the grid are maximized.
Beneficial electrification is included in the same strategy area as EE because, despite resulting in a net
increase in electricity use, measures that constitute beneficial electrification will result in a net decrease in
total energy use (in British thermal units, or some other measure of total energy). Participants in the clean
energy plan process identified beneficial electrification, particularly of the transportation sector, as a key
opportunity for NC to meet its GHG emission reduction goals, provide North Carolinians with cleaner
and cheaper transportation options, and give utilities the ability to manage new flexible loads for the
benefit of the electric grid.
As the electricity sector has been becoming less carbon-intensive over the last decade, the transportation
sector has become the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the state. In 2017, the sector
accounted for 32.5% and emitted 48.7 million metric tons of GHG emissions. Electrification of
transportation presents a significant opportunity to reduce energy use and emissions from the sector due
to the superior fuel efficiency of electrified transportation. 173 As the electricity sector becomes cleaner,
electrification will result in greater emission reductions over time. In addition to reducing GHG
emissions, electrifying transportation can result in reductions in local air pollutants such as particulate
matter and NOx. This can make an especially big difference for communities that are most directly
impacted by motor vehicle pollution, such as those in urban areas with diesel bus traffic or those located
close to freeway corridors.
172F

Electrifying transportation also presents new opportunities for communities and individuals to save
money on fuel and operating costs of vehicles. Although the upfront cost of a new EV is still higher than
comparable gasoline cars, this is changing quickly as battery technology continues to improve. This trend
is occurring in the passenger vehicle market as well as for larger vehicles such as buses and fleet vehicles.
Under Executive Order 80, the state’s Department of Transportation is developing a NC Zero Emission
Vehicle (ZEV) Plan, designed to increase the number of registered ZEVs in the state to at least 80,000 by
2025 and plan for the charging infrastructure needed support this growth. 174 In April 2019, Duke Energy
filed a plan with the NCUC for a $76 million investment in electric transportation infrastructure,
including a statewide fast-charging station network. That plan is currently under review at the
Commission. The recommendations described in this section are focused on how the utility sector can
best integrate and encourage the adoption of electric vehicles and how the state can play a leadership role
in accelerating transportation electrification.
173F

173
For example, the average electric vehicle has a fuel efficiency of roughly 30 kWh per 100 miles, which translates
to a “miles-per-gallon equivalent” of about 112. This means that the average electric vehicle is 3-4 times more fuel
efficient on an energy basis than a typical gasoline-powered vehicle. Note, this only considers the fuel efficiency of
the vehicle itself, and not any energy used upstream of the vehicle.
174
NC now allows retail resale of electricity for EV charging stations per House Bill 329 which signed into law by
Governor Cooper on July 19, 2019.

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

137

Recommendations
L-1. Require utilities to develop innovative rate design pilots for electric vehicles to
encourage off-peak charging of vehicles and to test effectiveness of different rate structures
at shifting customer usage of the grid and encourage the adoption of electric vehicles.
Rate design, particularly when paired with smart chargers 175 or the programmable charging feature of an
EV, can be very effective at encouraging drivers to charge their vehicles at times of the day when it is
advantageous to the electric grid to do so. For example, a super-off-peak rate during the overnight hours
will entice drivers to program their vehicles to wait to charge until that time period starts, avoiding the
early evening hours that might otherwise exacerbate system peak demand. On a utility system that is
solar-rich, such as the one in NC, it may be helpful for rate design to encourage workplace charging of
EVs.
174F

Not only can rate design help encourage the off-peak charging of vehicles, it can impact the economics of
driving an EV as compared to a gasoline-powered vehicle. This is particularly true for charging stations
located at commercial sites, such as workplaces, shopping centers, truck stops, etc. The typical rate
design structure that utilities use for these kinds of customers can be a major inhibitor to the adoption and
usage of charging infrastructure. Utilities are beginning to experiment with new structures that will
recover costs from charging stations in a way that is more advantageous to the economics of EV charging.
State public utility commissions have begun to require utilities to employ the kinds of rate designs
described above as a condition of approval for rate recovery of electric vehicle charging infrastructure. 176
In reviewing proposals from utilities regarding EV charging infrastructure, the NCUC could ensure that
utilities plan to deploy rate designs that will encourage off peak charging and assist with EV adoption. As
EV adoption increases in NC, innovative rate design programs can assist in broader clean transportation
deployment as described in DOT’s NC ZEV Plan. 177 The ZEV Plan outlines 4 key action areas that will
support ZEV adoption: education, convenience, affordability, and policy.
175F

176F

The Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission describes smart chargers as follows:
Smart chargers provide enhanced capabilities that allow for data acquisition, network communication, and
demand response, which will allow the Company to determine baseline charging profiles and to ultimately
enable demand response programs.
See UTC, Docket UE-160799, Staff investigation regarding policy issues related to the implementation of RCW
80.28.360, electric vehicle supply equipment, Notice of Open Meeting, June 24, 2016.
https://www.utc.wa.gov/_layouts/15/CasesPublicWebsite/GetDocument.ashx?docID=4&year=2016&docketNumber
=160799.
176
Maryland, California, Nevada, and Michigan are some of the states that have recently issued orders requiring
innovative EV rate designs.
177
The NC ZEV Plan, another directive of EO 80, can be viewed at https://www.ncdot.gov/initiativespolicies/environmental/climate-change/Pages/electric-vehicles.aspx
175

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

138

Table L-1: Actions for Recommendation L-1
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

NCUC

Ensure that utility proposals for EV charging
infrastructure deployment are accompanied by
pilots designed to test innovative rate design that
encourages off peak charging and EV adoption

Short term

Co-ops and Municipal
Utilities

Implement EV rate designs that encourage off peak
charging and EV adoption

Medium term

L-2. Conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits of using electrification to reduce energy
burden and GHG emissions in end-use sectors in NC, such as in homes, buildings,
transportation, industrial, and agricultural operations.
Clean Energy Plan stakeholders identified the electrification of transportation as a key strategy for
reducing emissions from that sector, as more fully discussed in the final section. They also acknowledged
that an economy-wide strategy to meet the state’s GHG reduction goals would require emission
reductions from other sectors in addition to electricity and transportation, such as fuel use in buildings,
homes, industrial processes, and agricultural operations. Many studies have identified electrification of
those energy end uses as potentially the most technologically feasible and least-cost strategy to reduce
emissions from those sectors. Such a study has not been conducted for NC, and thus this clean energy
plan process did not focus specifically on electrification as a GHG reduction strategy. However, given
the importance of getting started on emission reductions from all sectors, stakeholders identified such a
study as an important next step for the state.
Beneficial electrification has the potential to provide significant financial relief to 30% of NC residents
living in poverty. Low income households spend a disproportionate percentage of their household
income on energy costs relative to their higher income counterparts. 178 For those living with incomes
below 50% of the Federal Poverty level, 33% of their annual income is spent on energy bills. Of this
amount, about 20% is spent on electric bills while over 60% is spent on natural gas or bottled gas (see
Supporting Document-Part 3 for more information). Examples of residential beneficial electrification
include switching from electrical resistance space or water heating to using heat pump technologies for
177F

Fisher, Sheehan, & Colton (2019). Home Energy Affordability Gap. Accessed May 2019.
www.homeenergyaffordabilitygap.com/.
178

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

139

heating. Heat pumps can provide 1.5 to 3 times more heat energy than the electrical energy they use, a big
improvement from electrical resistance heating. 179
178F

The industrial sector also offers potential electrification benefits. Industries using thermal processes can
shift to electrical process heating. Industrial induction heating offers more temperature precision, reduced
start-up times and faster product throughput, and more flexible control strategy. These factors result in
better quality products. In addition to process improvements, electrical induction heating can also
improve site air quality and reduce noise levels in industrial operations. 180
179F

A NC study could identify beneficial electrification opportunities in different sectors, noting technologies
offering the most benefits in terms of economics and environmental improvement.

Table L-2: Actions for Recommendation L-2
Entity Responsible

Action

Timing (Short,
Medium, or Long
term)

Academia

Initiate an analysis of the costs and benefits of
electrification of end-use sectors such as homes,
buildings, industrial processes, and agricultural
operations

Medium term

179
Farnsworth, Shipley, Lazar, & Colton (2018). Beneficial Electrification: Ensuring electrification in the public
interest. Regulatory Assistance Project. Accessed at https://www.raponline.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/6-192018-RAP-BE-Principles2.pdf
180
Deason, Wei, Leventis, Smith, & Schwartz (2018). Electrification of Buildings and Industry in the United States.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Accessed at
http://eta-publications.lbl.gov/sites/default/files/electrification_of_buildings_and_industry_final_0.pdf

NC CLEAN ENERGY PLAN: DETAILED REPORT

140

141

Next Steps

5. Conclusions and Next Steps
An ongoing transformation of North Carolina’s electricity system requires
ambitious actions at the state and local levels, with active participation
from the private sector. To achieve the goals and performance
measurement targets laid out in the CEP, a framework is needed that
centers on strategic investments that provide long-term energy, economic,
and environmental benefits. Developing modern regulatory tools,
market structures and processes to achieve state goals can set us
on a path to

lower risk, lower-cost and lower-impact energy fu-

ture.

In the coming months and years, the entities identified in this plan are
called upon to lead this effort by carrying out the stated recommendations
or make adjustments within their normal business and operational practices
to achieve the collective vision. We recognize that certain strategies and
actions will require additional deeper dives and detailed analysis when
considering new legislation or amending existing policies/practices. Many
experts from within the state and across the country are ready to work with
North Carolina leaders to continue transforming our state into a national
leader in clean energy economy.

nc.deq.gov/cleanenergyplan
143

144

North Carolina

Clean Energy Plan
All North Carolina Clean Energy Plan documents
and supporting documents can be found at:

deq.nc.gov/cleanenergyplan

North Carolina
Department of Environmental Quality
217 West Jones Street
Raleigh, NC 27603
877-623-6748

deq.nc.gov/cleanenergyplan

