New York State Climate
Action Council

Climate Action Plan
Interim Report

David A. Paterson, Governor
November 2010

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Photos courtesy of the Department of Environmental Conservation or
the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, unless otherwise indicated.

ii

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Acknowledgments
The New York State Climate Action Council (Council) gratefully acknowledges the following
individuals and organizations who contributed significantly to the State’s climate action planning
process and the publication of this Interim Report.
The Council thanks Governor David A. Paterson for his foresight and initiative in
commissioning the Council and Deputy Secretary Peter Iwanowicz for championing this
important initiative.
Alan Belensz of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) and
Janet Joseph of the New York State Energy Research & Development Authority (NYSERDA)
served as co-executive directors of the Climate Action Plan process; the Council thanks them for
their leadership and tireless efforts.
This Interim Report was a successful stakeholder-driven process, and the Council thanks the
members of the Integration Advisory Panel and the sector-based Technical Work Groups, all of
whom are listed in Appendix C. The Council would be remiss if it did not recognize and express
appreciation for the time and effort each Technical Work Group member spent in discussion,
study, and deliberation during this process. Many other individuals also contributed to the work
of the Technical Work Group, providing resources to the Technical Work Group members
throughout the process.
Gerald Stokes and Patrick Looney of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Brookhaven National
Laboratory and Karin Ezbiansky Pavese of the New York Academy of Sciences were
instrumental in developing the vision necessary to achieving a low-carbon, climate-changeresilient New York, and in organizing an important workshop that informed deliberations
throughout the process.
Many thanks go to Carl Mas and Sandra Meier of NYSERDA and Mark Lowery of DEC, who
coordinated all activities associated with the process, and to the other state agency staff members
who served as liaisons to the Technical Work Groups, also listed in Appendix C. Dave Coup,
Emily Denman, Richard Drake, Ken Galarneau, Ted Lawrence, Karl Michael, Becky Reed,
Adam Ruder, Amanda Stevens, Michelle Salisbury, Mark Torpey, and John Williams of
NYSERDA and John Marschilok, Lois New, Anne Reynolds, Marilyn Wurth, David Gardner,
and Mary Kadlecek of DEC added valuable input to the effort. Arturo Garcia-Costas of DEC
managed outreach to environmental justice advocates.
Members of the ClimAID project, including Cynthia Rosenzweig of Columbia University,
Arthur DeGaetano of Cornell University, and William Solecki of the City University of New
York, contributed valuable insights on adaptation issues, as did the many other members of the
ClimAID team.
The Technical Work Group co-chairs and Council designees were instrumental in facilitating and
contributing to the progress of this process. We thank Paul Beyer of the Governor’s Smart
Growth Cabinet; Glen Bruening, Tom Congdon, and Sarah Osgood of the Governor’s Office;
Jeff Cohen and Eleanor Stein of the Department of Public Service; Robert Davies, Robin Schlaff,
iii

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and Jared Snyder of DEC; Paul DeCotis of the Long Island Power Authority; Debra Devine of
the Homes and Community Renewal; Jennifer McCormick and Keith Corneau of Empire State
Development; Ron Rausch of the Department of Agriculture and Markets; Victoria Simon of the
New York Power Authority; George Stafford of the Department of State; Jeffrey Stefanko of the
Division of Budget; Ernest Tollerson of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority; Jodi Smits
Anderson of the Dormitory Authority; Mark Watson and Karen Villeneuve of NYSERDA; and
Lynn Weiskopf and John Zamurs of the Department of Transportation;
Thomas D. Peterson, Jeffrey Wennberg, and the Center for Climate Strategies, with its dedicated
team of professionals, provided time, energy, and expertise in the form of facilitation services
and technical analysis for the Council process, particularly in support of the Technical Work
Group deliberations. Special thanks to June Taylor and Katie Pasko of Center for Climate
Strategies who coordinated the production of and edited this report. Also, the Council wishes to
acknowledge the contributions of the following additional Center for Climate Strategies team
members:
Maureen Mullen
Hal Nelson
Joan O’Callaghan
Stephen Roe
Adam Rose
Randy Strait
Brad Strode
Dan Wei
James Winebrake

Rachel Anderson
Eric Belliveau
Steven Bower
Steve Chester
Bill Dougherty
Erin Green
Hillel Hammer
Lewison Lem
Judith Mueller

iv

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Table of Contents
Credits ............................................................................................................................................. ii
Acknowledgments.......................................................................................................................... iii
Members of the New York State Climate Action Council ............................................................ vi
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................ES-1
Overview .................................................................................................................................. OV-1
Chapter 1. Background ............................................................................................................ 1-1
Chapter 2. Climate Projections and Vulnerabilities ................................................................. 2-1
Chapter 3. Inventory and Forecast of New York State’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions ............ 3-1
Chapter 4. Envisioning a Low-Carbon Future – 2050 ............................................................. 4-1
Chapter 5. Overview of Mitigation Policy Development ........................................................ 5-1
Chapter 6. Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial Mitigation .......................... .6-1
Chapter 7. Transportation and Land Use Mitigation ............................................................... 7-1
Chapter 8. Power Supply and Delivery Mitigation .................................................................. 8-1
Chapter 9. Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management Mitigation.................................... 9-1
Chapter 10. Research and Development Needs to Achieve a Low-Carbon Economy ............ 10-1
Chapter 11. Adapting to Climate Change ................................................................................ 11-1
Chapter 12. Multi-Sector Policies and Issues .......................................................................... 12-1
Chapter 13. Stimulating a Clean Energy Economy in New York .......................................... 13-1
Chapter 14. National and Regional Action and Coordination ................................................. 14-1
Chapter 15. Acronyms and Abbreviations ............................................................................... 15-1
Appendices
A. Executive Order Establishing the New York Climate Action Council ................................ A-1
B. Description of New York Climate Action Council Process ..................................................B-1
C. Members of NY Integration Advisory Panel and Technical Work Groups ..........................C-1
D. Overview of Current New York State Climate and Energy Policies ................................... D-1
E. Methods for Quantification.................................................................................................... E-1
F. 2050 Visioning: Brookhaven National Laboratory Report ................................................... F-1
G. Electric Vehicle Workgroup Report ..................................................................................... G-1
H. ClimAID Summary Report ................................................................................................... H-1

v

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Members of the
New York Climate Action Council
Mark Leinung, Chair*
Acting Director of State Operations

Garry Brown

Brian Lawlor

Chair, Public Service Commission

Commissioner of Housing and
Community Renewal

Ruth Noemí Colón

Robert Megna

Acting Secretary of State

Director of the Budget

Stanley Gee

Dennis Mullen

Acting Commissioner of Transportation

Chairman and CEO, Empire State
Development Corporation

Michael Hervey
COO, Long Island Power Authority

Frank Murray

Patrick Hooker

President and CEO, New York State
Energy Research and Development
Authority

Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets

Peter Iwanowicz**

Jay H. Walder

Acting Commissioner of Environmental
Conservation

Chairman and CEO, Metropolitan
Transportation Authority

Peter Kiernan

Paul Williams

Counsel to the Governor

Executive Director, Dormitory Authority

Richard Kessel
President and CEO, New York Power
Authority

*Valerie (Val) Grey, Chair Emeritus
Former Director of State Operations

**Pete Grannis
Former Commissioner of Environmental Conservation

Co Executive Directors:
Alan Belensz
Department of Environmental Conservation

Janet Joseph
New York State Energy Research & Development Authority
vi

Executive Summary
New York State Climate Action Plan
Interim Report
The Challenge and the Opportunity
Climate change, resulting primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels and other human
activities, is a significant threat to our environment, economy, and communities. Climate change
is already occurring; its adverse effects are well documented across the globe and throughout our
region. That realization, combined with the economic and national security vulnerability
associated with our current, finite, fossil-based energy system, has created a sense of urgency in
advancing a sustainable low-carbon energy future.
New York State can turn this challenge into an opportunity by
working aggressively to become a hub of the new clean energy
economy and by making policies and investments that bring lowcarbon choices to our citizens and future generations. Success will
bring dramatic co-benefits in economic development, jobs,
technological innovation, energy security, and cleaner air and
water.

Rooftop solar panels provide
renewable power for many buildings
across New York State. Here, the
array on the Dormitory Authority’s
Albany headquarters. (Photo
courtesy of DASNY)

New York has shown leadership in clean energy policy, and is
taking actions to reduce emissions of the greenhouse gases
(GHGs) that cause human-induced climate change. Governor
Paterson’s issuance of Executive Order 24 in August 2009
formally established a State goal of reducing GHG emissions 80
percent below 1990 levels by 2050 (or 80 by 50), and named the
Climate Action Council to determine how to meet the goal. The
Council was also tasked with developing a plan to increase New
York’s resiliency to a rapidly changing climate.

State agencies then launched a process that has brought together more than 100 technical experts
and stakeholders and the broader public to define a vision of New York that can achieve this
aggressive goal, to identify and examine both mitigation and adaptation policy options, and to
analyze the costs and benefits of adopting these policies.
While the climate planning process is not complete, and in
New York could become a
many ways will be an ongoing effort, the initial analysis
hub of clean technology
documented in this Climate Action Plan Interim Report
industry and innovation –
makes clear that achieving the 2050 GHG reduction goal
creating good jobs for
will require dramatic change. New York State’s
New Yorkers.
government, its residents, and businesses must embrace the
goal of wise use of clean energy. To meet this goal, we
must transform the way we make and use energy—we must maximize efficiency and make a
major shift toward zero-GHG emissions in electricity generation, smart electric transmission and

ES-1

distribution systems, low-carbon buildings, and zero-emission vehicles, and increase options for
alternative modes of travel and land use.

Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions in New York State
A variety of policy options and strategies can build on New York’s experience in advancing
clean energy and further reduce GHG emissions in New York State, while providing other
benefits to New Yorkers.
•

Buildings and Industry
Sector Policy Options:
Substantially reduce
GHG emissions from the
existing building stock,
which will be in place for
years to come, and
ensure that new buildings
meet the highest
performance standards.
To maintain a robust
economy, we will need to The village and town of Ossining, both Climate Smart Communities, serve
with a new library, the state’s first public building to meet the
ensure that our industrial residents
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standard. (Photo
sector can grow and be
courtesy of Amiaga Photo, Inc )
economically
competitive, while reducing GHG emissions per unit output. Policy options include enhanced
performance-based building codes and appliance standards; building commissioning; and
additional consumer incentives for efficiency and renewable energy. The combination of
voluntary incentives and aggressive codes and standards, along with new financing
mechanisms and critical enabling policies (such as education and outreach, electric rate
design, workforce development, and
technology research and development),
could lead to a substantial reduction in
emissions in this sector over time. This
sector is the largest source of GHGs in
New York, accounting for about 40
percent of the state’s GHG emissions.
• Transportation and Land Use
Sector Policy Options: Reduce the GHG
intensity of fuel, improve vehicular
efficiency, and improve travel and system
efficiency. Policy options include the
Hybrid electric buses reduce GHG emissions and fuel costs for continued development of a regional lowNew York City’s public transportation fleet. The world’s first
carbon fuel standard; more aggressive
hybrid electric bus was developed in New York State through a
efficiency and carbon dioxide (CO2)
public-private partnership.
vehicle standards; light-duty and heavyduty vehicle incentives or disincentives to promote efficiency, e.g., feebate; demand-

ES-2

management investments; and smart growth practices. Electrification of our transportation
sector holds great promise in both reducing GHG emissions in New York and reducing the
petroleum dependency of this sector. Investments in transit and high-speed rail appear to
offer additional opportunities to reduce GHG emissions and enable a low-carbon future,
while providing very significant co-benefits. These policies could reduce GHG emissions
from the fastest growing source of emissions in our economy—transportation.
•

Power Supply and Delivery Sector Policy Options:
Accelerate the introduction of zero- or low-carbon
sources of power, such as renewable energy and
potentially nuclear energy, while maintaining the
reliability of the electric grid. Policy options include a
more aggressive renewable portfolio standard
potentially evolving into a low-carbon portfolio
standard; expansion of the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative; GHG emission standards for new power
plants; policies to facilitate the siting of new power
plants; and policies to encourage repowering of
existing fossil fuel plants. These policies, combined
The 321-MW Maple Ridge Wind Farm in
Lewis County, New York is one of the
with investments to improve and maintain the
largest wind farms east of the Mississippi
performance of the grid (e.g., transmission and
River.
distribution network upgrading, energy storage) could
reduce the GHG emissions from this important sector, which is the backbone of a low-carbon
future.

•

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Sector Policy Options: Promoting sustainable
production and conversion of biomass feedstocks; improving land management to maximize
carbon uptake; supporting on-farm renewable energy and energy efficiency; increasing the
availability of locally produced foods; and reducing waste are some of the key policies in this
sector. While a small source of GHG emissions in New York, this sector is unique in that it
can serve as a sink for carbon and as a potential source for low-carbon biofuels.

This Interim Report also presents preliminary quantitative analysis of the costs, savings, and
GHG emission reduction potential for individual mitigation policy options relative to a mid-point
40 by 30 benchmark target, i.e., 40 percent reduction in GHG emissions by 2030. While further
economic analysis is needed, some general observations can be made from the analysis to date:
•

No single policy can deliver the level of emission reduction needed to achieve a 40 by 30
target. A portfolio of policies will be needed to reduce emissions from the many different
GHG sources throughout our economy.

•

A linear path to achieving 80 by 50 may not be feasible nor optimal for a state like New
York, which is already one of the most carbon-efficient states in the country on a per capita
basis. We may need to ratchet up the stringency of the policies over time to increase the rate
of emission reduction as technologies and markets mature.

•

There are a number of policies—particularly in the Buildings, Industry, and Transportation
sectors— that represent cost-effective ways to take a meaningful step toward a low-carbon
future. These “No Regrets” policies, which are primarily efficiency policies, represent

ES-3

options for early action. Further analysis of benefits and costs, and strategies to finance
and/or fund, will be needed.
•

Energy efficiency policies alone, however, will not deliver the level of emission reduction
needed to achieve a 40 by 30 target (and ultimately 80 by 50). To make appreciable progress
toward these aggressive goals and to break our dependence on finite fossil-fuel resources, the
State will need to continue to strategically advance low-carbon energy supply-side policies
and infrastructure investments, particularly focusing on policies that provide significant cobenefits to New Yorkers (e.g., improvements in local air quality, opportunities for economic
development, and job creation).

As a single state attempting to address a global problem, maximizing the co-benefits in New
York State associated with GHG mitigation policies will be necessary to maintain public support
for GHG reduction investments.
New York will need to work
in partnership with other
states to craft regional
solutions, and to have the
federal government as an
active and financially
supportive partner.

Creating the clean energy economy requires clear and
consistent public policies, and sustained and significant
public and private investment. To achieve aggressive GHG
reduction goals and reap the benefits, New York will need
to be resolute in pursuing forward-looking policies and
continuing to advance technology. New York will need to
work in partnership with other states to craft regional
solutions, and to have the federal government as an active
and financially supportive partner.

To turn climate policy into an engine for economic growth,
we will need to ensure that the State’s economic development policies are focused on emerging
growth markets; that State policies foster a robust technology development and
commercialization system; that we have a skilled workforce and a dynamic workforce
development system; and that public and private sectors are fully engaged as partners.

Managing the Risks in New York State Associated with a Changing
Climate
Climate change has already put in motion certain environmental impacts in New York, and
further changes are likely. According to the latest assessment from a team of scientists at the
NASA Goddard Institute, Columbia University, Cornell University, and the City University of
New York—the average air and water temperatures in New York and the region are projected to
increase significantly over the coming decades and heat waves are expected to become more
frequent and more intense. Summertime rain is expected to fall more often as heavy downpours,
leading to more flooding; at the same time, the periods between these rainstorms are likely to be
drier, leading to droughts. By the year 2100, sea levels along our coast and the Hudson River
estuary are projected to rise between 12 and 55 inches, increasing storm-related coastal flooding.
The projected rate of change in our climate is unprecedented in our human history. And only
through aggressive global action will we be able to change this path.

ES-4

Measures to increase the resilience of our communities must begin now. Common sense actions,
such as vulnerability assessments and emergency preparedness, are required to protect a range of
sectors, from agriculture to public health
to utilities. Adaptation can be thought of
simply as responsible planning,
incorporating the most current
information about projected climate
change into a variety of decisions. This
Interim Report identifies a number of
policy options and actions that could
increase the resiliency our natural
systems, our built environment, and key
economic sectors—focusing on
agriculture, vulnerable coastal zones,
ecosystems, water resources, energy
A 400-kW fuel cell (grey box) meets 85 percent of the energy needs of infrastructure, public health,
this Price Chopper supermarket in Albany. The installation reduces
telecommunications and information
the building’s carbon footprint by 71 tons, provides energy security
infrastructure, and transportation.
for perishable items, and saves more than 4 million gallons of water
each year. (Photo courtesy of UTC Power)

Public and private entities will need to assess whether new investments in infrastructure,
particularly long-lived infrastructure like power plants and transportation, will be consistent with
a low-carbon future, both in terms of GHG emissions and in terms of vulnerability to a changing
climate. We should avoid investments that are not highly adapted to a modified climate, such as
infrastructure sited in low-lying floodplains.

Managing Uncertainty and Taking the Long View
While some of the policy options offered for consideration in this Interim Report rely on
technologies that are still rapidly evolving, others make use of technologies readily available
today, such as energy efficiency measures in new and existing buildings, wind, and solar power,
investments in public transportation systems, and smart landuse planning that, by promoting mixed use and transportationClimate change will affect
centered development, naturally results in less vehicle travel.
New York’s economy,
New York can begin now to consider climate change in
decisions, setting us on the path to a low-carbon, climatecommunities, and natural
resilient future.
systems. Measures to
increase resiliency must

Responding to the challenge of climate change is an imperative
begin now.
for government. Effective response includes reducing
emissions, unleashing innovation, capitalizing on the economic
opportunity of a clean energy economy, reducing reliance on petroleum (stemming the flow of
billions of energy dollars out of state), and helping communities become as well-prepared and
resilient to climate change as possible. Significant economic and environmental co-benefits will
flow from this response, satisfying important economic and public health goals.
An effective response will not be easy. It will require long-term dedication and a willingness to
make the public and private investments to keep moving in the right direction (especially

ES-5

challenging in today’s fiscal climate). But ignoring the need for action will be dramatically more
costly over the long term, and New York will miss a great opportunity to be in the forefront of
the emerging low-carbon, clean energy economy.

Next Steps
With this Interim Report, the Climate Action Council is seeking stakeholder and public response
to the initial climate action planning work, including input on the mitigation and adaptation
policy options. During 2011, work will continue to complete the required analyses of the policy
options, which will inform a final Climate Action Plan.
New York State will then need to develop more specific near-term implementation strategies to
effectuate policy and practice. The State will need to establish clear targets and evaluate progress
toward those targets. A mechanism to update this long-term plan on a regular basis will be
needed, as the technology, the state-of-science, and the broader public policy environment will
continue to change.
Further, given the strong linkages between GHG emissions and energy policy, strategies to
reduce GHG emissions will also need to be considered further in the development of New
York’s State Energy Plan as well as in other planning processes, such as State implementation
plans for various co-pollutants.
The recently enacted Article 6 of the Energy Law requires the State Energy Plan to include an
inventory of greenhouse gas emissions, and strategies for facilitating and accelerating the use of
low-carbon energy sources and carbon mitigation measures. Thus, the State Energy Plan will
become a mechanism to deliberate and advance appropriate energy policy that fully accounts for
the climate change impacts from New York energy production and use.

ES-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Overview
Climate Action Plan Interim Report
1.0 Climate Change and the Imperative for Action
Humans are conducting a vast experiment on Earth’s systems. Combustion of fossil fuels and
land use change on a global scale are driving alterations to the Earth’s climate. Human-made
global climate change is underway. Scientists have spent the past several decades intensively
studying our planet’s temperature and climate history, assessing how our natural climate has
changed and projecting how future human emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) will trap still
more excess heat in the Earth’s land, ocean, and atmosphere, further changing the climate. Key
findings include the following:
•

That our climate is changing is no longer in question. Worldwide temperature measurements
of land, oceans, and air document that the average temperature of the earth is rising. A
considerable portion of this temperature rise is attributed to human activities—primarily
deforestation and the combustion of fossil fuels.

•

Natural processes required hundreds of millions of years to turn the stored carbon from
ancient plants into our fossil fuels. In the short time (geologically speaking) since the
Industrial Revolution, fossil fuel combustion has
injected large amounts of this long-stored carbon into
Scientists conclude that
our atmosphere as heat-trapping carbon dioxide, while
an 80 percent reduction
other modern industrial practices have increased
of GHG emissions is
emissions of powerful GHGs such as methane and
needed by mid-century
nitrous oxide. The additional heat that these GHGs trap
to avoid potentially
is altering our climate system.

•

Although heat already trapped by past emissions of
change impacts.
GHGs will continue to increase global temperatures for
some decades, actions taken now can dramatically
decrease impacts for current and future generations. Decisive emission reduction that keeps
atmospheric GHG concentrations below threshold levels could mean the difference between
climate changes to which humans can likely adapt and very severe impacts. Scientists
forecast that an 80 percent reduction in GHG emissions, achieved by mid-century, has a good
chance of minimizing the worst of the potential impacts. Integrating climate adaptation into
current decision making can reduce the costs and disruption of the unavoidable impacts
already built into the climate system.

•

The best available information suggests that, for the most part, the “new” climate that will
result if emissions continue on today’s path will be less hospitable to human civilization than
the climate that has prevailed for millennia—possibly different enough to lead to widespread
social disruptions, and certainly enough to impose huge costs.

•

In New York State, climate change has begun to affect, and will continue to affect the natural
resources that support our economy and quality of life: air quality, water quality, marine and
freshwater fisheries, plant and wildlife species, salt and freshwater wetlands, surface and
subsurface drinking water supplies, forests, and other wildlife habitats.

catastrophic climate

OV-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Our economy, communities, and natural systems are vulnerable to higher temperatures, rising
sea level, and more variable, intense weather: agriculture and forestry (e.g., new pests,
reductions in crop yields and viability); electric transmission efficiency and power demands
(e.g., hotter days mean more air cooling); communications and transportation infrastructure,
especially structures in low-lying areas; public health (e.g., increases in heat-related deaths
and in cardiovascular, respiratory, and vector-borne illness); and interruptions in food and
drinking water availability.

The human role in planetary warming and climate change
gives us both the opportunity and the responsibility to avert
or limit the impending changes. Climate science suggests
that we can avoid the worst consequences of climate change
if we mitigate (reduce or sequester) our emissions of GHGs
and take measures to adapt to unavoidable climate change.

Major Greenhouse
Gases Emitted from
Human Activities
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Methane (CH4)
Halocarbons
(Industrial gases)
Nitrous Oxide (N20)
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)

Climate change is a global problem requiring global
solutions and local action. Businesses and communities,
states and nations are beginning to respond to the challenge
by fostering low-carbon energy and economic development
patterns. Leaders of this response are positioned to reap
economic and social benefits from the transition, while
rigid, inflexible economies risk losing competitive positions
in the global marketplace. If we fail to reduce GHG emissions and adapt to unavoidable changes,
future generations will be forced to bear significant consequences.

2.0 Responding to Climate Change: Climate Action Planning in New
York
New York State is leading a candid discussion of responses to the threats and opportunities of a
changing climate. The context for this discussion is the goal established by Executive Order 24
for a reduction of GHG emissions by 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050 (80 by 50). This goal
is based on the consensus of the scientific community that this magnitude of emission reduction
is needed to avoid potentially catastrophic impacts from climate change.
This Interim Report is an important element in the planning process. It presents for consideration
by decision makers, businesses and citizens the overarching goals and initial outcomes of New
York’s climate planning process:
•

A long-term vision for a climate-resilient, low-carbon, clean energy future for New York

•

The long-term 80 by 50 goal and a mid-term benchmark target of reducing GHG emissions
by 40 percent by the year 2030 (40 by 30)

•

A preliminary list of policy options that, if broadly adopted, have the potential to
dramatically reduce emissions and increase resiliency to a changing climate, while providing
other benefits to New Yorkers in the near term

•

Initial expert analysis on the relative costs of different GHG mitigation policy options

OV-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Initial strategies to link climate and energy policy with economic development opportunities,
in particular those associated with growing a clean energy economy.

In 2011, the Climate Action Council will further refine these preliminary ideas, finalize cost
information and economic potentials, analyze the macroeconomic impacts of the policies, and
outline a strategy for implementation.
As climate change is a long-term issue that touches on many facets of our society and economy,
New York’s climate planning process must be ongoing and iterative—establishing needs; raising
and refining ideas, action plans, and cost estimates; adopting policies at various time scales; and
checking to see whether the policies are accomplishing the goals. The Climate Action Plan is
intended to lead and motivate a sustained effort by business, government, and individuals to
mitigate GHG emissions, adapt to a changing climate, and reap the societal and economic
benefits of a low-carbon economy.
Policies to address climate change cannot be developed in isolation. Using energy has been
characterized as "the metabolism of modern industrial society." As such, development of climate
policies cannot be separated from energy security, energy affordability, economic activity, and
overall quality of life. These linkages and constraints must be considered in formulating and
developing realistic policy options.
Transformation of our fossil fuel economy into a clean energy economy will be the work of a
generation, involving large numbers of investors
and workers, a wide variety of skills, and action
and support by both public and private sectors.
Using energy is the metabolism
The Council recognizes the magnitude of the
of modern industrial society.
80 by 50 challenge and acknowledges that New
Daniel Sarewitz, Arizona State University
York’s success in achieving the economy-wide
GHG reduction goal ultimately depends on
coordinated policy and action by federal, state and local governments.
Overarching Goals of New York’s Climate Action Plan
•

Provide a set of long-term objectives to guide State decision making.

•

Set out the policies that will enable both climate change adaptation and mitigation, helping to
ensure that New York State does not make decisions in the near term that will lock in a highcarbon future or increase our vulnerability to changes in climate (such as building long-lived
infrastructure that is carbon intense or climate vulnerable).

•

Identify core solutions and strategically allocate available funding to effectively reduce GHG
emissions and stimulate economic activity, while promoting constructive responses by other
states and the nation as a whole.

•

Provide a foundation for New York to gain advantage in the emerging low-carbon, clean
energy economy, advancing the state’s economic and strategic interests in the short and long
term.

OV-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York State Climate Action Policy Options
At the center of this Interim Report are policy options to achieve GHG emissions mitigation and
climate change adaptation. The policies were selected for their potential to minimize costs,
maximize co-benefits, and integrate environmental justice and other important public policy
objectives. Additional analysis and further development of these policies will be carried out in
the next phase of climate action planning.
Mitigation: policy options to reduce emissions cover four categories of GHG emission sources:
Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial buildings and processes (RCI);
Transportation and Land Use (TLU); Electric Power Supply and Distribution (PSD); and
Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste (AFW).
Adaptation: policy options to increase climate resiliency cover eight sectors (Agriculture,
Coastal Zones, Ecosystems, Energy, Public Health, Transportation, Telecommunications, and
Water Resources).

The Climate Action Council's website,
www.nyclimatechange.us, provides
access to New York’s climate planning
process.

These policy options were developed through a collaborative
process that included more than 100 technical experts and
stakeholders, along with staff experts from 13 State agencies.
The Climate Action Council convened New York stakeholders,
calling on experts from New York and beyond to take part in
Technical Work Groups and an Integration Advisory Panel.
Since February 2010, these groups have been examining
mitigation and adaptation policy options available to the State.
The Council‘s comprehensive web site offers detailed
information about the process at www.nyclimatechange.us.

This Interim Report builds on extensive previous work. Data
on emissions and policy design came from New York’s
experience with programs supporting development of renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency and the development of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). In particular,
the 2009 New York State Energy Plan significantly advanced understanding of GHG mitigation,
through preliminary technical assessments of greenhouse gas science, emissions, and the scope
of needed mitigation actions. The State Sea Level Rise Task Force, the Assessment for Effective
Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New York State (ClimAID), PlaNYC, and New York
City’s extensive adaptation analyses provide foundational data for statewide adaptation
recommendations.
Public Input, Further Planning Work, and Implementation
With this Interim Report, the Climate Action Council is seeking stakeholder and public response
to the initial climate action planning work, including input on the policy options. During 2011,
the Council will complete additional analyses and design of the policy options and transmit its
recommendations in a Climate Action Plan. That plan will include the following:
•

Economic assessments, including both the cost of inaction and macroeconomic impacts in
New York, such as creating jobs and retaining some of the $38 billion dollars that is exported
annually from New York to pay for energy imports
OV-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Refinement of policy options based on public comment

•

Assessment of policy interactions (reinforcement and conflicts) among individual policy
options; there are many such interactions, given the multi-sector nature of aggressive GHG
mitigation policies

•

Creation of a mitigation cost curve
(comparing net costs and reduction
potentials of individual climate policy
options)

•

•

Climate Smart Communities
More than 80 New York villages, towns,
and counties have declared themselves
Climate Smart Communities, working to
reduce energy use, protect the climate,
and save taxpayer dollars.

Assessment of the GHG reduction
potential of the full policy package, and
determining whether it puts New York on
the path to meet the 40 by 30 benchmark
target and the 80 by 50 long-term goal

Across New York, Climate Smart
Communities are

Further analysis of funding options and
availability of capital, as well as of
societal benefits and externalities.

• Inventorying greenhouse gas emissions,
setting reduction goals and developing
action plans.
• Carrying out projects that reduce
emissions from municipal facilities and
vehicles.

Implementation of policies to achieve a
transformation as significant as 80 by 50 will
require substantial investments in some
sectors of the economy. Although many
policy options offer substantial savings to
consumers, there are notable exceptions that
demonstrate deep carbon emissions
reductions but come at a cost to achieve.

• Reducing community emissions through
more efficient municipal services, such as
traffic systems and waste disposal.
To learn more about Climate Smart
Communities, visit:
http://www.dec.ny.gov/energy/50845.html

To fund some policy proposals, New York
State will need to identify new funding mechanisms of sufficient magnitude and duration to
catalyze a change in how we produce or use energy. Such funding sources could be created by a
combination of carbon pricing, federal cost sharing, and public-private partnerships. Leveraging
private capital will be absolutely critical to achieving a goal as bold as 80 by 50. Public funding
should come from sources that directly link revenue generation to GHGs, promoting efficiency
and low-carbon technologies, and avoiding burdens on desired activities such as economic
activity and employment.
Policies must be crafted in a way that promotes clean energy and low-carbon investment,
optimizes public investment dollars, and places New York at a competitive advantage both
nationally and globally. Recognizing the current fiscal constraints, the Council recommends a
staged or phased approach to this grand challenge.

3.0 A Clean Energy Economy in New York
New York could become the regional, national, and international hub of clean technology
industry and innovation—creating good jobs for New Yorkers. A portfolio of State policies
strategically designed to support the critical building blocks of a clean energy economy would

OV-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

maximize economic development potential, turning climate policy into an engine for economic
growth.

NYS Climate Action Plan
Energy Terminology
Low-carbon and near-zero-carbon
energy refer to energy from sources
whose carbon intensity (CO2 emitted
per unit of energy) is significantly
lower than that of traditional fossil
fuels. Low-carbon sources include
renewables (solar, hydroelectric,
sustainable biomass, wind, marine,
tidal, and geothermal power), nuclear
power, and energy produced by
processes that capture and sequester
CO2 from fossil fuel combustion.
The term clean energy includes the
suite of environmentally sustainable
energy supply and demand
technologies and systems in all
industries. It includes renewable
energy, energy storage, and efficient
transportation technology, as well as
technologies and systems that
improve energy efficiency.

Much has been written about the potential growth of
the burgeoning clean energy economy and the
competition for these emerging markets is fierce and
global. New York is well positioned to compete in
this economic race: New York has long been a leader
in energy technology innovation and
commercialization, with a well established worldclass research infrastructure and a major financial and
venture capital industry. New York has a superior
higher education system, natural resources necessary
to power a low-carbon economy, and a productive
and skilled labor force that can readily transition into
new energy industries and markets.
The clean energy economy includes these critical
building blocks:

1. Robust Market Demand for Clean Energy
Products and Services: Strong market demand must
exist to motivate companies to make investments in
facilities, manufacturing, services infrastructure, and
research and development. Policies at the
international, national, and state level can help create
this demand. Such policies include market-pull
policies (e.g., a Renewable Portfolio Standard, or
RPS), financial incentives/disincentives (e.g., a price on carbon emissions), regulations/codes,
procurement guidelines, and a variety of other mechanisms analyzed in this Interim Report.
Market demand is the critical foundation for advancing a clean energy economy.
2. Skilled Clean Energy Workforce and Dynamic
Workforce Development System: A skilled workforce will
help companies to grow and locate in New York State. In an
innovation-based economic model, a full spectrum of skill
levels is needed—from the technician servicing customers’
repair and installation needs to the CEO who attracts
investment and runs the company. A dynamic workforce
development system meeting the needs of a clean energy
economy must take a long view to develop the human capital
needed to prepare New York to capture the benefits of a
clean energy economy.

Jobs involved with weatherizing
buildings and other aspects of the
clean energy economy keep energy
dollars in the local community.

3. Technology Innovation and Commercialization
Ecosystem: To provide more options and lower cost
solutions, substantial and sustained investment in energy
technology research and development and new approaches to accelerate technology

OV-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Working to reduce the cost of mounting and installing solar
arrays, this start-up company is part of the New York City
Accelerator for a Clean and Renewable Economy (NYC
ACRE), a joint effort of New York State, New York City, the
investment community, and several universities. NYC
ACRE is developing entrepreneurs and innovative local
businesses that provide climate and energy solutions while
growing the clean technology sector and creating jobs in
New York. Located in Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse,
Albany, Long Island and New York City, New York’s six
Clean Energy incubators support a total of 72 clean energy
start-up companies. (Photo courtesy of Polytechnic Institute
of NYU.)

commercialization must be developed. A fully
integrated network of inventors, entrepreneurs,
financiers, and market experts—with many
vital connections much like a natural
ecosystem—will together spur creation of new
clean energy companies that will take the risks
needed to produce new products and services.
New York has the key ingredients for robust
job-creating, energy-technology innovation.
With State policies that support the entire
innovation ecosystem, New York could reap
substantial economic gains by developing and
manufacturing high-value clean energy
products for local use and for international
markets.

4. Focused and Sustained Economic
Development Strategies that Support Clean
Energy: New York must embrace a model for
economic development that builds on its
strengths as a knowledge-based economy and
that recognizes that the state will struggle to
compete in low-cost commoditized markets. State economic development policies should
support the retention of jobs and the creation of new businesses and jobs in emerging highgrowth markets, such as clean technology industries. Economic development policies must
embrace the new emerging economy of the 21st century— an economy whose growth is based
on innovation, knowledge, and entrepreneurship.
5. Fully Engaged Private and Public Sector: Achieving a goal as transformational as
80 by 50 is possible only with the full and sustained commitment of all levels of the public and
private sectors. The clean energy revolution will ultimately depend on linkages and support from
the federal government, State government, businesses, academic institutions, not-for profits and
municipal governments—each of which plays an important role in the transformation to a clean
energy economy. And support from the public at large is a prerequisite for policymakers in New
York to advance and sustain the climate-energy policy options presented here.

4.0 Potential Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities in New York
Global climate models project that the Earth will warm in the next century, in a consistent
geographical pattern. This climate change threatens New York’s natural resources, economy, and
the health and lifestyle of its residents. For example, New York State’s average air temperatures
are projected to increase significantly over the coming decades, and heat waves are expected to
become more frequent and intense. Summertime rain is expected to fall more often as heavy
downpours, leading to more flooding; at the same time, the periods between these rainstorms are
likely to be drier, leading to droughts. By the year 2100, sea levels along our coast and the
Hudson River estuary are projected to rise between 12 and 55 inches, increasing storm-related
coastal flooding.

OV-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New York
State (ClimAID) is a comprehensive project to provide New York State decision makers with the
best available climate science and other information on the state’s vulnerability to, and possible
benefits from, climate change. The study also aims to facilitate development of adaptation
strategies informed by both local experience and scientific knowledge. To make it easier to
assess potential impacts under future conditions, the ClimAID team developed a set of climate
change scenarios for New York State. Figure OV-1, from ClimAID, shows the projected changes
in average annual temperature and precipitation for New York for a mid-level emission scenario
of future greenhouse gas emissions. A synthesis report summarizing the findings of ClimAID
can be found in Appendix H to the Interim Report.
Figure OV-1. Projected changes in annual temperature and precipitation for the 2080s in
the Northeast, under the A1B (“middle”) emissions scenario, relative to the 1970-1999
baseline

Many climate changes projected by scientists are already occurring, with impacts to New York
State’s society, economy, and natural ecosystems. The
summaries presented here by sector list some of the
expected specific impacts to New York State as the climate
continues to change.
Agriculture
Some crops may have yield or quality losses associated
with increased frequency of drought, increased summer
high temperatures, increased risk of freeze injury as a result
of more variable winters, and increased pressure from
weeds, insects, and disease. Dairy milk production per cow
will decline in the region as temperatures and the frequency

OV-8

Apple crops are vulnerable to late spring
freezes and other weather aberrations that
accompany climate change.

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

of summer heat stress increase. Warmer temperatures, a longer growing season, and increased
atmospheric carbon dioxide could create opportunities for farmers who are able to transition to
new crops.
Coastal Zones
Sea level rise will greatly amplify risks to coastal populations and will lead to permanent
inundation of low-lying areas, more frequent flooding by storm surges, and increased beach
erosion. Saltwater could reach farther up the Hudson River and into estuaries, contaminating
urban water supplies. Tides and storm surges may propagate farther up the Hudson River,
increasing flood risk far from the coast.
Ecosystems
Widespread shifts in species composition will occur
in the state's forests and other natural landscapes,
with the loss of spruce-fir forests, alpine tundra, and
boreal plant communities. Warmer temperatures
will favor the expansion of some invasive species
into New York. Some habitat and food generalists
(such as white-tailed deer) may also benefit. Higher
levels of carbon dioxide may increase the growth
rate of fast-growing species, which are often weeds
Tidal wetlands are expected to be flooded by rising seas and invasive species. Lakes, streams, inland
faster than new wetlands can establish themselves
wetlands, and associated aquatic species will be
further inland.
increasingly vulnerable to changes in the timing,
supply, and intensity of rainfall and snowmelt, groundwater recharge, and duration of ice cover.
Increasing water temperatures will negatively affect brook trout and other native coldwater fish.
Sea level rise will lead to loss of coastal wetlands, reducing populations of fish and shellfish.
Energy Systems
More frequent heat waves will cause an increase in the use of air conditioning, stressing power
supplies and increasing peak demand loads. Transformers and distribution lines for both electric
and gas supply are vulnerable to extreme weather events, temperature, and flooding. Coastal
infrastructure in downstate areas is vulnerable to flooding as a result of sea level rise and severe
storms. Hydropower is vulnerable to drought and changes in precipitation patterns while power
plant efficiencies may be reduced due to increased air and water temperatures.
Public Health
Heat-related illness and death are projected to increase, while cold-related deaths will likely
decrease. Increases in heat-related death are projected to outweigh reductions in cold-related
death. Cardiovascular and respiratory-related illness and death will be increased by worsening air
quality, including more smog, wildfires, pollens, and molds. Allergy and asthma cases are
projected to increase and become more severe. Vector-borne diseases, such as those spread by
mosquitoes and ticks, may expand or their distribution patterns may change. Water- and foodborne diseases are likely to increase. Water supply, recreational water quality, and food
production will be at increased risk due to increased temperatures and changing precipitation
OV-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

patterns. More intense storms and flooding could lead to increased stress and mental health
impacts and impaired delivery of public health and medical services. Demand for health services
and the need for public health surveillance and monitoring are likely to increase.
Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure
Communication service delivery is vulnerable to hurricanes, lightning, ice, snow, wind storms,
and other extreme weather events, some of which are projected to change in frequency and/or
intensity. Communication lines and other infrastructure are vulnerable to the observed and
projected increase in heavy precipitation events and resulting flooding and/or freezing rain. In
coastal and near-coastal areas, sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge flooding
will be a considerable threat especially later this century. The delivery of communication
services is reliant on the electric power grid, which may experience increased stress resulting
from the additional demand associated with heat waves.
Transportation
Low-lying transportation systems such as subways and tunnels, especially in coastal and nearcoastal areas, are at particular risk of flooding as a
result of sea level rise and heavy-precipitation events.
Materials used in transportation infrastructure, such
as asphalt and train rails, are vulnerable to increased
temperatures and frequency of extreme heat events.
The Great Lakes may see a shorter season of winter
ice cover, leading to a longer shipping season.
However, reduced ice cover is also likely to mean an
increase in “lake effect” snow events, which often
cause transportation-related problems. Air- and landbased transportation systems are vulnerable to ice
and snowstorms, although requirements for salting
Railroad tracks that run only a few feet above the
Hudson River illustrate the vulnerability to climate
and snow removal may decrease as snow tends to
change and sea level rise of infrastructure located
turn more often into rain. The number of freeze/thaw
near water bodies. Tidal as far north as Troy, the
cycles, which disturb roadbeds, may increase as
Hudson will directly experience higher ocean levels
and storm surges.
winter temperatures rise.
Water Resources
Increasing water temperatures in rivers and streams will affect aquatic health and reduce the
capacity of streams to assimilate effluent from wastewater treatment plants. Heavy downpours
have increased over the past 50 years and this trend is projected to continue, causing an increase
in localized flash flooding in urban areas and hilly regions. Flooding has the potential to increase
pollutants in the water supply and inundate wastewater treatment plants and other vulnerable
development within floodplains. At the same time as downpours occur more often, more
moderate rain events are expected to become less frequent during the summer, resulting in
additional and possibly longer summer dry periods and stressing water supply systems with
limited storage. Reduced summer flows on large rivers and lowered groundwater tables could
lead to conflicts among competing water users.

OV-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Economic Impacts
The economic cost associated with climate change mitigation and adaptation is a growing
concern for national, state, and local governments around the world. While the cost of combating
climate change often impedes action on this threat, inaction has its own significant costs.
Some economic sectors in New York State are more at risk from climate change than others.
Because of heavy concentrations of assets in coastal areas, the largest financial impacts likely
will occur there, including impacts on transportation, energy, and other coastal infrastructure, as
well as natural areas. Other likely costs include decreased agricultural crop yield and dairy
production, as well as tourism dollars lost in the winter-recreation industry.

5.0 New York State's GHG Emissions
Emission inventories and projections provide the basis for identifying GHG emissions reduction
opportunities and for planning to minimize the economic and environmental impacts of policies.
New York’s Emissions Inventory
In 2005, the latest year for which global emissions data
are available, New York’s share of emissions within the
U.S. (3.8 percent) was smaller than its share of the U.S.
population (6.5 percent). In contrast, the U.S. share of the
world’s GHG emissions (18 percent) was much greater
than its share of the 2005 population (4.6 percent).
Nonetheless, New York’s GHG emissions accounted for
0.7 percent of the world’s GHG emissions in 2005, while
its share of global population was 0.3 percent.
In 2008, New York emitted approximately 254 million
metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e), an
average of a little more than 13 metric tons of CO2e for
each state resident. New York’s per capita GHG
emissions are considerably (43 percent) below the U.S.
average.

Carbon Dioxide
Equivalent (CO2e)
Because GHGs vary in their
ability to retain heat, GHG
emission inventories and
projections are given in the
metric CO2e. CO2e expresses
any GHG’s global warming
potential as a multiple of the
potential of carbon dioxide
(CO2).
For instance, methane has a
CO2e of approximately 22 –
that is, methane in the
atmosphere produces about 22
times as much warming as the
same weight of CO2.

For each of the six major GHGs, Figure OV-2 depicts the
portions of New York’s emissions that result from fuel
combustion and from other sources. Prominent non-fuel
combustion GHG sources are cement production, ozone depleting substitutes, natural gas
leakage, landfills, agricultural animals, municipal waste combustion, municipal wastewater, and
agricultural soil management.

OV-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-2. 2008 Percentage of GHG Emissions by Gas and Source (Includes Net
Imports of Electricity)
Total CO2 Equivalent from Greenhouse Gases:
254 Million Metric Tons

Percent of Total GHG Emissions

Perf luorocarbons

0.14%

Sulf ur Hexaf luoride

0.21%

Nitrous Oxide

2.2%

Hydrof luorocarbons

3.0%

Methane

15%
Other Sources
(38 Million Metric
Tons)
85%
Fuel Combustion
(216 Million Metric
Tons)

6.1%

Carbon Dioxide

88.4%
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Million Metric Tons of CO2 Equivalent

Fuel Combustion

Other Sources

CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas

As Figure OV-2 shows, carbon dioxide (CO2) is the predominant GHG emitted in New York
(88 percent, including both combustion and non-combustion emissions). Methane is second
(6 percent); most of New York’s methane results from non-fuel combustion sources such as
municipal waste and natural gas leakage. The state’s small amounts of nitrous oxide emissions
(2 percent of total emissions) are mostly attributable to automotive fuel combustion. Other
industrial gases make up the remaining GHG emissions.
Combustion of fossil fuels is the dominant source CO2 emissions—CO2 from fuel combustion
makes up 84 percent of New York’s GHG emissions. Fossil fuel combustion occurs in power
plants to generate electricity, on building sites for space heat and industrial process power, and in
vehicles to transport goods and people.
Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Major Economic Sectors
The GHG inventory divides CO2 emissions into four main end-use sectors: industrial, residential,
commercial/institutional, and transportation. The emissions inventories for the residential,
commercial/institutional, and industrial sectors include the emissions resulting from each
sector’s share of electricity generation, whereas the Climate Action Plan policy option analysis
separates out electricity sector emissions because they must be mitigated within the power
supply and distribution sector.
Figure OV-3 details 2008 CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion by end-use sector. The
transportation sector accounts for approximately 40 percent of CO2 emissions from fuel
combustion; the residential and commercial/institutional sectors are each responsible for roughly
25 percent of fuel combustion CO2 emissions, including emissions from the share of electricity
generation required by each of these sectors. The residential sector shows greater emissions from
fuel combustion on-site than from electricity generation or imported electricity, while the
commercial/institutional sector shows the reverse—emissions from electricity generation and
imported electricity are higher than emissions from on-site fuel combustion. The industrial
sector’s fuel combustion CO2 emissions are the lowest (approximately 10 percent), with most of
these emissions coming from on-site fuel combustion.

OV-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-3. 2008 CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion by End Use Sector (Includes Net
Imports of Electricity)
Total CO2 from Fuel Combustion: 213 Million Metric
Tons (84% of Total GHGs)
4%
Net Imports of
Electricity

Industrial

22%
Electricity
Generation

9.5%

Residential

39%
Transportation

24.9%

Commercial

35%
On-Site Combustion

25.8%

Transportation

39.8%

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Million Metric Tons of CO2
Transportation

On-Site Combustion

Electricity Generation

Net Imports of Electricity

CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas.

Of the different fuels, natural gas, which is burned in all fuel combustion sectors, accounts for
the largest amount of fuel combustion CO2 emissions (almost 30 percent). The transportation
sector emits nearly as much fuel combustion CO2 (28 percent), from burning gasoline in
vehicles.
Trends in Emissions and GHG Sinks
New York’s gross GHG emissions increased by about 2 percent (or 6 million metric tons of
CO2e) between 1990 and 2008, with a peak around the year 2000. New York’s transportation
sector showed by far the greatest growth in gross GHG emissions, with an annual increase of 14
million metric tons from 1990 to 2008. In contrast, during this same period annual CO2e
emissions from electricity generated in-state decreased by about 18 million metric tons, although
emissions associated with electricity imported from other states grew.
It should be noted that gross emission figures do not take into account uptake of carbon by GHG
sinks, while net emissions do. New York’s forests, including urban forests, wetlands, and fields,
function as sinks of CO2 emissions. Agricultural cultivation practices also are found to contribute
to removal of CO2 from the atmosphere.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Forecast through 2030
Relying on a variety of sources for forecasts (as described in Chapter 3 of the full Interim Report
on Inventory and Forecast), a reference case forecast of GHG emissions through 2030 was
developed. The reference case assumes implementation of policies that are currently approved

OV-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and funded at the state and federal level. It assumes no additional policy action, and is sometimes
referred to as a “business-as-usual” scenario.
Figure OV-4 shows estimates of annual GHG emissions through 2030 (based on forecasts for
Mid-Atlantic fuel demand, along with natural gas projections). Forecasts for on-highway diesel
and gasoline fuel use were based on forecasts of New York vehicle miles of travel provided by
the Department of Transportation and federal projections of vehicle fuel economy. The forecasts
do not take into account the effects of a changing climate.
Figure OV-4. Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Source Category, 1990–2030

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

300
250

247

250

1990

1995

278

280

FORECAST
256

261

263

268

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

200
150
100
50
0

Residential, Commercial/Institutional & Industrial

Transportation

Power Supply & Delivery

Agriculture

Waste

Under the reference case forecasts, New York’s gross GHG emissions decrease slightly from
2005 over the forecast period, to about 268 million tons of CO2e by 2030, or 8 percent above
1990 levels. Relative to 2005, the shares of 2030 emissions associated with residential,
commercial/institutional and industrial sector fuel use, transportation, and power supply and
delivery are still the highest, in the same order. The greatest increase in the share of emissions is
in the transportation sector, with an increase from 29 percent of total gross emissions in 2005 to
33 percent in 2030.
Growth rates of fuel use for space heating, industrial processes, transportation, and electricity
demand, the principal determinants of New York’s future GHG emissions, are driven by
economic, demographic, and land-use trends, which are difficult to predict. Improving forecasts
of growth patterns and transportation system impacts will be a crucial task for climate planners
going forward.

OV-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

6.0 Visioning
New York’s 2050 Analysis
The 80 by 50 goal and the year 2050 vision drive New York’s Climate Action Plan. In the 2050
vision, with GHG emissions at only 20 percent of today’s level, New York would boast a vibrant
economy, its resilient communities and natural resources meeting citizens’ needs in a changing
climate and thriving as the nation’s and the world’s low-carbon economy matures.
To give definition and specificity to this 2050 vision, the Climate Action Council conducted a
visioning exercise. The visioning exercise made use of four tools:
•

2050 Scenario development, based on a coupled energy-sector model and sets of
assumptions about future energy demand, patterns of energy use, and low-emission
technologies that might reasonably be available to power the low-carbon economy

•

Visioning workshop, held at the New York Academy of Sciences on January 5, 2010; full
session and presentations available online at http://nyclimatechange.us/2050

•

White paper incorporating workshop outcomes and information from other expert sources:
Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State, Brookhaven National Laboratory
(Appendix F).

•

2050 Sectoral visions developed by the
Technical Work Groups for each sector
of New York’s economy: Residential,
Commercial/Institutional and Industrial
(buildings and processes); Power
Supply and Delivery; Transportation
and Land Use; Agriculture, Forestry,
and Waste (with Materials
Management). Detailed discussions of
the visions for each sector are part of the
mitigation sector chapters of this Interim
Report.

This visioning exercise led to the following
key findings:

The City of Syracuse, a Climate Smart Community, sets an
example and achieves GHG reduction by partnering in a car
sharing program through which residents rent low-emission
hybrid vehicles for short time periods. (Photo courtesy of
City of Syracuse)

•

Meeting the 80 by 50 goal will require substantial investments in new energy systems and
infrastructure that have very low- or zero-net carbon emissions. Changes in patterns of
energy use also will be needed.

•

Transportation systems and buildings (residential and commercial) will have to move away
from reliance on combustion of fossil fuels to alternate sources with significantly lower
carbon or no carbon emissions.

•

A broad shift from reliance on fossil fuels to generate electricity to carbon-free low- or zerocarbon sources will be needed with a concurrent increase in energy storage and generation
capacity. Local fossil fuel combustion yields to electrification and other alternate
technologies.

OV-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Energy efficiency must be aggressively pursued today, but it alone is not sufficient to achieve
New York’s 80 by 50 GHG emission reduction goal.

•

Development and redevelopment based on smart
growth principles, along with efficient building design
practices, building technologies, and construction
methods, can significantly reduce the energy demand
for buildings and transportation.

•

An informed and engaged citizenry that values wise,
efficient use of clean energy as part of their everyday
lives is absolutely critical to achieving New York’s 80
by 50 goal. The goal must be pursued in part through
extensive, long-term partnering among all levels of
government and across the region, and between the
public and private sectors. It will take sustained,
unprecedented effort on the part of all.

The Climate Smart Community of New Castle
informs and engages its citizens and helps to
reduce GHG emissions with an e-waste
recycling day. (Photo courtesy of Town of New
Castle)

7.0 Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Options
The Technical Work Groups explored policy options to reduce GHG emissions in four key
energy-related sectors of New York’s economy, as shown in Figure OV-5: Power Supply and
Delivery; Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial; Transportation and Land Use;
and Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste. The Technical Work Groups developed policy options
after reviewing technologies and projections of future demand and screening a large number of
possible State policies. As the figure shows, the policy options target all the core 80 by 50
strategies developed in the visioning process.

OV-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-5. Policy Options and Vision Strategies Map

RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL, AND INDUSTRIAL
Building Codes, Appliance Standards, & Enforcement, RCI-7
Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, & Upgrades, RCI-8
Energy Efficiency Incentives, RCI-2
Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives, RCI-3
Industrial Process Incentives, RCI-11
Workforce Training & Development, RCI-6
Outreach, Education, and Behavior Change RCI-5
Rate Restructuring & Flexible Metering, RCI-10
Energy Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund, RCI-1
Tax Structure & Private Financing, RCI-4
Research, Development, & Demonstration, RCI-9
TRANSPORTATION & LAND USE
Vehicle Efficiency, TLU-1
Vehicle Incentives & Disincentives, TLU-2
Fleet Incentives & Disincentives, TLU-3
Alternative Fuel & Infrastructure, TLU-4
Research, Development, & Demonstration, TLU-5
Decreased Travel & Less Commuting, TLU-6
Mass Transit & Rail, TLU-7
Freight Strategies, TLU-8
Priority Growth Centers, TLU-9
Transit-Oriented Development, TLU-10
Location Efficient Land Use, TLU-11
Intergovernmental & Regional Initiatives, TLU-12
POWER SUPPLY & DELIVERY
Renewable Portfolio Std & Renewable Incentives, PSD-2
Cap-and-Invest & Low-Carbon Portfolio Std, PSD-6
Siting and Permitting of New Generation, PSD-1
New Facility Emissions and Nuclear Power, PSD-10
Existing Fossil Plant Policies, PSD-8
Distribution Network Upgrade, PSD-4
Transmission Network Upgrade, PSD-5
Energy Storage, PSD-3
Research, Development, & Demonstration, PSD-9
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, & WASTE
Production of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-Energy, AFW- 1
Conversion of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-Energy, AFW-2
Maximize Waste Reduction, AFW-3
Integrated Farm Management, AFW-4
Farm Efficiency & Renewable Energy, AFW-6
Conserve Open Space, AFW-5
Improved Forest Management, AFW-7
Local Food Production, AFW-8
Research, Development, & Demonstration, AFW-9

OV-17

Carbon Sink
Maintenance /
Enhancement

Low-Carbon Liquid
Fuels

Net Energy-Neutral
Buildings

Carbon-Free
Transportation Systems

Smart Electric
Transmission,
Distribution & Storage

Near- Zero-Carbon
Electricity Generation

POLICY OPTIONS

Maximize Energy
Efficiency &
Conservation

CORE VISIONING STRATEGIES

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-5 lists the policy options by sector (each option is designated throughout the Interim
Report by a combination of sector initials and numbers). Greater detail about the policy options
is available in the Interim Report mitigation chapters (Chapters 6 through 9). Evaluating policy
option effectiveness, their net cost and the interactions among them, and selecting policies for
final recommendations to the Governor, will be the work of the second phase of New York’s
Climate Action Plan.
Analyzing Cost and Potential Emission Reductions from the Policy Options
Where possible, the cost and/or savings associated with a policy and the total GHG emissions
expected by the 2030 benchmark year were quantified. The 1990 baseline emission levels
(referenced in Executive Order 24), along with current levels, are presented in Figure OV-6. The
2030 forecasted GHG emission level, 268 million metric tons (MMtCO2e ), is also presented,
along with the emission limits implied by the 2030 benchmark target (148 MMtCO2e ) and the
2050 goal (50 MMtCO2e ). The required emission reduction for 2030 is therefore 120 MMtCO2e,
as shown in Figure OV-6. While the precise pathway to the 80 by 50 goal cannot be known, the
benchmark goal does provide a plausible mid-point target for the purpose of policy evaluation.
Figure OV-6. GHG Emissions Reductions to Meet the 80 by 50 Goal
300

268

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

250

248

254
Required Reduction
by 2030

200

148

150

100

50

50

0
1990
Residential, Commercial & Industrial

2008

40 by 30 Interim
Benchmark

80 by 50 Goal

Transportation & Land Use

Power Supply & Delivery

Agriculture, Forestry & Waste

Figure OV-7 presents quantitative analysis of the Interim Report’s mitigation policy options over
the study period (2011-2030). The preliminary analytical results presented here describe the
potential effectiveness of the mitigation policy options on a stand-alone basis, without
considering interactions among policies or overlapping emissions reductions. Figure OV-7
presents an estimate of the annual GHG emission reduction anticipated by 2030 of the individual
policy options (i.e., as measured by Million Metric Tons CO2e). To make this estimate, the
Technical Work Groups developed specific targets (policy scenarios), where possible, for
OV-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

individual policy options. (Note that not all policy options are amenable to this type of
quantification.) The results also present an estimate of the total cost or savings of the policy
option through 2030, as measured by net present value (NPV). NPV reflects the total capital
costs, anticipated operation and maintenance costs/savings, and fuel costs/savings associated
with the policy. A negative NPV reflects a savings and implies an economically desirable
investment. Figure OV-7 also presents a rough indicator of cost-effectiveness for the policy
option, as measured by $/ton CO2e avoided, to determine which policy options will deliver the
most CO2e on a dollar-for-dollar basis. As with NPV, a negative $/ton CO2e implies that we save
money as we reduce GHGs.
While further analysis is needed to better understand the full range of economic impacts and to
eliminate potential overlap, some general observations can be made from the analysis to date:
•

No single policy can deliver the level of emission reduction needed to achieve a 40 by 30
target. A portfolio of policies will be needed to reduce emissions from the many different
GHG sources throughout our economy.

•

A linear path to achieving 80 by 50 may not be feasible nor optimal for a state like New
York, which is already one of the most carbon-efficient states in the country on a per capita
basis. We may need to ratchet up the stringency of the policies over time to increase the rate
of emission reduction as technologies and markets mature.

•

There are a number of policies—particularly in the Buildings, Industry, and Transportation
sectors—that represent cost-effective ways to take a meaningful step toward a low-carbon
future. These No Regrets policies, which are primarily efficiency policies, could represent
options for early action. Further analysis of benefits and costs, and strategies to finance
and/or fund, will be needed.

•

Energy efficiency policies alone, however, will not deliver the level of emission reduction
needed to achieve a 40 by 30 target (and ultimately the 80 by 50 goal). To make appreciable
progress toward these aggressive goals and to break our dependence on finite fossil-fuel
resources, the State will need to continue to strategically advance low-carbon energy supplyside policies and infrastructure investments, particularly focusing on policies that provide
significant co-benefits to New Yorkers (e.g., improvements in local air and water quality,
opportunities for economic development and job creation).

OV-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-7. Preliminary Analysis of Mitigation Policy Options: Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Potential and Costs and Savings Estimates
*Note: Negative values denote a savings.
Annual
GHG
Reductions
by 2030
(Million
Metric Ton
CO2e)

Net Present
Value:
Cost/Savings*
(Million $)

Energy Efficiency Incentives

17

-$29

$0

Combined Heat and Power (CHP) Incentives

1.1

$14

$2

Solar Electricity Incentives

3.3

$4,400

$200

Solar Thermal Incentives

2.8

$2,600

$130

Bioenergy Incentives

5.1

-$5,100

-$61

Building Codes, Appliance Standards, and
Enforcement

6.3

-$1,200

-$27

RCI-8

Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and
Upgrades

3.3

-$790

-$23

RCI-11

Industrial Process Incentives

2.6

-$2,500

-$95

TLU-1

Vehicle Technology and Operations

17

$7,900

$62

TLU-2

Vehicle Incentives and Disincentives

2.0

-$2,300

-$120

TLU-3

Fleet Incentives and Disincentives

0.6

-$750

-$130

TLU-4

Alternative Fuel-Related Measures and
Infrastructure—Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS)

8.5

$6,700

$79

Commuter & Traveler assistance

1.0

-$15,000

-$870

0.3
0.4

$720
-$480

$1,400
-$610

Telecommuting

1.0

-$15,000

-$870

Congestion Pricing

0.2

-$1,100

-$460

TLU-7

Expanded Transit

4.9

$25,000

$390

TLU-9

Priority Growth Centers

0.3

-$1,600

-$610

TLU-10

Transit-Oriented Development/ Transit Supportive
Development

0.5

-$5,000

-$870

TLU-11

Location Efficient Land Use

1.2

-$15,000

-$870

PSD-2

Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) and
Incentives for Grid-Based Renewable Generation

7.9

$1,700

$27

PSD-4

Distribution System Upgrades

0.8

-$460

-$73

PSD-6

Low Carbon Portfolio Standard (LCPS): High
penetration of renewables

29

$5,600

$26

AFW-3

Maximize Waste Reduction, Recycling, and
Composting—In-State Only

0.7

$280

$35

Policy
No.

RCI-2

RCI-3

RCI-7

Policy Option

Net
Cost/Savings
per Avoided
Emissions*
($/ Metric ton
CO2e)

Parking Pricing —
Upstate
NYMTC Region

TLU-6

OV-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy
No.

Policy Option

Annual
GHG
Reductions
by 2030
(Million
Metric Ton
CO2e)

Net Present
Value:
Cost/Savings*
(Million $)

Net
Cost/Savings
per Avoided
Emissions*
($/ Metric ton
CO2e)

AFW-4

Integrated Farm Management Planning and
Application

0.6

–$201

–$31

AFW-5

Conserve Open Space, Agricultural Land and
Wetlands

5.5

$1,500

$16

AFW-6

Increase On-Farm Energy Efficiency and
Production of Renewable Energy

0.4

$3

$1

Forest Restoration

4.7

$290

$6

Urban Forestry

2.0

$3,200

$140

Reforestation

2.4

$1,200

$36

AFW-7

*Note: Negative values denote a savings.

The data presented in Figure OV-7 are also illustrated in Figure OV-8. Figure OV-8 shows the
potential annual emission reductions in 2030 and the net-savings or net-cost per ton CO2e
avoided for each policy. The 2030 benchmark goal has been drawn as a line in the figure to
provide a basis for judging effectiveness of each policy. Some general observations can be
provided:
•

Policies that provide the largest potential emission reductions in 2030 include the low-carbon
fuel standard for vehicle fuels (TLU-4), increased vehicle fuel efficiency and/or CO2
emission standards (TLU-1), building energy efficiency incentives (RCI-2), and a low-carbon
portfolio standard for electricity generation (PSD-6).

•

Polices that provide the largest savings per avoided metric ton of emissions include smart
growth policies (TLU-9, -10, and -11) and commuter assistance (TLU-6).

•

Policies that provide both significant emission reductions and net savings include building
energy efficiency incentives (RCI-2), improved building codes, appliance standards, and
enforcement (RCI-7), and vehicle incentives (TLU-2).

The Interim Report also presents estimates of fuels savings associated with these policies, where
appropriate. Based on the estimated reductions in 2030 derived from the policy option and on
current consumption levels, RCI-2 would save enough electricity to power 4.6 million homes
and enough home heating oil and natural gas to heat more than 1.9 million homes for a year.
Similarly, based on the estimated reductions in 2030 derived from the scenario analysis and on
current consumption levels, TLU-1 would save enough motor gasoline to power 7.3 million cars
for a year.

OV-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-8. Preliminary Analysis of Mitigation Policy Options Relative to 40 by 30
Benchmark Target
120

Required Reduction Based on 40 by 30 Interim Benchmark

100

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO2e / Year)

80

RCI
60

PSD
AFW
TLU

40

LCPS: High Renewables Penetration
Location
Efficient
Land Use

Priority Growth Centers

20

Energy
Efficiency
Incentives

Telecommuting
Transit‐
Oriented
Development

Commuter
Assistance

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

Enhanced Codes &
Standards

Alternative Fuels/LCFS
Solar Electric Incentives

Vehicle Incentives
& Disincentives

Expand Transit
Reduction, Recycling & Composting

0

‐900

‐700

‐500

‐300

3.1

RPS & Grid‐Based Renewable Generation

‐100

100

300

500

Net Cost

Net Savings

Dollar Per Metric Ton CO2e Avoided
NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

OV-22

700

900

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

7.1 Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial Sector (RCI)
RCI Sector Vision for 2050
New Yorkers will enjoy safe, comfortable, well-functioning, and sustainable buildings and
communities whose construction and renovation activities, building operations, and industrial
processes are designed and operated to maximize energy and resource efficiency, to minimize
fossil fuel inputs, and to meet remaining energy needs from a mix of local low-carbon resources
and low-carbon imports.
Reaching the Vision: Transforming the
Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and
Industrial Sector
To reduce GHG emissions 80 percent by 2050, New
York’s residential, commercial/institutional, and
industrial buildings and industrial processes will need
to adopt technologies, management efficiencies, and
operational practices that support maximum energy
and resource efficiency, while substituting low- and
zero-carbon sources for fossil fuel in meeting their
remaining energy needs.

The City of Schenectady is sponsoring
construction of affordable, highly efficient homes
to replace deteriorating buildings.

New York has instituted policies that will provide the clean electricity needed for the reduced
energy needs of efficient buildings and industrial processes; for example, the 45 by 15 clean
energy policy challenges the state to reduce electricity end-use in 2015 by 15 percent below
forecasted levels, while simultaneously meeting 30 percent of electricity supply needs through
renewable resources. While these policies are among the most progressive in the country, they
barely begin to address the level of GHG reduction needed in RCI to achieve the State’s 80 by 50
goal.
RCI Policy Options

Long Island Green Homes is an energy efficiency retrofit
program created by the Town of Babylon. This program is
saving residents an average of $1,085 per year on utility
bills by providing upfront funds to upgrade insulation,
boilers, furnaces, water heaters, ventilation, air sealing,
ducts and weatherstripping. (Photo courtesy of Town of
Babylon LIGH Program)

The Technical Work Group identified ten key
policy options with the potential to transition
New York’s buildings and industrial sector to
use significantly less energy, improve resource
efficiency, and reduce fossil fuel inputs, with
additional energy supplied from low- or zerocarbon imports. Chapter 6 of this Interim Report
gives technical information, specific targets, and
preliminary estimates of cost and effectiveness
for each policy option based on the 2030
benchmark; more definitive economic analyses
will be developed during the next planning
phase.

OV-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-9. RCI Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
RCI Policy Options and Descriptions
Building Codes, Appliance Standards, and Enforcement (RCI-7)
Establish more aggressive codes regarding energy use, including movement to performancebased codes.
Provide a statewide “stretch code” that encourages municipalities to achieve additional savings
and informs the building sector of planned future changes.
Continue to establish and update energy efficiency performance standards for products that
are not federally preempted, as specified under Article 16 of the Energy Law, and lobby the
federal government to increase performance standards for those appliances with federal
preemption.
Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and Upgrades (RCI- 8)
Measure and provide information about buildings’ energy use, increasing incentive to reduce
energy consumption.
Require regular energy audits and cost-effective energy efficiency measures.
Energy Efficiency Incentives (RCI-2)
Provide incentives and resources for greater energy efficiency in new buildings and better
energy performance in existing buildings. Employ whole-building integrated analysis and
design to identify high performance efficiency measures.
Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives (RCI-3)
Provide incentives and resources for greater penetration of solar electricity, solar thermal, and
low-carbon bioenergy solutions.
Industrial Process Incentives (RCI-11)
Assess and reduce industrial process energy use. Provide funding and resources to reduce
GHG emissions per unit of industrial production.
Workforce Training and Development (RCI-6)
Assess and develop workforce capabilities in New York to meet the needs of a low-carbon
future.
Education, Outreach, and Behavior Change (RCI-5)
Change energy use behaviors by affecting retail purchase patterns, education in schools,
increasing New York State government lead-by-example, and providing information and
resources to New York State communities and individuals.
Rate Restructuring and Flexible Metering (RCI-10)
Redesign electric rates to vary by time-of-use for all electricity users and expand installation of
meters that provide real-time electric cost/use information.
Research, Development, and Demonstration (RCI-9)
Invest in next-generation technologies that will produce lower cost solutions to achieve climateenergy goals in the RCI sector and advance a clean energy economy in New York State.
Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund (RCI-1)
Fund efficiency and clean energy programs that reduce GHG emissions; build on existing
funding sources and explore expanding to include all fuels.
Tax Structure and Private Financing (RCI-4)
Conduct a two-phase comprehensive financing and tax policy review that will indentify changes
needed to support GHG emission reduction and encourage both public and private investment
in low-carbon energy.

OV-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

How the RCI Policy Options Would Work
At the core of the RCI policies are two statutory and regulatory policies that will produce longterm emission reductions in code-compliant new and renovated existing buildings: Building
Codes, Appliance Standards, and Enforcement (RCI-7), and Building Commissioning,
Benchmarking, and Upgrades (RCI-8). By promoting upgraded building envelopes and
equipment, furnished with energy-saving appliances governed by State or federal energy
efficiency performance standards, these policies will reduce building operating costs and achieve
substantial energy savings and emission reductions.
Because the RCI policy options do not require most
existing buildings to undergo code-mandated
improvements, incentives for voluntary upgrades
will be vital to meeting New York’s GHG emission
reduction goals. It is important to note that by 2030,
the total building stock in New York State is not
expected to increase by more than 6 percent.
Therefore, reducing emissions from existing
buildings will be absolutely critical to reducing
emissions from this sector.
Energy Efficiency Incentives (RCI-2) would
promote whole-building, integrated analysis to
identify high performance efficiency measures for
existing and new buildings. Customer-Sited
Renewable Energy Incentives (RCI-3) would
increase use of onsite renewable energy, and
Industrial Process Incentives (RCI-11) would enhance industrial activity and reduce carbon
intensity through more efficient, productive, and cost-effective operations.

Solar panels on the Town Hall roof in the Climate
Smart Community of Red Hook are reducing power
bills so successfully that the town has applied to
expand the installation and develop renewable energy
improvement projects for other local government
facilities. (Photo courtesy of Town of Red Hook)

Six supporting policies promote developments that are critical to successful statutory and
voluntary emissions reduction in buildings, including developing a workforce with the
knowledge, skills, and ability to directly meet the energy service demands driven by other RCI
policies (RCI-6), and investing in next-generation technologies that will produce lower cost
solutions to achieve climate-energy goals
(RCI-9).
Consumers play a key role in investing in
energy efficiency and renewable energy
equipment and infrastructure. Education,
Outreach, and Behavior Change (RCI-5)
will promote consumer and State agency
staff awareness of the benefits of clean
energy and energy efficiency. Redesign
of electric rates to vary by time-of-use for
most electricity users, along with
expanded installation of “smart” meters

Weatherizing buildings reduces building heating/cooling needs
and GHG emissions, and also provides employment to local
workers.

OV-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

that provide real-time information about electricity consumption and cost, would provide more
effective price signals reflecting time-of-use and the GHG burden of source fuels, enabling
customers to reduce electricity consumption, and save money in Rate Restructuring and Flexible
Metering (RCI-10).
Dedicated and continuous funding is essential for the overall success of the RCI policy options
and attainment of long-term carbon reduction goals. An Energy Efficiency and Clean Energy
Fund (RCI-1) and Tax Structure and Private Financing (RCI-4) initiatives would work in unison
to leverage public funding and private financing for low-carbon energy activities. Figure OV-10
illustrates how the RCI policies cover all aspects of a developing low-carbon RCI sector to
accomplish significant GHG emission reductions.
Figure OV-10. Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial Policy Framework

The next phase of climate action planning will evaluate policy interactions, preparing the way for
policymakers to select, design, and efficiently implement policies that will avoid conflicting
outcomes and make the most of beneficial interactions.

OV-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

7.2 Transportation and Land Use Sector (TLU)
TLU Sector Vision for 2050
Most New Yorkers will live in smart growth communities and have access to an efficient,
reliable, extensive transit network with a variety of modes of low-carbon public and mass
transportation within and between communities. Smart Growth will be the predominant land use
and development pattern, minimizing GHG emissions by 1) enabling and supporting widespread
use of public transit and 2) mixing land uses to minimize the need for driving. Individuals will
travel in low-carbon, highly efficient vehicles powered by electricity, hydrogen fuel cells, or
sustainably derived biofuels. A significant portion of freight will move on low-carbon modes like
rail and barge; trucks will become more efficient and use alternative fuels.
Getting to the Vision: Transforming the Transportation and Land Use Sector
A low-carbon transportation future for New York requires transforming all factors that determine
GHG emissions when people and goods are transported: vehicles, fuels, travel activity, and
transportation system efficiency. The TLU policies deal with both transportation and land use—
deployment of new transportation technologies, provision of new transit choices, and adoption of
land use patterns that allow people to meet their daily needs with less vehicle travel.
TLU Policy Options

Climate Smart Community New Rochelle, New York
is working to raise the efficiency of its municipal
vehicle fleet. (Photo courtesy of City of New
Rochelle)

The Technical Work Group identified 12
Transportation and Land Use policy options with the
potential to guide a transition to a low-carbon
transportation system. Chapter 7 of the full Interim
Report gives technical information, specific targets,
and preliminary estimates of cost and effectiveness
for each policy option based on the 2030 benchmark;
more definitive economic analysis will be developed
during the next planning phase.

Figure OV-11. TLU Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
TLU Policy Options and Descriptions
Vehicle Efficiency (TLU-1)
Advocate for and implement strict vehicle emissions standards that move vehicle fleet to near
zero-carbon emissions.
Vehicle Incentives and Disincentives (TLU-2)
Establish feebate system to provide incentive for New Yorkers to purchase more efficient lightduty vehicles.
Heavy-Duty Fleet Incentives and Disincentives (TLU-3)
Establish public low-interest revolving loan fund to facilitate the accelerated turnover of fleet
vehicles, especially heavy-duty vehicles.
Alternative-Fuel Related Measures and Infrastructure (TLU-4)
Establish a regional low-carbon fuel standard to reduce fuel carbon intensity.

OV-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

TLU Policy Options and Descriptions
Research, Development and Demonstration (TLU-5)
Invest in next-generation technologies that will produce lower cost solutions to achieve climateenergy goals in the TLU sector and advance a clean energy economy in New York State.
Travel Demand Management and Transportation Systems Management (TLU-6)
Implement measures that reduce dependency on vehicles, encourage and facilitate the use of
shared modes of transportation, and allow for the more efficient use of vehicles.
Transit and High Speed Rail (TLU-7)
Invest in the maintenance, enhancement, and expansion of public transit systems, including
high speed rail.
Freight Strategies that Promote GHG Reductions (TLU-8)
Invest in freight rail infrastructure, and research and implement the optimal freight system;
provide other incentives for freight mode-shift; promote more efficient or alternatively fueled
trucks.
Priority Growth Centers (TLU-9)
Promote centralized growth to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT).
Transit Oriented Development (TOD)/Transit Supportive Development (TSD) (TLU-10)
Promote growth where transit is available to provide transportation choices and reduce VMT.
Location Efficient Land Use (TLU-11)
Implement mixed-use, smart growth land-use, and planning policies that result in communities
that require less driving.
Intergovernmental/Regional Proposals (TLU-12)
Coordinate regional initiatives, including multi-state land use planning incentives, multi-state
transportation system GHG allowance system, coordination of high speed rail planning and
investment, and federal advocacy.

How the TLU Policy Options Would Work
The policy options identified by the technical work group would seek to influence the future mix
of technologies in New York’s fleet of vehicles (low-carbon vehicles, or vehicle efficiency) and
the fuels used (low-carbon fuels, or fuel GHG emission intensity), and would aim to reduce total
vehicle-miles travelled and system energy loss (travel activity/system efficiency). Vehicle Miles
Traveled, or VMT, is a key measure of travel activity and transportation system efficiency—a
smaller VMT means a more efficient system. Figure OV-12 portrays the relationships among
transportation and land use policy options.

OV-28

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-12. Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Policy Options

7.3 Power Supply and Delivery Sector (PSD)
PSD Sector Vision for 2050
New York will have a safe, reliable, diverse, and extremely low-emitting electric power system
that meets the needs of all citizens and accommodates the widespread conversion of buildings
and transportation from fossil fuel to electricity in a manner that maximizes societal benefits,
minimizes societal costs, and avoids imposing an undue burden on any community.
Getting to the Vision: Transforming the Power Supply and Delivery Sector
Reducing GHG emissions 80 percent by 2050 economy-wide means that by mid-century, close
to 100 percent of New York’s electricity must come from low-carbon sources—sources with
near zero-carbon emissions. Existing State policies have begun this crucial transformation: by
2015, the State’s electricity grid is expected to be powered 60 percent by renewable or other lowcarbon sources, as a result of the 30-percent renewable energy from the renewable portfolio
standard combined with the 30 percent of power currently provided by nuclear power plants. By
2018, the current RGGI cap requires electric power sector emissions to be 10 percent below
historic levels. However, these existing programs alone cannot reach the 80 by 50 goal.

OV-29

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

PSD Policy Options
The Technical Work Group identified nine policy options with potential to transition power
supply and delivery from its current status of more than 50 percent essentially carbon-free
sources (including nuclear, hydroelectric, and other renewable power) to nearly 100 percent.
This transition will require substantial investments to maintain system reliability. Chapter 8 of
this Interim Report gives technical information, specific targets, and preliminary estimates of
cost and effectiveness for each policy option based on the 2030 benchmark; more definitive
economic analyses will be developed during the next planning phase.
Figure OV-13. PSD Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
PSD Policy Options and Descriptions
Incentives for Grid-Based Renewable Generation (PSD-2)
Promote renewable energy with a goal of increasing the renewable energy attributable to the
Renewable Portfolio Standard by 130-140%
GHG Reduction Market Mechanisms: Low Carbon Portfolio Standard, Cap & Invest (PSD-6)
Require 75% low-carbon power by 2030 via utilities and other load-serving entities.
Cap and reduce emissions across the economy.
Generation Infrastructure Permitting and Siting (PSD-1)
Create a new plant siting process that facilitates public participation.
New Facility Emissions Standard and Nuclear Power (PSD-10)
Establish standards for new facilities based on GHG emissions from state-of-the-art natural
gas-fired plants.
Existing Fossil Plants Policies (PSD-8)
Encourage repowering of existing plants, so that they meet emission standards after 2030.
Distribution Network Upgrade Including EV and Smart Grid Infrastructure (PSD-4)
Promote smart grid and other distribution system improvements, facilitating electric vehicles
and distributed generation.
Transmission Network Upgrades And Loss Reductions (PSD-5)
Upgrade electric transmission system to facilitate the low-carbon grid.
Energy Storage (PSD-3)
Encourage energy storage techniques that accommodate the variability of renewable energy
sources.
Research, Development, and Demonstration (PSD-9)
Invest in next-generation technologies that will produce lower-cost solutions to achieve climateenergy goals in the PSD sector and advance a clean energy economy in New York State.

Figure OV-14 portrays the relationships among PSD policies.

OV-30

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-14. Power Supply and Delivery (PSD) Policy Options

How the Power Supply and Delivery Policy Options Would Work
Three policy options would lead to most of the emission reductions from the electricity sector:
•

Extension and expansion of the State’s existing Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), a
policy that seeks to increase the proportion of renewable electricity delivered to retail
customers. The expanded RPS will more than double by 2030 the amount of electricity
provided by new renewable energy, including off-shore wind energy and solar energy. The
policy also would include complementary measures providing early support to bring lowcarbon renewable sources on line.

•

A low-carbon portfolio standard that will build on the RPS, requiring regulated utilities
and other load-serving entities to procure an increasing amount of low-carbon energy.

•

Building upon and strengthening the RGGI program, working with New York’s regional
partners to convert RGGI into a multi-sector cap-and-invest program that caps and reduces
carbon emissions region-wide, sets a price on carbon emissions, and invests proceeds from
allowance auctions in building the clean energy economy in New York.

The remaining policy options focus on lowering emissions from fossil-fueled power generation,
modernizing the electric grid, and advancing technology to cost-effectively build the clean
energy economy.

OV-31

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

To ensure relatively low emissions from existing or new fossil-fired plants by 2030, State
policies initially can facilitate siting of new lower carbon power-generating facilities and
ensure that all new plants meet a GHG emission standard based on the performance of
modern, efficient natural gas-fired plants. After 2030, existing plants also would meet lower
emission levels; incentives would
encourage the repowering or replacement
of older plants with more efficient, loweremitting technology earlier than 2030.

•

To ensure electricity grid reliability
when drawing increasingly on renewable
and other low-carbon power sources,
policy options include extensions and
upgrades to the electricity distribution
system, along with continued deployment
of smart grid technologies. These grid
Wind power is an important and growing source of lowmodernization options enable increased
carbon electric power. The Fenner Wind Power Facility,
use of distributed renewable energy
located in Madison County, New York, generates 89
sources and electric vehicles, as well as
million kilowatt hours of electricity each year.
efficient transmission from new renewable
and low-carbon generation facilities to areas of high demand. Additional energy storage will
help accommodate the variability that characterizes most renewable electricity sources.

•

To cost-effectively transition to a low-carbon power sector, policy options emphasize
continued investment in research, development, demonstration, and deployment. Options for
Technology Research and Development are detailed in Chapter 10 of this Interim Report.

The next phase of climate action planning will evaluate any interactions among these policies,
preparing the way for policymakers to select, design, and efficiently implement policies that will
avoid conflicting outcomes and make the most of beneficial interactions.

7.4 Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Sectors (AFW)
AFW Sector Vision for 2050
Agriculture: A carbon-negative New York agricultural sector will help to meet the state’s food
and fiber needs, while also making a significant contribution to the energy supply mix. Farms
will be profitable, valued by society, and highly adapted to a changing climate. Farms will be
managed as multiple-resource concerns, successfully competing in a fossil-fuel dependent world
that is undergoing major climate shifts.
Forests: Rural forest land conversion will be rare and long-term forest storage of carbon will
realize its maximum potential. Urban green space and trees will reduce building heating and
cooling loads. Working together, land owners, government officials, and the public will
maximize the long-term carbon sequestration and bio-energy potential of the state’s forests.
Forests will deliver co-benefits that are vital to the economy and to New Yorkers’ quality of life,
maximizing the value of forest lands to private forest owners and to the public.

OV-32

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Waste: New York will have a sustainable and energy-efficient materials economy where
environmental stewardship is pursued as a common societal value and where environmental
considerations inform purchasing, production, and materials management, minimizing waste
and reducing risks to human health and the environment. Materials management systems and
infrastructure will maximize the recovery and re-use of water, wastewater, and other materials
in ways that capture their economic value, conserve embedded energy, and minimize net lifecycle emissions of greenhouse gases and other pollutants.
Getting to the Vision: Transforming the Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Sector

Climate Smart Community North Hempstead targets schools
(Manhasset School District, shown here), libraries and parks
with a vigorous recycling program. Recycled materials do
not require energy-intensive disposal, and re-manufacturing
takes less energy than using virgin materials. (Photo
courtesy of Town of North Hempstead)

The agriculture, forestry, and waste sectors all
involve management and stewardship of
resources. These sectors contribute only a
small portion of total state GHG emissions
(about 6 percent), but offer potential for
relatively low-cost and low-technology GHG
mitigation and sequestration policies. Policy
options in the agriculture, forestry, and waste
sectors would add GHG reduction as a goal of
managing energy production and use, natural
resources, materials management and waste.
Intensive resource management offers
significant environmental, economic, and
social benefits beyond GHG reductions,
including improved water and air quality,
increased agricultural and forest productivity,
and job creation.

AFW Policy Options
The Technical Work Group identified eight Agriculture, Forests, and Waste policy options with
the potential to develop economically vibrant resource and materials management in New York,
with sustainable production of food, fiber and fuel; energy-efficient operation; maximum GHG
sequestration; and effective stewardship of New York’s soils, natural resources, materials, and
energy. Chapter 9 of this Interim Report gives technical information and preliminary estimates of
cost and effectiveness for each policy option based on the 2030 benchmark; more definitive
economic analysis will be developed during the next planning phase.

OV-33

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-15. AFW Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
AFW Policy Options and Descriptions
Production of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-energy (AFW-1)
Encourage development of sustainability criteria and use of best management systems to minimize
environmental, economic and social impacts.
Conversion of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-energy (AFW-2)
Advance development and commercialization of low-carbon biomass conversion processes.
Maximize Waste Reduction (AFW-3)
Develop and provide tools designed to reduce waste and divert materials for reuse, recycling and
composting.
Integrated Farm Management (AFW-4)
Develop comprehensive farm-specific plans to reduce GHG emissions, increase carbon
sequestration, and address agricultural adaptation challenges.
Conserve Open Space, Agriculture Land, and Wetlands (AFW-5)
Support improved land management and land-use protection programs to maintain or increase
forestland acreage and protect and restore freshwater and tidal wetlands.
On-Farm Energy Efficiency and Production of Renewable Energy (AFW-6)
Increase on-farm energy efficiency and renewable energy production via comprehensive energy
audits and coordination of energy services for the agriculture sector.
Improved Forest Management (AFW-7)
Provide incentives, education, technical assistance, and support programs to improve forest health,
sequester additional carbon, reduce fossil fuel energy consumption, and increase green
infrastructure.
Locally Produced Food (AFW-8)
Increase the availability of locally produced foods to help reduce the energy required for
transportation, packaging and marketing.

How the AFW Policy Options Would Work
Overall, the policy options seek to accomplish the following:
•

Reduce energy-related emissions through the deployment of renewable energy technologies,
including low-carbon bio-based energy solutions, and energy efficiency policies and
measures that address direct and embedded energy usage.

•

Conserve the embedded energy in materials by maximizing reuse and recycling.

•

Reduce emissions of methane and nitrous oxide, both potent GHGs, from agricultural and
waste-related activities by deploying a combination of systems.

•

Capitalize on the large carbon storage capability of agriculture and forests, which sequester
carbon from the atmosphere via natural processes.

•

Coordinate climate change adaptation strategies with mitigation strategies wherever possible.

Figure OV-16 portrays the relationships among agriculture, forestry, and waste policies.

OV-34

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-16. Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste (AFW) Policy Options

The next phase of climate action planning will evaluate any interactions among the policy
options, preparing the way for policymakers to select, design, and efficiently implement policies
that will avoid conflicting outcomes and make the most of beneficial interactions.

8.0 Research, Development, and Demonstration Investments for a
Low-Carbon Future
Experts are calling for a three-to-five-fold increase in global public and private investment in
energy technology research, development, and demonstration (RD&D) to develop lower cost
solutions to the climate-energy challenge and to capitalize on the opportunities associated with
new energy markets. This recommendation is strongly supported by a range of stakeholders
including business leaders, academic leaders, the National Academy of Sciences, and the United
Nations.
New York’s Climate Action Plan must include a commitment to promote and support RD&D, in
a coordinated partnership with the federal government and the private sector, to ensure continual
development of innovative technologies necessary to cost-effectively reduce GHG emissions and
promote the economic strength of local clean energy businesses. Statewide RD&D investments,

OV-35

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

across all economic sectors, must be targeted to provide demonstrable benefits for New York
companies.
Development of this RD&D investment strategy represents a critical follow-on task that will
build upon the high-level policy options in this Interim Report. The investment strategy will
further define New York’s technological strengths, establish multi-disciplinary collaborative
teams between universities and industry, and identify opportunities to further leverage limited instate resources with federal and private sector funds.
Chapter 10 in the Interim Report provides an overview of the
RD&D needs of the four mitigation sectors, identifies technology
areas where New York can best leverage its investments and
capabilities to benefit local businesses, and presents “order-ofmagnitude” funding estimates to support a technical innovation
network and advance low-carbon technologies. It is expected that
any State-funded RD&D program established to support
implementation of New York’s 80 by 50 goal would be supported
by a broad array of public stakeholders throughout the state – with
active private sector involvement.
The New York Battery and Energy
Storage Technology Consortium
(NY-BEST™) is a private-public
coalition building a vibrant, worldclass advanced battery and energy
storage sector from R&D to
commercialization.

The Interim Report provides the following observations and
recommendations:
• RD&D and innovation are responsible for over half the
economic growth in this country over the past century.

• The energy industry invests only about 0.2 percent of its
revenues on energy RD&D, while the average industrial investment in RD&D is closer to 2.6
percent.
•

Federal investments in low-carbon energy R&D should increase five-fold from $5 billion per
year to $25 billion according to many experts.

•

Energy RD&D investment in New York State, currently $50 million per year, must be
increased substantially to pursue a low-carbon future and stimulate a clean energy economy
in New York.

•

New York energy RD&D funds should be targeted toward helping New York businesses
develop low-carbon technologies while also addressing local energy and infrastructure needs,
thereby helping to stimulate a clean energy economy in the state.

•

The State must actively promote innovation and commercialization to bring the fruits of
RD&D investment to the market and to realize local economic benefits, as described further
in Chapter 13 on the Clean Energy Economy.

•

RD&D needs for buildings and industry of relevance to New York include deep-retrofit
strategies for existing buildings, onsite energy storage systems, building-scale renewables,
active power management, consumer behavior modification, whole-building/zero energy
buildings, and non-fossil-fuel based industrial process technologies.

OV-36

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

RD&D needs related to transportation and land use include intelligent transportation systems,
alternative fuel vehicles, and related infrastructure—in particular electric vehicle
infrastructure, vehicle efficiency optimization for urban duty cycles, smart growth pilots, and
improvements in electrified rail.

•

RD&D needs in power supply and delivery include marine-based resource development,
including off-shore wind, advanced wind resource forecasting, carbon capture and
sequestration assessments, grid integration of large-scale solar and smart grid.

•

RD&D needs in agriculture, forestry, and waste include carbon sequestration in agriculture
and forest lands, and sustainable biomass resource development.

It is important to note that New York State cannot support the entire technology development
process (basic research, technology development, large-scale demonstration, commercial
adoption) on its own. The Interim Report acknowledges a clear role must be established for the
federal government and the private sector that efficiently optimizes limited resources,
appropriately assigns technical and business risk, and ensures a consistent and stable flow of
investment capital to finance advanced energy technologies. Any State-level investment strategy
must function as an advocacy tool to drive national RD&D energy policy and leverage privatesector RD&D investments.

9.0 Adapting New York to Climate Change
To create a more climate-resilient New York
State, the Climate Action Plan places a strong
emphasis on adaptation. Climate change already
is affecting New York’s society, economy, and
natural ecosystems, and these impacts are
expected to increase. Past climate is no longer a
reliable guide to the future. New climate
conditions and unpredictability in the climate
affect all of New York’s social and economic
systems, particularly agriculture, infrastructure,
public health, and natural resources.
In this historic photo, storm surge is poised to wash over
Battery Park in New York City. Rising sea levels will bring
more dangerous storm surges, not only for communities at
sea level, but also for upland communities near tidal rivers,
such as the Hudson.

Adaptation: Planning for a Changing
Climate in New York State

Adaptation can be thought of simply as
responsible planning, incorporating the most
current information about projected climate change into a variety of decisions. Adaptation
strategies can include changes in policies, operations, management, or infrastructure that reduce
risk of harm and/or take advantage of potential opportunities associated with climate change.
Adaptation can take place at the individual, household, community, organizational, and
institutional levels. New York State as a whole is generally considered to have significant
resources and capacity for effective adaptation, but the costs and benefits of adaptation will not
be evenly distributed throughout the State.

OV-37

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Climate Risks and Adaptation Planning
Incorporating adaptation into decision making requires the following:
•

Understanding how the climate in New York State might
change

•

Identifying potential vulnerabilities to a changing climate—
infrastructure or resources that could be harmed if the climate
changes

•

Assessing the risk levels of those vulnerabilities

•

Developing adaptation strategies that will help to minimize
those risks

•

Prioritizing adaptation strategies and developing an adaptation
plan that coordinates with GHG mitigation strategies and
economic development.

Past climate
conditions alone
are no longer a
reliable guide when
planning for
the future.

Prerequisites to Successful Adaptation Planning
The Adaptation Technical Work Group identified seven themes that emerged for all sectors as
important first steps to implementation of adaptation policy options. These themes are
summarized below:
•

Develop a process to maintain, disseminate and explain to decision makers a set of bestavailable climate projections, potentially via a New York State Climate Science Institute.

•

Identify and track key climate change indicators important to New York.

•

Develop a framework to monitor, assess, and share progress on local, state, and federal
government adaptation planning and implementation.

•

Initiate research to develop new adaptation strategies and provide detail and confidence to
support adaptation strategy decisions.

•

Evaluate emergency preparedness, management and response capabilities (such as
emergency warning systems, cooling centers, emergency evacuation, and preparation for
power and/or communication outages) in light of climate projections, to determine where
these capabilities will be compromised by climate threats in New York.

•

Initiate widespread education and outreach, including both school curricula and community
outreach, to build public support and awareness.

•

Develop adaptation policies that protect those citizens and communities most vulnerable to
the impacts from climate change.

The following sections outline the adaptation vulnerabilities and policy options developed by the
Adaptation Technical Work Group for eight sectors of New York’s economy and natural
resources.

OV-38

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

9.1 Agriculture Sector Adaptation
Agriculture Climate Vulnerabilities
Farmers are on the front lines of climate change, but the direct impacts on crops, livestock, and
pests and the costs of farm adaptation will cascade throughout New York’s economy. While
climate change will create unprecedented challenges, there are likely to be new opportunities as
well, such as possible new markets for food and energy crops suited to a longer growing season
and warmer temperatures.
New York’s agriculture sector encompasses more
than 34,000 farms that occupy about one-quarter of
the state's land area (more than 7.5 million acres)
and contribute $4.5 billion annually to its
economy. Many New York crops benefit from the
state’s historically relatively temperate climate.
The state’s farming community includes many
large-scale wholesale operations, as well as small
farms that are vital to the economy of rural areas.

Dairy farming, New York’s top agricultural activity, is
vulnerable to climate change because milk yields
decrease in warmer temperatures.

Figure OV-17. Agriculture Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Agriculture Adaptation Policy Options
1: Support research, development, and deployment of agricultural adaptation strategies that
simultaneously manage on-farm GHG emissions and adaptation concerns.
A. Support the introduction of existing varieties and the development of new varieties that can
take full advantage of the beneficial effects of climate change.
B. Develop improved methods of responding to extreme weather events (frost, freeze, heat,
precipitation).
C. Develop improved responses to increased weed, disease, and insect threats.
D. Increase the accuracy of the existing real-time weather warning systems.
E. Support the development of decision-making tools to help the agricultural community adapt.
F. Increase climate change impact education and outreach efforts to agricultural producers.
G. Ensure equity is incorporated into programs targeting agricultural adaptation.
2: Incorporate anticipated increases in the incidence of weeds, diseases, and insect threats due
to climate change in current detection, monitoring, and integrated pest management efforts.
A. Evaluate the capacity of existing federal, state and local agriculture and forestry programs that
are focused on identifying and monitoring weed, disease, and insect threats attributable to a
changing climate.
B. Develop and deploy pest-resistant plant varieties, regional coordination for early detection, and
rapid-response approaches to emerging threats.

OV-39

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Agriculture Adaptation Policy Options
3: Evaluate and develop mechanisms to more effectively protect livestock from the effects of
greater temperature variability and extremes.
A. Continue research, development, and deployment of livestock protection measures and
climate-related modifications to feed management systems and approaches.
B. Increase installation of energy-efficient cooling systems and other structural or mechanical
interventions.

9.2 Coastal Zones Adaptation
Coastal Zones Climate Vulnerabilities in New York
New York’s coastal zone includes the shoreline, coastal wetland areas, and adjacent inland areas
likely to be affected by sea level rise and coastal
storms. Even in a densely populated urban
environment such as New York City, coastal
ecosystems provide numerous functions and values.

Adapting to climate change is urgent for coastal cities
and communities. New York City already is planning
for rising sea levels. Communities on the Hudson River
also recognize that they are vulnerable to storm surges
that propagate up the river.

Sea level rise will greatly amplify risks of
permanent inundation of low-lying coastal areas,
more frequent flooding by storm surges, and
increased beach erosion. Saltwater could reach
farther up the Hudson River, contaminating urban
water supplies; increased water depth could allow
faster propagation of tide and storm surges up the
Hudson, increasing flood risk far from the coast.

Sea level rise will progressively affect both human
and natural systems as it changes water levels on the ocean and estuarine coastline, shortens
flood-recurrence intervals, and increases risk and geographic extent of coastal hazards such as
storm-surge-related flooding, erosion, and groundwater intrusion.
Figure OV-18. Coastal Zones Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Coastal Zones Adaptation Policy Options
1: New York State should endorse a coordinated set of projections for sea level rise and
associated changes in flood recurrence intervals in all coastal areas, including the Hudson
River estuary, for use by state and local agencies and authorities for planning and decisionmaking purposes.
2: Integrate sea level rise and flood recurrence interval projections into all relevant agency
programs and decisions.

OV-40

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Coastal Zones Adaptation Policy Options
3: Identify and map areas of greatest current risk from coastal storms and sea level rise to
support risk reduction actions in those areas.
4: Reduce vulnerabilities in coastal areas at risk from sea level rise and storms (coastal risk
management zone) and support increased reliance on non-structural measures and natural
protective features to reduce impacts from coastal hazards.
A. Develop Coastal Resilience Plans
B. Assist in funding measures to reduce risk
5: Develop a long-term interagency mechanism to regularly evaluate climate change science;
set research priorities to foster adaptation; coordinate actions; and assess progress

9.3 Ecosystems Adaptation
Ecosystems Climate Vulnerabilities in New York
New York State includes 47,047 square miles of land, 1,894 square miles of inland lakes and
rivers, and 3,988 square miles of Great Lakes. Variation in topography and proximity to water
bodies causes large climatic variations, and distinct ecological zones support biological diversity
and provide important ecosystem services, including harvested products (food, timber, biomass,
and maple syrup), clean water, flood control, soil conservation, carbon sequestration, genetic
resources, recreation, wild places, and heritage sites.
Initial impacts of climate change on species are already
apparent, with documented accounts of species range shifts
and changes in the seasonal timing of bud-break or
flowering. Climate change creates risks to biodiversity, net
primary productivity, vegetation water use, and
biogeochemical cycles, but to date, there is not unequivocal
evidence of impacts on ecosystem services such as carbon
sequestration or water storage and quality in New York
State.
Within the next several decades New York State is likely New York's brook trout population, already at
risk from increasing temperatures, is likely to
to see widespread shifts in plant species composition.
be severely reduced by continued warming.
Warmer temperatures will favor the expansion of some
invasive species into New York, some habitat and food generalists (such as white-tailed deer)
may benefit. Climate factors could increase the productivity of some hardwood tree species,
provided growth is not limited by other factors such as drought or nutrient deficiency.

OV-41

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-19. Ecosystems Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Ecosystems Adaptation Policy Options
1: Support the implementation of the recommendations of the Invasive Species Task Force to
mitigate potential damage from climate change-induced growth of invasive species.
2: Ensure that New York State’s ecosystems sustain healthy, diverse, well-distributed, and
abundant populations of fish, wildlife, plants, and human communities that are adapted to
survive in a changing climate.
A. Support State agency efforts to incorporate an Ecosystem Based Management approach that
factors ecosystem function, services, and biodiversity into decision making, including
management plans, funding decisions, and policies.
B. To enable ecosystems to better respond to changing climate conditions, incorporate adaptive
management principles, techniques, and approaches into New York’s forest management
policies and programs.
C. Protect and enhance the stability and function of stream, river, and aquatic coastal systems to
accommodate changing climate conditions.
3: Develop a research and monitoring plan to detect, record, and analyze changes in species,
habitat composition, natural cycles, and fish and wildlife health, and effectively address current
and future threats in changing climate conditions.
4: Expand climate change education and outreach initiatives on the potential impacts of climate
change to natural areas and ecosystem services.

9.4 Energy Adaptation
Energy Vulnerabilities in New York
Reliable energy systems are critical to commerce and quality of life. New York State’s electricity
and gas supply and distribution systems are highly reliable, but extreme weather events,
temperature, and flooding can damage equipment, disrupt fuel supply chains, reduce power plant
output levels or increase demand beyond the energy system’s operational capacity. Downstate
coastal energy infrastructure is vulnerable to flooding by sea level rise and storm surges.
Renewable generation can be affected by drought, changes in precipitation patterns, cloud cover,
or other factors characteristic of climate change.

OV-42

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-20. Energy Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Energy Adaptation Policy Options
1: Ensure the accuracy of demand forecasting for planning purposes and build resilience for
meeting peak demand.
A. Incorporate best available projections of changes in seasonal average temperatures and
increased frequency of extreme heat events in near and longer-term demand forecasting for
electricity and natural gas.
B. Plan for meeting regional demand growth and improved system resiliency through local
implementation of demand response and energy efficiency measures, greater use of localized
distributed generation, energy storage, other energy supply technologies, and smart-grid
technologies, beyond those efforts already underway and planned.
2: Increase utilities’ and energy providers’ resiliency to climate-related impacts.
A. Ensure that best available projections concerning the frequency and severity of extreme storm
events are incorporated into State and regional emergency response plans.
B. Ensure that detailed statewide maps are available to assist in identifying areas and
infrastructure at high risk from storm and flood damage.
C. Work with organizations such as the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) and NYSEARCH
(a voluntary sub-organization within the Northeast Gas Association) to survey and assess utility
industry best practices for increasing resilience to climate change.

9.5 Public Health Adaptation
Public Health Vulnerabilities in New York
Some current health conditions are considered sensitive to the changing climate. Cardiovascular
disease, the leading cause of death in the state, is made worse by extreme heat and poor air
quality. Childhood asthma, an important health challenge in many parts of New York State,
especially New York City, is made worse by poor air quality. Several vector-borne diseases
(those spread by carriers such as mosquitoes and ticks) have emerged in the past few decades.
A diverse state with populations spread unevenly over urban and rural service areas, New York
relies primarily on a county-based system for public health service delivery. This highly
decentralized system leads to non-uniform provision of core services, making public health
adaptation measures more difficult to coordinate.

OV-43

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-21. Ecosystems Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Public Health Adaptation Policy Options
1: Improve or establish robust public health mechanisms to reduce the potential for heat-related
morbidity and mortality in New York State.
A. Assess the adequacy of existing heat warning systems and, as necessary, expand the capacity
of existing cooling center programs.
B. Enhance existing education and outreach activities, employing multilingual and culturally
sensitive approaches and targeting particularly vulnerable populations.
C. Coordinate with utilities to develop an approach to address the public health needs resulting
from power disruptions associated with extreme heat events.
D. Establish and expand community-based volunteer networks, and identify and assist vulnerable
populations.
E. Develop and implement a statewide “Green Cool-down Plan” to reduce the “heat-island effect,”
with a particular focus on the most vulnerable communities.
2: Educate the public regarding the public health consequences of climate and take actions to
reduce or eliminate those consequences.
A. Raise the awareness of policy makers, State and local government officials, community
leaders, businesses, institutions, health care providers, and the general public about the public
health significance and related costs of climate change.
B. Work with communities to create effective outreach materials and mechanisms focused on
vulnerable and/or hard-to-reach populations.
3: Assess and improve the capacity of existing public health preparedness, response, and
recovery programs to respond to climate-related impacts.
A. Assess and enhance the capacity of existing preparedness programs.
B. Determine how existing telecommunications technology and social networking systems can be
better integrated into early warning and evacuation systems.
4: Build community resilience and integrated public health capacity to reduce human health
impacts of climate change.
A. Consider possible public health impacts of climate change in planning, programs, policies, and
regulations.
B. Increase the resilience of communities by providing additional support for healthy-built
environment concepts, such as smart growth and green infrastructure, and for local and urban
agriculture initiatives that strengthen food security.
C. Require that emergency preparedness plans include coordination and communication among
critical stakeholders.
5: Evaluate and enhance, monitoring and surveillance programs for diseases and diseasecausing agents and respond to the anticipated climate change-related increase in such public
health threats.
A. Evaluate the capacity of existing public health programs that control disease-causing agents.
B. Provide necessary assistance to local governments.
C. Expand analytical laboratory capacity.
6: Assess and prepare for the significant public health risks associated with hazards related to
sea level rise.

OV-44

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Public Health Adaptation Policy Options
7: Support research to better understand the public health consequences associated with
climate change in New York State.
A: Develop a priority research agenda that includes making use of health impact assessments,
developing appropriate health indicators, and assessing the effectiveness of adaptation
technologies.
B: Assess effectiveness, accessibility, and quality of public health-related climate change
adaptation programs.

9.6 Transportation Adaptation
Transportation Vulnerabilities in New York
Climate change has significant consequences for the transportation sector. Over the next few
decades, heat waves, heavy precipitation events, and windstorms will likely be the dominant
causes for moderate, frequent transportation
problems such as flooded streets and mass transit
delays. By 2050 at the latest, sea level rise and
storm surge will become more significant threats.
By the latter half of this century, these threats will
be so severe that major adaptations will have to be
in place, not only in the coastal zone, but all the
way to cities in the way of sea level rise and storm
surges propagating up the tide-controlled Hudson
River. Low-lying transportation systems like
subways and tunnels, especially in coastal and
near-coastal areas, are at particular risk of
Transportation may be disrupted more often and more
flooding from sea level rise and heavyseverely as heavier rains flood roads and bridges located
precipitation events.
near New York’s many rivers and streams.
Materials used in transportation infrastructure, such as asphalt and train rails, are vulnerable to
increased temperatures and extreme heat events. Air conditioning requirements in buses, trucks,
and trains and ventilation requirements for tunnels will increase. Some aircraft runways may
require lengthening, since hotter air provides less lift, necessitating higher takeoff speeds.

OV-45

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure OV-22. Transportation Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Transportation Adaptation Policy Options
1: State, regional, and local transportation agencies and authorities should prepare detailed
inventories and climate vulnerability assessments of critical transportation infrastructure.
A. Designate key transportation corridors, based on the critical movement of people and/or freight
and their importance to intra- and interstate travel.
B. Endorse a coordinated set of climate change projections and provide these to transportation
agencies and authorities and other transportation stakeholders.
C. Integrate climate change into vulnerability assessments, including analyses of potential
financial and social impacts based on climate projections endorsed by New York State.
D. To facilitate investment decisions, evaluate which freight and passenger transport systems are
most resilient to climate change.
2: Prioritize transportation infrastructure that is essential for emergency preparedness and
response capabilities.
3: Incorporate State-endorsed climate change projections into all relevant decisions.
A. State transportation agencies and authorities should develop specific design criteria and
operational guidance based on climate change projections in transportation projects and
investments.
B. Stormwater management techniques and approaches should be incorporated wherever
possible.
C. Assist local governments in implementing adaptive measures for priority transportation
infrastructure.
4: The State’s transportation master plan should consider and incorporate State-endorsed
climate change projections.
A. Policy direction for the siting, design, operation, and maintenance of key transportation
infrastructure elements should include climate change projections.
5: Transportation investments in New York State should be consistent with smart
growth/transit-oriented development principles.
A. Infrastructure investments should be designed and constructed to protect and preserve natural
resources and ecosystems that provide essential climate adaptation services.
B. Incorporate redundancy and travel choices into the transportation system.

9.7 Telecommunications/Information Infrastructure Adaptation
Telecommunications/Information Vulnerabilities in New York
Telecommunications infrastructure is vital to New York State's economy and welfare; its
capacity and reliability are essential to the effective functioning of global commerce and the
state's economy and is especially vital during emergencies.
Communication service delivery is vulnerable to hurricanes, lightning, ice, snow, wind storms,
and other extreme weather events, some of which are projected to change in frequency and/or
intensity. Communication lines and other infrastructure are vulnerable to the observed and
projected increase in heavy precipitation events and resulting flooding and/or freezing rain. In
coastal and near-coastal areas, sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge flooding
will be a considerable threat later this century. The delivery of communication services is

OV-46

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

sensitive to power outages, such as those resulting from the increased demand associated with
heat waves, which are expected to increase with climate change.
Figure OV-23. Telecommunications Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Telecommunications Adaptation Policy Options
1: Prepare detailed inventories of telecommunications facilities, network, and corridor-critical
infrastructure, and complete vulnerability assessments of critical infrastructure and corridors.
A. Prioritize infrastructure that is essential to support critical State and local functions such as
emergency preparedness and response capabilities.
B. Vulnerability assessments should use accepted climate change projections to assess the
impact of projected climate change on high priority communication infrastructure.
2: Incorporate climate change projections into decision-making within New York State’s
telecommunication and information infrastructure sector.
A. State agencies responsible for the management of communication infrastructure should
develop specific design and operational guidance based on climate change projections, and
incorporate it into communication projects and investments.
B. Direct funding as available for adaptive changes to existing critical communication networks
used for emergency preparedness and response that are at greatest risk from climate impacts.
C. Develop models, guidance and standards, and financial support where possible to help local
governments implement adaptive measures for priority communication infrastructure.
3: Where feasible and cost effective, reduce vulnerability of telecommunications infrastructure
to extreme weather events.
A. Foster a shift toward a more distributed network of communication infrastructure, including
expansion of wireless services.
B. Planning for investments in communications infrastructure or operational changes planning
should support and be coordinated with adaptation and operations of other sectors, particularly
the energy sector (e.g., smart grid).
C. Ensure system redundancies for communications infrastructure at high risk of flooding and high
winds, including communication towers.
4: Improve the dialogue on climate resiliency between State agencies and private
telecommunications service providers and provide increased accountability for service
disruptions.
A. To provide increased accountability carriers and other communication service providers should
be required to report compliance with the Federal Communications Commission’s standards.

9.0 Water Resources Adaptation
Water Resources Vulnerabilities in New York
The state’s water and wastewater treatment infrastructure is in dire need of repair and upgrade,
requiring some $36 billion for water treatment and $40 billion for wastewater treatment
improvements. Challenges associated with a changing climate will only exacerbate these needs.
New York is experiencing growing demand for water, both for human consumption and for
energy production. As other parts of the country experience more frequent and intense drought,

OV-47

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York’s water resources may become a defining economic asset, drawing people and
businesses into the state and presenting new water resource management challenges.
Figure OV-24. Water Resources Adaptation Policy Options with Brief Descriptions
Water Resources Adaptation Policy Options
1: Enact into law Governor's Program Bill 2010 #51- Water Withdrawal Regulation (S.8280A/A.11436-B) to authorize implementation of a comprehensive statewide water withdrawal
permitting program.
2: Build greater resilience to projected climate change impacts into drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure systems.
A. Prepare detailed inventories of critical water infrastructure and conduct climate vulnerability
assessments.
B. State and local agencies should update permit and design standards for drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure to factor in projected climate impacts.
3: Adopt statewide and region-wide comprehensive sustainable water resources management
strategies that consider climate change.
A. All water-related permit programs and policies should minimize alterations and disruptions to
the natural hydrologic cycle to the extent possible.
B. Create mechanisms to foster development and state approval of regional intermunicipal
watershed management plans that address expected climate change impacts.
4: Allow “room for rivers.” Acknowledge the dynamic nature of rivers on the landscape and
strive to reduce risk to critical infrastructure and human development as the risk of flooding
increases with climate change.
A. Coordinate with key federal and local stakeholders such as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), U.S. Department of Agriculture, and county soil and water
conservation districts to identify and map areas of greatest current risk from riverine flooding
and erosion due to movement of rivers across the landscape.
B. Work with federal agencies to reduce new development in areas at high risk of riverine flooding
and undertake long-term managed relocation or elevation of existing structures in these areas.
Restructure disaster recovery policies to ensure that redevelopment efforts strive to reduce
long-term risk.
5: Incorporate water-related climate projections into state and local emergency management
planning.

10.0 Identification of Cross-Sector Policies & Issues
Many issues associated with mitigating and adapting to climate change relate to more than one of
the sectors examined in this planning process. To date, the climate planning process has
identified several important cross-sector issues:
•

Environmental justice and community-based concerns;

•

Near- and long-term workforce training for a clean energy economy;

•

Education, outreach, and behavior change;

•

The transition to increased use of electric vehicles.

OV-48

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The second phase of climate action planning will seek to identify additional policy interactions
among the final recommendations.
Environmental Justice and Community-Based Concerns
The Climate Action Council made a determined effort throughout the planning process to
integrate input from community-based groups, regional/community focused organizations, and
environmental justice (EJ) groups. These groups served as members of Technical Work Groups
and of the Integration Advisory Panel; in addition, the council held statewide videoconferences
and a series of teleconferences and surveyed community and EJ organizations on proposed
policy options. Details of this discussion and the inputs that resulted are available in Chapter 12
of this Interim Report.
Effective Community Engagement and Public Participation
One of the key ingredients in communities across the world that have successfully engaged on
climate change-related issues is the presence of strong and sustained local leadership. Local
dialogues educate community members, build support for climate policies and facilitate the shift
to a low-carbon economy. Acknowledging and addressing past concerns of the EJ community
with official decisions and planning processes were identified as critical to developing and
implementing the Climate Action Plan.
The plan’s statewide awareness-raising is designed to include tools and guidance to help
communities frame climate-related risks within a local context, along with resources and
technical assistance for community capacity building.
Permitting, Siting, and Environmental Impact Assessment
Climate policy approaches should respect hard-won procedural safeguards designed to ensure
adequate access to official decision making in areas such as permitting, the siting of facilities and
infrastructure, and conducting environmental impact assessments. As part of the climate action
planning process, EJ stakeholders emphasized the importance of assessing the cumulative risks
and impacts of different types of stressors, facilities, and infrastructure on the health and quality
of life of communities and adequately analyzing the public health implications of proposed
policies. Transparency and timely access to information were advanced as critical in all the
policy areas.
Waterfront Facilities and Public Health
Waterfront facilities, especially wastewater treatment plants, petroleum/chemical bulk storage
sites, and solid waste management facilities, are particularly vulnerable to climate change
impacts and represent risks to surrounding communities. Particular attention should be given to
the medium- and long-term contamination and public health consequences associated with
coastal flooding.
Fair Share of Burdens and Benefits
No single neighborhood or group should be forced to bear a disproportionate share of the
environmental consequences resulting from industrial, commercial, or municipal operations or
from the execution of government programs and policies. Community/EJ stakeholders pointed

OV-49

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

out that a nuanced approach could help to balance the legacy of environmental pollution and
burdens in EJ communities, such as awarding overburdened communities a greater proportion of
beneficial climate projects and policy initiatives.
Near- and Long-Term Workforce Training for a Clean Energy Economy
The Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI) Technical Work Group
identified near-term workforce training and development as a priority policy option (RCI-6).
However, because workforce issues cut across all sectors, near-term training needs for all
mitigation sectors are incorporated into the Workforce Training and Development Policy (RCI6) (see Chapter 6). As we implement new clean energy technologies and practices and make
permanent changes in the way we use resources, we need a trained workforce for projects in
energy efficiency; site-based clean and renewable energy resources; power supply and demand;
smart grid technologies; codes and standards; agriculture, forestry, and waste; transportation; and
manufacturing and other related areas. Chapter 6 of this Interim Report summarizes the
workforce policy discussion and details opportunities to expand upon current workforce training,
continuing education, credentialing, licensing, on-the-job training, and recruitment and job
placement.
Long-term workforce training is addressed in the Building Block #2 section of Chapter 13:
Stimulating a Clean Energy Economy in New York. Over the long term, training must enable
New York to identify and respond to workforce development needs as they arise and to prepare
future generations of workers for the low-carbon economy.
The innovation-based model that will underlie New York’s low-carbon economy requires a full
spectrum of educational support. From the K-12 system, grounding is needed in math, science,
environmental sustainability and alternatives to a carbon-based economy, and preparation for
entrepreneurship. From higher education, new curricula, certifications and degrees for lowcarbon technologies, and access for current workers to skills upgrades as technologies evolve are
critical.
Education, Outreach, and Behavior Change
Government must lead by example and take responsibility for developing an implementation
strategy that meets the 80 by 50 goal and guides the transition to a low-carbon economy in a
cost-effective and politically and socially acceptable manner.
The first step for State agencies and local governments is internal outreach and education
promoting the Climate Action Plan and making climate change considerations part of routine
government activities and decisions. At the same time, robust, well-funded, and effective
external outreach, education, and awareness raising should acquaint all citizens with the
substantial economic, social, and environmental benefits the Climate Action Plan will generate.
Transition to Electric Vehicles
At present, the transportation sector produces nearly 40 percent of New York’s combustionbased GHG emissions, the vast majority from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. Plug-in
electric vehicles (EV), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV), and fuel cell vehicles powered
by hydrogen derived from electrolysis could displace a significant portion of this petroleum

OV-50

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

consumption by using electricity for all or portions of vehicle trips. If this electricity had a low or
near-zero-carbon intensity, the carbon footprint from this segment could be nearly eliminated.
A cross-sectoral vehicle subgroup worked on a comprehensive, multisectoral strategy to achieve
EV penetration as part of the Climate Action Plan, integrating issues applying to power supply
generation, transmission and distribution, vehicles, and vehicle charging infrastructure. The
following items were among its findings:
• PHEVs, EVs, and fuel cell vehicles
having acceptable performance for many
applications are a reality, and vehicles
deriving their fuel from the electric grid are
likely to become a cost-effective means of
achieving carbon-free mobility.

Fuel mileage of 125 mpg is the promise of this plug-in hybrid,
newly introduced as a way to reduce GHG emissions and
petroleum consumption. This year, several auto
manufacturers are commercially introducing electric vehicles.

• Through the mid-term (2025) New
York’s transmission grid has adequate
capacity to accommodate the maximum
(30 percent) anticipated penetration of EV
and PHEVs with smart charging. Minor
upgrades in the distribution system could be
needed on a very localized basis.

• Policy and regulations should encourage
the development of a variety of business
models for charging/re-fueling, and policies should encourage off-peak charging to maximize
benefits. In the near term, incentives will likely be necessary to induce EV adoption.

The full report of the Electric Vehicle Subgroup is found in Appendix G of this Interim Report.

11.0 National and Regional Action and Coordination
To successfully reduce the impacts a changing climate will have on New York’s people,
environment, and economy will require coordinated policy and action by all levels of
government—federal, state, and local. Given the global nature of the climate change challenge,
U.S. federal government action will be essential to successfully position the American economy
in an evolving international marketplace and to enable the United States to lead efforts to achieve
a global solution. Federal action will create a fertile arena for development of the new
technologies that will be needed to achieve the scale of emission reductions needed, and it will
enable New York businesses to compete on a level playing field with businesses in other states
and nations.
New York’s domestic energy, environment, and economic development interests can be
successfully augmented through participation in regional efforts that achieve more change, in a
more equitable manner, than New York acting alone. National and regional programs can result
in greater reductions at a lower marginal cost than programs implemented by a single state, and
State actions also are most effective when coordinated with local government activities.

OV-51

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Finally, climate change is, at its core, a global issue that will require the dedicated action and
attention by all governments, industries, and citizens. New York already is working and should
continue to work with other states, subnational entities, and other nations to achieve an
international solution to climate change.
This chapter makes the following specific recommendations and observations:
•

New York should seek implementation of national or regional market mechanisms to price
carbon and reduce emissions. A national program can be implemented through Congressional
action or a collaborative effort between states and EPA under the Clean Air Act.

•

Leveraging the opportunities available under federal programs such as production and
investment tax credits and a national renewable electricity standard can help create a robust
market demand for clean energy.

•

National electricity transmission policy should facilitate achievement of New York’s climate
goals rather than providing an avenue for importing coal-fired power.

•

New York should take advantage of the federal government’s advanced energy technology
investment policy. Developing new clean energy technologies requires a substantial and
sustained commitment from the federal government.

•

Federal investment in, and support for, nuclear technology and carbon capture and
sequestration will help New York achieve its climate protection goals, while preserving
system reliability. Given the financial commitment needed to advance the technology in
these areas, the federal government is best positioned to make the necessary investments.

•

Regional and national transportation initiatives will be essential to achieving New York’s
climate goals, including strong national vehicle emission and fuel economy standards and
regional low-carbon fuel standards, regional transportation pricing strategies, and regional
rail initiatives.

•

New York should advocate for strict national standards for appliances and other products
that are sources of greenhouse gas emissions.

•

Federal agencies should cooperate to create and
implement regulatory frameworks that foster energy
efficiency and distributed renewable energy. For
example, the federal government should facilitate
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing.

•

National education policy to foster innovation and
technology is important to achieving New York’s
climate protection goals.

•

The federal government should target infrastructure investments that advance climate change
objectives, such as high-speed rail and a more intelligent electricity grid.

•

Federal and state policy should engage localities and communities as active participants in
achieving climate goals.

OV-52

Climate change is a
global issue that will
require dedicated action
and attention by all
governments, industries
and citizens.

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

New York should support efforts to achieve an international solution to climate change. New
York can play a critical role in providing an example of the policies that can be implemented
worldwide to mitigate climate change.

Achieving a comprehensive solution to global climate change requires New York to collaborate
with regional partners and the federal government on emission reduction strategies, and to seek
action across the community of nations. Although comprehensive federal legislation is
preferable, until such legislation is in place, the federal government should seek to target its
broad suite of policies and programs toward promoting low-carbon technology and behavior.

12.0 Next Steps
With this Interim Report, the Climate Action Council is seeking stakeholder and public response
to the initial climate action planning work, including input on the mitigation and adaptation
policy options. During 2011, work will continue to complete the required analyses of the policy
options, which will inform a final Climate Action Plan.
New York State will then need to develop more specific near-term implementation strategies to
effectuate policy and practice. The State will need to establish clear targets and evaluate progress
toward those targets. A mechanism to update this long-term plan on a regular basis will be
needed, as the technology, the state-of-science, and the broader public policy environment will
continue to change.
Further, given the strong linkages between GHG emissions and energy policy, strategies to
reduce GHG emissions will also need to be considered further in the development of New
York’s State Energy Plan as well as in other planning processes, such as state implementation
plans for various co-pollutants.
The recently enacted Article 6 of the Energy Law requires the State Energy Plan to include an
inventory of greenhouse gas emissions, and strategies for facilitating and accelerating the use of
low-carbon energy sources and carbon mitigation measures. Thus, the State Energy Plan will
become a mechanism to deliberate and advance appropriate energy policy that fully accounts for
the climate change impacts from New York energy production and use.

OV-53

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 1
Background
There is scientific consensus that emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) are affecting the Earth's
climate. That consensus is represented by the work of the U.S. Global Change Research Program
(USGCRP) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a body established by the
World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations to assess scientific, technical, and
socio-economic information relevant for the understanding of climate change, its potential impacts,
and options for adaptation and mitigation. On May 19, 2010, the U.S. National Academies of
Science (Academies) released three reports emphasizing why the U.S. should act now to reduce
GHG emissions and develop a national strategy to adapt to the inevitable effects of climate change.
"Climate change is occurring, is caused largely by human activities, and poses significant risks for
— and in many cases is already affecting — a broad range of human and natural systems," the
report concluded.
The IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report, released in November of 2007, states, “Warming of the
climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observation of increases in average air and
ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global average sea level.”
More recently, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) reported, “All
three major global surface temperature reconstructions show that Earth has warmed since 1880.
Most of this warming has occurred since the 1970s, with the 20 warmest years having occurred
since 1981 and with all 10 of the warmest years occurring in the past 12 years. Even though the
2000s witnessed a solar output decline resulting in an unusually deep solar minimum in 20072009, surface temperatures continue to increase.” 1 Although the year is not over as of the release
of this Interim Report, 2010 is on track to be one of the warmest years on record, globally, in the
United States and in New York.
The IPCC, USGCRP, and the Academies concluded that these increased temperatures are largely
attributable to human activities that result in emissions of GHGs that contribute to global warming.
These gases include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and several
industrial gases including chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs),
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). Other climate
forcing agents, such as aerosols including sulfate (SO4) and black carbon (soot) also affect our
climate.
The New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) is currently
funding an assessment of the potential effects of climate change and possible adaptation strategies
specific to New York State, Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies in New York State, known as the ClimAID project, the findings of which have informed
the development of this plan. A summary of the ClimAID project can be found in Appendix H.

1

http://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/

1-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

In addition to ClimAID, other scientific organizations have studied climate change effects for
several regions of the U.S. 2,3 These reports indicate that northeastern U.S. is likely to experience
the following climate-related changes:
•

Extreme heat and declining air quality are likely to pose increasing problems for human health,
especially in urban areas.

•

Agricultural production, including that of dairy products, fruit, and maple syrup, is likely to be
adversely affected as favorable climates shift.

•

Severe flooding due to sea level rise and heavy downpours is likely to occur more frequently.

•

Reduction in snow cover will adversely affect winter recreation and the industries that rely
upon it.

•

Sea level rise will threaten coastal groundwater supplies of fresh water.

Creation of the New York Climate Action Council
In August of 2009, Governor David A. Paterson signed Executive Order 24 establishing the goal of
reducing GHG emissions from all New York State sources to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050
(hereafter referred to as 80 by 50) and creating the New York State Climate Action Council
(Council). The Council is made up of 13 agency heads in addition to representatives from the
Governor’s Office. The purpose of the Council is to assist New York in identifying the best
opportunities to mitigate and adapt to climate change, reduce costs associated with climate change
activities, and foster economic growth in New York.
The Council prepared the Interim Report with assistance from NYSERDA, the Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC), and other Council member-agency staff. The Council
convened three external advisory panels to assist and advise in areas requiring special expertise or
knowledge: technical analysis, multi-sector integration, and 2050 Visioning. The 2050 Visioning
Advisory Panel, the Integration Advisory Panel, and five Technical Work Groups (participants
listed in Appendix C) have provided direct input to the Interim Report.
The Council has approved a final New York State GHG emissions inventory and forecast, and this
Climate Action Plan Interim Report. Following receipt of public comment on this report and the
completion of additional research and macroeconomic analysis, the final Climate Action Plan will
be developed and issued in 2011.

Approach to Climate Planning
The New York State Climate Action Plan process relies heavily upon earlier and ongoing work
performed by New York State and others. For example, in addition to ClimAID, NYSERDA
funded an assessment of the technical potential for GHG emissions reductions and costs of
2

Frumhoff, P.S., J.J. McCarthy, J.M. Melillo, S.C. Moser, and D.J. Wuebbles. Confronting Climate Change in the
U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts, and Solutions. Synthesis Report of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment
(NECIA). 2007. http://www.climatechoices.org/ne/resources_ne/nereport.html
3

The Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources National Science and Technology Council. Scientific
Assessment of the Effects of Global Change on the United States. 2008.
http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/scientificassessment/Scientific-AssessmentFINAL.pdf

1-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

mitigation technologies and best practices in New York, Development of New York State
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curves, which supported the analysis of mitigation policy
options recommended here. Other notable reports are the Renewable Fuels Roadmap (NYSERDA,
Pace University), 2009 New York State Energy Plan (New York State Energy Planning Board),
Report of the Sea Level Rise Task Force (NYS DEC), PlaNYC (New York City Mayor’s Office),
and Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State (Brookhaven National Laboratory).
The three advisory panels brought outside perspectives and expertise to the process. The
Integration Advisory Panel reviewed and integrated the sector-focused work of the Technical
Work Groups to ensure that the policy options took account and advantage of policy interactions
and synergies. Council member designees were represented on the Integration Advisory Panel,
which also included stakeholders representing public, private, and NGO interests.
The Technical Work Groups served as advisors to the Council and consisted of Council memberagency staff and additional public, private, and non-profit sector stakeholders with specific interest
and expertise. Members of the public were invited to observe and provide input at all meetings of
the Integration Advisory Panel and Technical Work Groups, in addition to attending public
informational meetings held around the tate during the process. Planning process documents,
including deliberative and analytical products, were posted to the project’s public Web site
(www.nyclimatechange.us).
Prior to the organizational meetings of the Council and Integration Advisory Panel, the appointed
participants attended a “2050 Visioning Conference” hosted by the New York Academy of
Sciences and organized by Brookhaven National Laboratory. The focus of the conference was to
place the challenge of the 80 by 50 goal into real-world context and, by example, to illustrate the
kinds of transformational change needed to achieve the goal.
The Council began the formal deliberative process at the first meeting of the Integration Advisory
Panel and Technical Work Groups on January 14, 2010. The Integration Advisory Panel met in
person five times, and the five Technical Work Groups met in person and by teleconference on a
bi-weekly basis since January 2010. The five Technical Work Groups considered potential policy
options and were organized by the following sectors:
•

Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI)

•

Transportation and Land Use (TLU)

•

Power Supply and Delivery (PSD)

•

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW)

•

Adaptation

Policy options contained in this Interim Report are principally the product of Technical Work
Group deliberations, with feedback and guidance from the Integration Advisory Panel, Council
designees and the public. The Technical Work Groups that were charged with developing policies
to reduce GHG emissions and enhance carbon sequestration potential in New York’s soil, trees and
wetlands, developed policy options through a stepwise process:

1-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

2050 Visioning;

•

Identifying potential policies;

•

Evaluating policy attributes and metrics, including co-benefits;

•

Selecting priority policies;

•

Developing New York-specific policy designs;

•

Quantifying draft policy GHG reduction potentials and costs;

•

Refining policy options;

•

Presenting policy options to the Council for inclusion in the Interim Report.

Figure 1-1 illustrates the Climate Action Plan process and where this Interim Report fits within the
overall effort. This report presents the results of the policy selection, development, and preliminary
cost analysis. The analytical results presented describe the potential effectiveness of the mitigation
policies on a stand-alone basis and do not consider interactions among policies or overlapping
emissions reductions. 4 Assessment of interactions will be done in the next phase of the analysis. It
is therefore not appropriate to sum up the reductions or costs associated with individual policies in
this report to estimate a cumulative result. A detailed explanation of the process employed for
policy option development can be found in Appendix B.
The Adaptation Technical Work Group, as outlined in Figure 1-2, followed a slightly different
process to build a foundation for New York State climate change adaptation planning:
•

Evaluating the best available information on how the climate in New York State will change;

•

Identifying potential vulnerabilities to a changing climate;

•

Assessing risk levels of those vulnerabilities;

•

Developing adaptation strategies that will help to minimize those risks;

•

Prioritizing strategies, considering other adaptation tools, and developing an overall adaptation
plan that is coordinated with GHG mitigation efforts.

The Adaptation Technical Work Group formed subgroups to evaluate eight sectors: agriculture,
coastal zones, ecosystems, energy, public health, transportation, telecommunications and
information infrastructure, and water resources. Evaluation of New York’s climate-related risks
and vulnerabilities were based on the latest climate projections and other information provided by
the ClimAID project. As potential adaptation strategies were being developed, the sector
workgroups spent much time reviewing and analyzing the efficacy, need, cost, environmental
justice considerations, and timing of each proposed recommendation. A full description of the
Adaptation Technical Work Group process is found in Chapter 11.

4

An example would be an energy efficiency measure in RCI that reduces the demand for electricity, and a PSD policy
that makes electricity generation cleaner. The GHG reduction benefits associated with clean generation would be
decreased by an overall reduction in demand for electricity. Failure to take this interaction into account would result in
‘double counting’ or overstating the reduction benefits of the two policies operating together.

1-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Citizens living in economically disadvantaged communities have been represented and their
concerns voiced through formal integration of environmental justice concerns throughout the
process. Through the appointment of environmental justice advocates to the Integration Advisory
Panel and Technical Work Groups, and by incorporating written comments and guidance at key
junctures in the deliberations, the authors of these policy options have heard and sought to
incorporate these concerns into the policy designs.

Challenges of Climate Action Planning
Development of a Climate Action Plan for New York is a unique challenge in policy planning.
Forty year planning, necessary to meet the 80 by 50 goal, is an unusually long time horizon, and
the uncertainty associated with key variables—e.g. future prices of conventional and alternative
fuels and technologies—complicates the analysis of policy options to a greater extent than is
typical. This complication extends to the analysis of the cost of these policies and the cost of not
taking action on climate change. Both are very difficult to estimate.
Another challenge is that while both the cost and cost-effectiveness metrics developed for each
mitigation policy option are long-term societal costs, New York decision makers often must focus
on short-term public costs, that is, the required State investment. Although many of these policy
options have low or no cost to the State, there are notable exceptions: expanding and improving
public transportation systems; investing in a clean energy and all-fuels efficiency fund for
buildings; providing incentives to attract private capital to produce abundant low-carbon energy;
enhancing New York’s rail infrastructure for both people and freight; and investing in the research,
development, and deployment necessary to grow the next generation of technologies and fuels and
promote a clean energy economy.
To cover the investment necessary for these types of policy options, New York State would need
to identify a funding mechanism—a difficult challenge in the current fiscal crisis. While this
Interim Report generally does not propose specific mechanisms for supporting these types of
policy options, there are some principles that should be adhered to in the next stage of climate
action planning:
•

Policies that set a price for carbon and largely allow the market to dictate actions will be the
most efficient and will likely bring about the most benefit, both by reducing emissions at leastcost and raising revenue for reinvestment in GHG reduction programs that have an overall
societal benefit;

•

State investment in research and development should be strategic given limited resources, and
should focus on those activities that overcome a critical barrier and offer significant co-benefits
such as attracting clean energy investment to New York or creating jobs.

•

For each sector, it will be important for New York to pursue a federal advocacy strategy to
bring the resources of the U.S. government to bear on research, development, and
infrastructure investment.

•

Any necessary mechanisms to raise revenue should be carefully crafted not to put New York
State at a competitive disadvantage. This may imply a multi-state strategy. It could also imply
the application of an environmental tax shifting approach. This tax structure would provide a
“double dividend” leading to a decrease of an undesired polluting activity while

1-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

simultaneously increasing government revenue. This increase in government revenue would
reduce the tax burden currently placed on desired activities (e.g. employment or economic
activity).
•

Revenue generation mechanisms should be directly linked to the relevant activity (GHG
emissions) and dedicated to the desired outcome (reduction of GHG emissions). Research has
shown that these types of “green” fees dedicated to specified uses garner more public support
than generalized revenue sources and uses. This approach also recognizes and harnesses the
systems benefit dynamic whereby financial support benefits both the direct recipient and the
entire system (e.g. transportation system, electricity system).

•

Funding for projects and proposals throughout the Climate Action Plan will require substantial
private investments in addition to the public funding detailed above. Coordinated publicprivate partnerships will play an integral role in attracting increased venture capital, a critical
component of an economic transition of this magnitude.

In some cases, the policy options described in the Interim Report could be designed and
implemented either as a revenue-neutral mechanism or a revenue-generating mechanism. To
demonstrate just one example, a revenue-neutral feebate system to influence vehicle purchasing
behavior would be structured so that the total amount offered as an incentive is equal to the amount
charged as a disincentive. The rebates disbursed could be slightly smaller than the fees collected,
with a small amount reserved to cover administrative cost. In contrast, a vehicle purchase incentive
program could also be designed to be revenue generating (e.g. gas-guzzler sales tax surcharge), or
to be revenue-negative (e.g. tax credit for purchase of electric cars). In any case, for the variety of
potential pricing mechanisms, both the amount of GHG emissions reductions and the amount of
revenue that will result depends upon the size and scope of the pricing mechanism, and the
elasticity of demand for the technology or activity.

2011 Final Climate Action Plan
The next phase of the planning process will consider all mitigation policy interactions and produce
an integrated projection for action plan emission reduction potentials and costs. Also to be
included in the next phase is a macroeconomic analysis of the potential for climate change policies
to expand New York’s clean energy economy. Costs and savings associated with policies in this
report consider only the direct costs and savings to society, defined as within the geographic
boundaries of New York State. Direct costs include capital, operating, maintenance, or other costs
directly associated with the implementation of the policy or technology. Direct savings are
typically reduced fuel consumption, but may also include reduced labor, operations, maintenance,
etc. Secondary, indirect, or macroeconomic effects on statewide employment, income, energy
price, and gross state product will be examined in the next phase of the plan with the results
presented in the final report.
Critical to the charge of Executive Order 24 is developing the policies necessary to achieve the 80
by 50 goal. The quantitative analyses conducted for the Interim Report cover the period from 2010
through 2030. Some key policy options consider GHG reduction needed for the period from 2030
through 2050, but cost estimates are limited to the next twenty years due to the increasing
uncertainty associated with longer-range projections. The final Climate Action Plan will include an

1-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

analysis of whether the 80 by 50 goal can be achieved by implementing the policy options
presented in the Interim Report.
The Interim Report (see Chapter 12) brings together policy options that involve regional or
national policy actions or interactions. The final Climate Action Plan will expand upon these
interactions and lay the groundwork for strategic policy implementation, which will address not
only the needs and opportunities for partnerships with the federal government and neighboring
states and provinces, but also the specific actions New Yorkers must take to realize the
environmental, economic and security benefits of a low carbon economy.

1-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 1-1. New York State Climate Change Mitigation Planning Process Flowchart

1-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 1-2. New York State Climate Change Adaptation Planning Process Flowchart

1-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 2
Climate Projections and Vulnerabilities
Introduction to Climate Change 1,2
Climate change is occurring in New York and around the globe. Global mean temperatures and
sea levels have been increasing for the last century, accompanied by other changes in the Earth’s
climate. While Earth's climate is subject to natural variation, the changes we currently see in our
climate result largely from human activities, which have increased atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs), as well as aerosols (black carbon and
sulfate). The natural greenhouse effect keeps the Earth warm enough to support life, but higher
amounts of GHGs from human activities have increased average global temperatures and led to
other climate changes and effects. Relatively small increases in average global temperature can
cause large changes in the Earth’s climate system. Warming of the Earth is unequivocal,
documented by observations of higher global average air, land surface, and ocean temperatures;
widespread melting of mountain glaciers and ice sheets; and rising global average sea level. 3
Figure 2-1 depicts the trends of these key climate indicators. 4

1

Climate science is complex and evolving. Much of the text in this chapter on New York’s climate and vulnerability
to climate change is from the ClimAID project (see Appendix H for the draft summary report). For a more thorough
description of climate change in New York State, including references, please see the draft of the full ClimAID
report available at www.nyserda.org/programs/environment/emep/home.asp . For additional information on climate
science and national and global impacts of climate change we recommend the reader consult summary documents
from the US National Academy of Sciences, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), United States
federal agencies including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), and peer reviewed scientific literature.

2

Definitions of many climate science terms can be found in an appendix at the end of this chapter.

3

Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report; Summary for
Policymakers. 2007.
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm

4

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The State of the Climate Highlights. 2009.
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/bams-state-of-the-climate/

2-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 2-1. Indicators of a Warming World

The panels show changes in climate indicators over several decades. Each of the different colored lines in each
panel represents an independently analyzed dataset. Source: The State of the Climate Highlights: National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 2009.

2-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

In the approximately 150 years since industrialization began, concentrations of GHGs in the
Earth's atmosphere have risen to higher levels than at any time in the past 800,000 years;
atmospheric concentrations of CO2 are now more than one-third higher than in pre-industrial
times. The most rapid rates of warming have occurred during the past 35 years. Each of the last
three decades has been much warmer than the decade before it, with each one setting a new and
significant record for the highest global temperature. Figure 2-2 depicts this decade-to-decade
warming.
Figure 2-2. Global Temperature Change, Decade Averages

Source: The State of the Climate Highlights: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2009.

Many human activities contribute GHGs to the atmosphere, but the primary contributor is
combustion of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas), which releases large amounts of CO2 to the
air. Particulate emissions (such as black carbon) from the combustion of fossil fuels and biomass,
while short-lived in the atmosphere, also contribute to climate change. Other GHGs, especially
methane, nitrous oxide, and halocarbons such as fluorocarbons (F-gases in Figure 2-3), are also
released to the atmosphere by human activities, primarily due to fuel combustion and agricultural
and industrial processes. As shown in Figure 2-3, global annual emissions of anthropogenic
GHGs have increased significantly since 1970.

2-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 2-3. Global Emissions of Anthropogenic Greenhouse Gases, 1970 to 2004

Global annual emissions of anthropogenic GHGs increased significantly from 1970 to 2004. Source: IPCC. Climate
Change 2007: Synthesis Report, Summary for Policymakers, Figure SPM3 [modified], p.5.

Efforts to lessen the severity of climate change by limiting levels of anthropogenic GHG
emissions are already underway in some areas around the globe. However, because the added
GHGs will remain in the atmosphere for centuries and some parts of the climate system respond
gradually, awareness is growing that some additional climate changes are inevitable. Responses
to climate change have grown beyond a focus solely on mitigating the amount of GHGs released
into the atmosphere to include adaptation measures that minimize and prepare for the effects of
anticipated climate change.

Projections of Future Global Climate Change
Climate scientists use analyses of historical climate conditions combined with complex,
computer-based, global climate models to project how the climate will respond in the future to
natural and anthropogenic forcings, such as increased GHG concentrations. The models run
many different scenarios of future GHG emissions based on estimates of economic and social
growth. Model output provides ranges of future temperature increases, rather than point
estimates, primarily due to uncertainty regarding which future scenario will occur and limitations
in knowledge of how the climate system will respond. Despite the uncertainties, all global
climate models project that the Earth will warm in the next century, with a consistent
geographical pattern.
2-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Climate model experiments show that even if no additional GHGs were added to the atmosphere,
further warming still would occur due mainly to a lag in ocean temperature response. Many of
the GHGs currently being added to the Earth’s atmosphere have long residence times. For
example, 33 percent of the anthropogenic CO2 added to the atmosphere today will remain in the
air for at least 100 years, and 19 percent will remain at 1,000 years.5 This means that GHGs
added now to the atmosphere will continue to warm the planet for hundreds and, possibly, even
thousands of years.

Stabilizing Atmospheric Greenhouse Gas Concentrations
To stabilize the atmospheric concentrations of GHGs, GHG emissions must approach
equilibrium—a state of balance between GHG sources and sinks. The likelihood and extent of
many climate change impacts in New York and elsewhere depend, in part, upon the global
concentration of atmospheric GHGs. Generally, the higher the concentrations at which GHGs are
stabilized, the greater the average global temperature increase.
Climate Science is the Basis for GHG Stabilization Goals
Since GHGs exert their climate-altering properties on a global scale, emission reductions must
occur not only in New York, but globally. In 1992, 154 nations, including the United States,
agreed to a series of overarching goals to minimize the risks from climate change, embodied in
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Article 2 of the
UNFCCC establishes the treaty’s long-term objective of “stabilization of greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the Earth’s climate system.”
Scientific evidence suggests that limiting the global average temperature increase to
approximately 3.6°F (2°C) above pre-industrial temperatures may minimize the likelihood of the
most severe climate impacts and is consistent with the UNFCCC goal of avoiding dangerous
climate change. 6 Figure 2-4 7 illustrates the range of potential physical impacts at varying levels
of global temperature change. For each impact category, a colored arrow indicates the possible
temperature range for a specific physical change to occur: an unbroken arrow with redder color
indicates greater likelihood and severity of the physical event. It is important to note that the
most severe effects, or “Abrupt and Major Irreversible Changes,” may be prevented if the rise in
global average temperature is limited to approximately 3.6°F (2°C). Climate change impacts also
depend upon the vulnerability and adaptive capacity of natural systems and human populations.
Effective management of climate change risks requires policy and decision makers to take
flexible, yet significant and sustained actions to reduce GHG emissions and build the state’s
resiliency to climate change impacts; to learn from new research, monitoring data and scientific
assessments; and to adjust future actions accordingly.
5

Hansen, J. et. al., (46 co-authors). Dangerous Human-Made Interference with Climate: A GISS Model Study:
Figure 9(a) Carbon Cycle Constraints (a) Decay of Pulse CO2 Emissions. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 7: 1262007b. . http://www.atmoschem-phys.org

6

Parry, M.L., O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, and Co-authors Technical Summary. Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. 2007.http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-ts.pdf

7

Stern, N. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review: Executive Summary. Figure 2, pp v. 2007.
http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm

2-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 2-4. Projected Impacts of Climate Change

Source: The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge University Press, 2007.

The atmospheric GHG concentration that will result in a 3.6°F (2°C) increase in global
temperatures cannot be known with great accuracy. The best scientific estimates available,
including estimates from the 2007 IPCC Report, indicate that if atmospheric GHG
concentrations are stabilized in the atmosphere at approximately 450 ppm of carbon dioxide
equivalent (CO2e), or total GHGs, there is a medium likelihood that warming will not exceed
3.6°F (2°C). 8 To achieve stabilization of atmospheric concentrations at this level, the IPCC
estimates that net global GHG emissions must approach zero by the end of this century. 9,10 The
interim targets along the pathway to a 450 ppm CO2e stabilization level require global emissions
to peak no later than 2015 and to decrease to 85 percent below year 2000 levels by 2050. 11 The
IPCC did not evaluate intermediate reductions for timeframes other than year 2050.
Apportioning GHG Reductions
Determining how much individual states or nations should reduce emissions through midcentury requires consideration of allocation equity and reduction effectiveness. 12 The UNFCCC
approach to apportioning GHG emission reduction requirements between developed and
8

The concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is already at approximately 375 ppm CO2e and currently
rising at roughly 2.5 ppm every year. IPCC. 2007.
9

Using paleoclimate evidence and observations of current rates of global change, some recent studies suggest that
today’s atmospheric GHG concentrations already are too high to maintain the climate to which humanity, wildlife,
and the rest of the biosphere are adapted. See: Hansen et al. Target Atmospheric CO2: Where Should Humanity Aim?
2008. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg3/ar4-wg3-chapter3.pdf
10

Fisher, B.S., N. Nakicenovic, K. Alfsen, J. Corfee Morlot, F. de la Chesnaye, J.-Ch. Hourcade, K. Jiang, M.
Kainuma, E. LaRovere, A. Matysek, A. Rana, K. Riahi, R. Richels, S. Rose, D. van Vuuren, R. Warren. Issues
Related to Mitigation in the Long Term Context. In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. 2007. p. 199
11

Meinshausen, M. (edited by Schellnhuber et. al.) What Does a 2°C Target Mean for Greenhouse Gas
Concentration? In Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change, 2006.
12

As previously discussed, global emissions of GHGs must eventually be in quasi-equilibrium with GHG removal
mechanisms to allow for stabilization of atmospheric GHG concentrations.

2-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

developing nations considers a broad spectrum of parameters, including population, gross
domestic product (GDP), GDP growth, and global emission pathways that lead to climate
stabilization. 13 Applying these parameters, the UNFCCC concludes that, to reach the 450 ppm
CO2e stabilization target, developed countries must reduce GHG emissions by 80 to 95 percent
from 1990 levels by 2050. This is the basis for the Executive Order 24 greenhouse gas reduction
goal of 80 by 50.

Summary of the ClimAID Report - Climate Change and New York State
Initiated in 2008, the Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation Strategies
in New York State (ClimAID) was funded by the New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority (NYSERDA) as part of its Environmental Monitoring, Evaluation, and
Protection (EMEP) Program. The ClimAID team was made up of university and research
scientists who are specialists in climate change science, effects, and adaptation. Researchers
came primarily, but not exclusively, from Columbia University, Cornell University, and Hunter
College of the City University of New York. The goals of the ClimAID project are to provide
New York State decision makers with cutting-edge information on the state’s vulnerability to,
and its ability to derive benefits from, climate change and to facilitate the development of
adaptation strategies informed by both local experience and scientific knowledge. Further aims
of ClimAID are to identify data gaps and monitoring needs to help guide future efforts. As part
of the project, the ClimAID team evaluated a set of climate change scenarios for New York State
to facilitate the assessment of potential impacts under future conditions.
New York State is vulnerable to a changing climate but, at the same time, has a great potential to
adapt to its effects. From the Great Lakes to Long Island Sound, from the Adirondacks to the
Susquehanna Valley, climate change will increasingly affect the people and resources of New
York State. Climate hazards include higher temperatures and more frequent and intense heat
waves leading to greater incidence of heat morbidity and mortality, decreased air quality and
increased health risks for those with medical conditions such as cardiovascular disease, renal
disease, emphysema, and others; increased short-duration warm season droughts and extreme
rainfall events affecting food production, natural ecosystems, and water resources; and sea level
rise, resulting in both gradual inundation of natural and human habitats and greater risk of
damage from coastal storms.
The uncertainties inherent in climate projections and the complex linkages among climate
change, physical and biological systems, and socioeconomic factors pose special challenges for
New York State decision makers. However, there is a large amount of local and scientific
knowledge on climate change that is critical to understanding not only the necessary urgency and
magnitude of GHG mitigation, but to reducing vulnerability and building adaptive capacity to
respond to the changing climate as well.
The ClimAID researchers divided New York State into seven regions, shown below in Figure 25. Historical climate trends and future projections were analyzed for each region and the state as
13

UNFCCC. Synthesis of Information Relevant to the Determination of the Mitigation Potential and to the
Identification of Possible Ranges of Emission Reduction Objectives of Annex 1 Parties: An Update. 2008.
http://unfcccbali.org/unfccc/images/document/technical_papper.pdf

2-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

a whole. Understanding how New York’s climate has changed in the past and is projected to
change in the future allows for the exploration and identification of potential effects.
Figure 2-5. Regions of New York State used in the climate assessment

Dots represent meteorological stations used in climate analysis. Source: ClimAID.

The current climate in New York State can be described as humid and continental. Key features
of New York State’s climate include the following:
•

Temperature varies widely across the state. Average annual temperature varies from 40°F in
the Adirondacks to near 55°F in the New York City metropolitan region.

•

Precipitation amounts also vary. Average annual precipitation ranges from approximately 30
inches in Western New York to nearly 50 inches in the New York City region, Tug Hill
Plateau, and Adirondacks.

•

A variety of extreme events occurs throughout the state:
o Heat waves, defined as three consecutive days with maximum temperatures above 90°F,
are common in urban areas, especially in the southern parts of the state.
o Short-duration flooding, which can result from heavy rainfall and runoff from snowmelt,
affects the entire state.
o Lake effect snow is a major climate hazard in western and central New York State.
o Areas along the Atlantic coast and Hudson River Valley are especially prone to coastal
storms and their associated effects, including heavy precipitation, high winds, and coastal
flooding.

2-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Observed Climate Trends
Temperature and Precipitation
Temperatures in New York State have risen over the course of the 20th century, with the greatest
warming coming in recent decades. There has also been an increase in the number of extreme hot
days (days at or above 90ºF) and a decrease in the number of cold days (days at or below 32ºF).
Statewide, there has been no discernable trend in annual precipitation, which is characterized by
large variability, both from year to year and over decades. Table 2-1 shows observed 20th century
trends in temperature and precipitation for select meteorological stations in New York.
Table 2-1. 1900-1999 Temperature and Precipitation Trends in New York State
Temperature (°F / decade)
Annual

Spring

Summer

Fall

Winter

Albany

0.18**

0.25**

0.13*

0.06

0.29**

Elmira

0.01

- 0.02

- 0.09

0.00

0.17

Indian Lake

0.15**

0.13

0.05

0.14*

0.29*

NYC

0.39**

0.45**

0.33**

0.28**

0.53**

Port Jervis

0.06

0.09

0.02

- 0.08

0.20*

Rochester

0.20**

0.26**

0.19**

0.10

0.25*

Watertown

0.17**

0.17*

0.15**

0.08

0.31**

Precipitation (inches / decade)
Annual

Spring

Summer

Fall

Winter

Albany

1.13**

0.33

0.34

0.36**

0.10

Elmira

0.30

0.01

- 0.08

0.26

0.11

Indian Lake

- 0.06

- 0.01

- 0.04

0.08

- 0.10

NYC

0.47

0.24

- 0.05

0.25

0.04

Port Jervis

0.11

0.15

- 0.21

0.12

0.04

Rochester

0.29

0.01

0.15

0.20*

- 0.07

Watertown

0.35

- 0.01

0.05

0.23*

0.09

* Significant at the 95% level; ** Significant at the 99% level

Sea Level Rise
Sea level in the coastal waters of New York State and up the Hudson River has been steadily
rising over the 20th century. As global temperatures have increased, rates of sea level rise have
increased as well. During the 20th century, global sea level rise was primarily the result of
thermal expansion of ocean waters. Sea level rise in New York coastal regions is a factor of both
global sea level rise and local changes in height of the land relative to the height of the
continental land mass. Over the 20th century, the rate of sea level rise for the New York coastal
region was 1.2 inches per decade. The difference between this rate and the rate of global sea
level rise (0.7 inches per decade) was due primarily to local subsidence.

2-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

ClimAID Projections of Future New York State Climate Conditions
For the assessment, investigators developed projections of temperature, precipitation, and
extreme events for each of the seven climate regions and New York State as a whole. For sea
level rise, projections were developed for the marine coastal region and the Hudson River
estuary. These projections were based on climate data from 16 (seven for sea level rise) global
climate models (GCMs) and three GHG emission scenarios. In addition to these climate
projections, for eight sectors across the state (corresponding to the sectors discussed in the
Adaptation chapter of the Interim Report), sector-specific climate risks were defined with
stakeholder input, and “tailored products” were developed for use in the sector assessments (e.g.,
the number of heating-degree days in future years was projected for use in the energy sector
assessment).
The combination of multiple GCMs and emissions scenarios produced a range of possible
outcomes for each future time period and climate variable. The results constitute "model-based"
probability functions and are presented as a probabilistic range across the potential outcomes.
What is an emission scenario?
An emissions scenario is plausible representation of future global greenhouse
gas emissions. Each emissions scenario represents a unique blend of
demographic, social, economic, technological, and environmental assumptions.
The ClimAID analysis used three scenarios:
A2: Relatively rapid population growth and limited sharing of technological
change combine to produce emissions growth throughout the century and high
greenhouse gas levels by the end of this century.
A1B: Effects of economic growth are partially offset by introduction of new
technologies and decreases in global population after 2050. This trajectory is
associated with relatively rapid increases in greenhouse gas emissions and the
highest overall carbon dioxide levels for the first half of this century, followed
by a gradual decrease in emissions after 2050.
B1: This scenario combines the A1 population trajectory with societal changes
tending to reduce greenhouse gas emissions growth. The net result is the lowest
greenhouse gas emissions of the three scenarios, with emissions beginning to
decrease by 2040.
Higher average annual temperatures and sea level rise are extremely likely for New York State.
For temperature and sea level rise, all climate models analyzed project continued increases over
the coming century, with a high likelihood of more rapid temperature increases and sea level rise
than occurred over the 20th century. Although most projections indicate small increases in
precipitation, some do not, and decade-by-decade precipitation variability is large; therefore,
precipitation projections are less certain than temperature projections.

2-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York State Temperature and Precipitation Projections
Figure 2-6 shows the projected changes in average annual temperature and precipitation for the
state, averaged across the 16 GCMs for one of the three scenarios for possible future GHG
emissions. Although only a single emission scenario is shown (the A1B “middle” emissions
scenario), the spatial pattern is similar for the other two scenarios. Table 2-2 shows specific
mean annual change projections for seven regions of the state.
Figure 2-6. Projected changes in annual temperature and precipitation for the 2080s in
the Northeast, under the A1B (“middle”) emissions scenario, relative to the 1970-1999
baseline

°F)

Table 2-2. Temperature and Precipitation Projections for the Seven ClimAID Regions
Region 1

Baseline1
1971-2000

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

48° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+3.0 to 5.5° F

+4.5 to 8.5° F

Precipitation
Central Range

37 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

0 to 15 %

Stations used for Region 1 are Buffalo, Rochester, Geneva, and Fredonia.
Region 2

Baseline1
1971-2000

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

48° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+3.0 to 5.0° F

+4.0 to 8.0° F

Precipitation
Central Range

48 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 10 %

Stations used for Region 2 are Mohonk Lake, Port Jervis, and Walton.

2-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Baseline1
1971-2000

Region 3

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

46° F

2.0 to 3.0° F

+3.5 to 5.5° F

+4.5 to 8.5° F

Precipitation
Central Range

38 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 10 %

Stations used for Region 3 are Elmira, Cooperstown, and Binghamton.
Region 4

Baseline1
1971-2000

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

53° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+3.0 to 5.0° F

+4.0 to 7.5° F

Precipitation
Central Range

47 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 10 %

Stations used for Region 4 are New York City (Central Park and LaGuardia Airport), Riverhead, and Bridgehampton.
Baseline1
1971-2000

Region 5

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

50° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+3.0 to 5.5° F

+4.0 to 8.0° F

Precipitation
Central Range

51 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 10 %

Stations used for Region 5 are Utica, Yorktown Heights, Saratoga Springs, and the Hudson Correctional Facility.
Region 6

Baseline1
1971-2000

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

44° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+ 3.5 to 5.5° F

+4.5 to 9.0° F

Precipitation
Central Range

51 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 15 %

Stations used for Region 6 are Boonville and Watertown.
Region 7

Baseline1
1971-2000

2020s

2050s

2080s

Air temperature
Central Range2

42° F

+1.5 to 3.0° F

+3.0 to 5.5° F

+4.0 to 9.0° F

Precipitation
Central Range

39 in

0 to +5 %

0 to +10 %

+5 to 15 %

Stations used for Region 7 are Wanakena, Indian Lake, and Peru.
1
The baselines for each region are the average of the values across all the stations in the region.
2

Shown are the central ranges (middle 67%) of values from model-based probabilities; temperature ranges are
rounded to the nearest half-degree and precipitation to the nearest 5%.

2-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Sea Level Rise
In 2007, the IPCC concluded that global sea level will likely rise between 7 and 23 inches by the
end of the century (2090-2099), relative to the base period (1980-1999), not counting unexpected
rapid changes in ice flow from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. These projections do not
consider all ice sheet melting processes or cover the full likely range of global temperature
increase given in the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (up to 11.5 ºF). The “rapid ice-melt”
scenario is an alternative method to estimate future sea level rise that incorporates observed and
longer-term historical melt rates, and documented rates of melting in past climate eras, and
includes the possibility of accelerated melting of land-based ice sheets and glaciers. Projections
based on this scenario are higher than the IPCC projections.
For the ClimAID assessment, a set of projections for the ocean coastal area of New York State
(including the tidal extent of the Hudson River north to Troy) was developed based on IPCC
global climate models and methods. 14 A set of higher projections for a “rapid ice melt scenario”
was also developed. These projections are provided in Table 2-3.
Table 2-3. Sea Level Rise Projections (relative to 2000-2004 baseline)
Region 4: Lower Hudson
Valley, New York City, & Long
Island

2020s

2050s

2080s

Sea Level Rise1
Central Range

+ 2 to 5 in

+ 7 to 12 in

+ 12 to 23 in

Sea Level Rise1,2
Rapid Ice Melt

+ 5 to 10 in

+ 19 to 29 in

+ 41 to 55 in

2020s

2050s

2080s

Region 5: Mid-Hudson Valley
& Capital Region
Sea Level Rise1
Central Range

+ 1 to 4 in

+ 5 to 9 in

+ 8 to 18 in

Seal Level Rise1,2
Rapid Ice Melt

+ 4 to 9 in

+ 17 to 26 in

+ 37 to 50 in

1

Shown are the central ranges (middle 67%) of values from model-based probabilities rounded to the nearest inch.
The rapid ice melt scenario is based on acceleration of recent rates of ice melt in the Greenland and West Antarctic
ice sheets and paleoclimate studies.

2

Changes in Extreme Events
Extreme climate events, such as heat waves and heavy rainstorms, significantly impact New
York’s communities and natural resources and often have disproportionate effects on urban and
rural systems. Probabilities of the future occurrence of extreme events in New York State were
developed, based on climate models. The following are likely to occur during the 21st century:
•

Heat waves are expected to become more frequent and intense.

•

Intense precipitation events are expected to become more frequent.

•

Storm-related coastal flooding is expected to increase due to rising sea levels.

14

The 2009 New York City Panel on Climate Change sea level rise projections for the New York City area are
identical to the ClimAID projections for Region 4.

2-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

As an example, projections for such events in Central New York (Region 3) are shown in
Table 2-4.
Table 2-4. Projections of changes in extreme events: minimum/maximum; central range*
for Central New York (Region 3)

Extreme
Event

Baseline

2020s

2050s

2080s

Intense
Precipitation

Heat waves & Cold Events

# of days per year with max
temperature at or above:
90°F

10

11/25; 14 to 19

15/45; 21 to 33

19/70; 26 to 56

95°F

1

2/7; 2 to 4

2/18; 4 to 10

4/38; 7 to 24

# of heat waves
per year2

1

1/3; 2 to 3

2/6; 3 to 4

2/9; 3 to 8

average duration
(in days)

4

4/5; 4 to 5

4/5; 4 to 5

4/7; 5 to 5

# of days per year
with min
temperature at or
below 32°F

152

116/145; 122 to
124

86/168; 106 to
122

68/124; 87 to
114

Number of days per year with
rainfall exceeding:

1 inch

6

5/8; 6 to 7

5/8; 6 to 7

5/10; 6 to 8

2 inches

0.61

0.5/1; 0.6 to 0.9

0.5/1; 0.6 to 1

0.4/2; 0.7 to 1

* The minimum, central range (middle 67%), and maximum of values from model-based probabilities across the
GCMs and GHG emissions scenarios are shown.
1
Decimal places shown for values less than 1, although this does not indicate higher precision/certainty. More
generally, the high precision and narrow range shown here are due to the fact that these results are model-based.
Due to multiple uncertainties, actual values and range are not known to the level of precision shown in this table.
2
Defined as three or more consecutive days with maximum temperature exceeding 90°F

There is potential for changes in other climate variables as well. However, because quantitative
information is either unavailable or considered less reliable, the changes in these variables are
described qualitatively at this time. ClimAID researchers developed confidence levels for these
projections using a system similar to that used by in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report
(Table 2-5). These ratings are based on the correspondence between climate model projections
and observed climate, agreement among climate models, and expert judgment.

2-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Table 2-5. Explanation of ClimAID Confidence Level Terminology
Term

Probability of Occurrence

Extremely likely

> 95%

Very likely

> 90%

Likely

> 66%

More likely than not

> 50%

Table 2-6 shows the probable direction of change over the 21st century for New York City and
Long Island, as well as the likelihood associated with the qualitative projection. For these
variables, which can have large effects on infrastructure, quantitative projections are not possible
due to insufficient information.
Table 2-6. Qualitative changes in extreme events for New York City and Long Island
(Region 4)
Extreme Event

Probable Direction Throughout
21st Century

Heat index2
Ice storms/ freezing rain

Likelihood1
Very likely

Unknown

Snowfall frequency & amount

Likely

Downpours
(precipitation rate/hour)

Likely

Lightning

Unknown
More likely than not

Intense hurricanes
Nor’easters

Unknown
More likely than not

Extreme winds
1

Likelihood definitions found in Table 2-5
The National Weather Service uses a heat index related to temperature and humidity to define the likelihood of
harm after “prolonged exposure or strenuous activity” (http://www.weather.gov/om/heat/index.shtml).
2

Longer-term Projections
Consideration of climate projections past the year 2100 is beyond the current planning horizons
of most infrastructure managers. However, planning for some long-lived infrastructure, which,
for example, could include new aqueducts and subway lines, may need to consider the climate
during the next century. Furthermore, many pieces of infrastructure intended only to have a
useful lifespan within this century may remain operational beyond their planned lifetimes. It is

2-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

also possible that future projects aimed specifically at climate change mitigation or adaptation
might benefit during their planning stages from long-term climate guidance.
Because the climate of the 2100s is highly uncertain, only qualitative projections are possible,
especially at a local scale. Despite uncertainties, at least two key climate variables, sea level rise
and temperature, will in all probability continue to increase into the next century. Additionally, if
evidence over the next decade continues to show accelerated melting of the ice sheets on
Greenland and West Antarctica, it would greatly increase the probability that these ice sheets
would contribute significantly to sea level rise in the next century, even if GHG concentrations,
and perhaps even global temperatures, were to stabilize at some point during this century.
Uncertainty and Likelihoods
Projections of future climate conditions are characterized by large uncertainties. At the global
scale these uncertainties can be divided into two main categories:
•

Uncertainties in future land-use changes and emissions of GHG gases and other climate
drivers, such as aerosols and black carbon

•

Uncertainties regarding the sensitivity of the climate system to GHG concentrations and
other climate drivers.

When considering future changes at local and regional, geographic scales, uncertainties increase,
for two additional reasons:
•

Climate variability, such as precipitation extremes, can be especially large over small
regions, partially masking more uniform effects of climate change.

•

Changes in local atmospheric processes that operate at small scales, such as land or sea
breezes, may not be captured by the global climate models used to make projections.

Uncertainties may be reduced by using projections generated from a range of global climate
models and GHG emissions scenarios as was done with ClimAID, but they cannot be fully
eliminated. Additionally, averaging the projections over 30-year time periods and showing
changes in climate through time, rather than absolute climate values, reduces the local- and
regional-scale uncertainties. However, these techniques do not address the possibility that local
processes may change with time.
New York State’s Vulnerability to Climate Change
Climate change is already impacting New York State’s society, economy, and natural
ecosystems. With changes in temperature, precipitation patterns, and sea level projected to
continue, the impacts to New York State are likely to increase. Presented here are the eight
sectors of the state considered in the ClimAID assessment, including some of the sector-specific
impacts expected as the climate continues to change.
Agriculture
Agriculture is a significant component of the New York economy and includes large wholesale
grower-shippers selling products nationally and internationally, a substantial dairy industry, and
thousands of small farm operations selling direct retail and providing communities throughout

2-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

the state with local, fresh produce. Farmers will be on the front lines of coping with climate
change, but the direct impacts on crops, livestock, and pests, and the costs of farmer adaptation
will have cascading effects beyond the farm gate and throughout the New York economy.
Climate change presents both economic challenges and opportunities for agriculture in New
York State. Warmer temperatures, a longer growing season, and increased atmospheric carbon
dioxide could create opportunities for farmers with enough capital to take risks on expanding
production of warmer temperature-adapted crops (e.g., European red wine grapes, peaches,
tomato, watermelon) assuming a market for new crops can be developed. However, the dairy
industry as well as many of the high-value crops that currently dominate the state’s agriculture
economy (e.g., apples, cabbage, potatoes), benefit from the state’s historically relatively cool
climate. As New York’s climate changes, some crops may have yield or quality losses associated
with increased frequency of drought; increased summer high temperatures; increased risk of
freeze injury as a result of more variable winters; and increased pressure from weeds, insects,
disease, or other factors. Dairy milk production per cow will decline in the region as
temperatures and the frequency of summer heat stress increase.
The impacts from climate change will occur on top of non-climate stressors already affecting the
sector. For example, as with many other businesses in New York and elsewhere, agriculture is
sensitive to the volatile and rising costs of energy. Also, New York farmers are affected by
rapidly changing consumer preferences and demands of supermarket buyers; increasingly,
farmers must consider global market forces and international competition as well as competition
from neighboring states. As a final example, too much as well as too little rainfall is currently a
recurrent problem for farmers in New York. Currently, summer precipitation is insufficient to
fully meet the water needs of non-irrigated crops most years, while brief, intense rainfall events
can have detrimental effects on crops. Climate change is likely to exacerbate these challenges.
Coastal Zones
For the ClimAID assessment, the coastal zone is defined as the shoreline of New York State,
including coastal wetland areas and inland areas adjacent to the shoreline that are likely to be
affected by sea level rise and coastal storms. Also considered are the potential effects of climate
change up the Hudson River estuary to the Troy Dam.
Global sea level rise due to climate warming will have a significant impact on New York’s
coastal areas, in addition to other impacts like ocean circulation changes and higher water
temperatures. The effects of global sea level rise will be amplified in New York State due to
coastal subsidence caused by ongoing adjustments of the Earth’s crust to the melting of the ice
sheets that began 20,000 years ago.
New York's coastal zones, including the New York City metropolitan region, are becoming more
developed, further increasing their vulnerability to flooding, coastal erosion, and sea level rise.
Sea level rise will greatly amplify risks to coastal populations and will lead to permanent
inundation of low-lying areas, more frequent flooding by storm surges, and increased beach
erosion. Saltwater could reach farther up the Hudson River and into estuaries, contaminating
urban water supplies. Tides and storm surges may propagate farther up the Hudson River
increasing flood risk far from the coast.

2-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

High water levels, strong winds, and heavy precipitation resulting from strong coastal storms
already cause billions of dollars in damages and disrupt transportation and power distribution
systems. Barrier islands are being dramatically altered by strong coastal storms as ocean waters
over wash dunes, create new inlets, and erode beaches. Warming ocean waters have the potential
to produce stronger storms by increasing the source of energy for these storms.
Non-climate-related stresses will compound the effects of climate change. In the coastal region,
most of these are associated with human consumption of natural resources and land-use
practices. For example, coastal development, construction of organized drainage, and impervious
surfaces have led to a reduction in groundwater recharge and degraded coastal water quality. The
interconnection among precipitation, land use, and local fish populations has also been
documented, suggesting that increased urbanization may lead to a reduction in stream
biodiversity. In addition to water-quality-related stresses, fish stocks and other marine
ecosystems may be affected by harvesting practices, disease, normal population dynamics
(increased predation), and recruitment processes. Over-development along the coast increases the
demand for groundwater, which could lead to drawdown of the aquifer and increased saltwater
intrusion. Coastal infrastructure also inhibits natural migration of marine systems, including
wetlands and barrier islands.
The most economically significant risks and vulnerabilities in the coastal areas are the
multifaceted risks from higher sea levels and consequent higher storm surges. Substantial
economic losses can be expected in buildings, infrastructure (including underground
infrastructure for utilities, such as gas lines and telecommunications cables), natural areas, and
recreation sites. Other impacts from precipitation changes, higher temperatures, higher ocean
temperatures and ocean acidification will also have significant impacts.
Ecosystems
Ecosystems, as defined here, encompass the plants, fish, wildlife, and other biotic resources of
all natural and managed landscapes (e.g., forests, grasslands, aquatic systems) in New York State
except those land areas designated as agricultural or urban. This sector includes timber and
maple syrup industries, as well as tourism and recreation businesses conducted within natural
and managed ecosystems. It also encompasses wetlands, waterways, and lakes as well as their
associated fisheries. Ecosystems services provided by New York’s landscapes include
preservation of freshwater quality, flood control, soil conservation, carbon sequestration,
biodiversity support, recreation, and preservation of wild places and heritage sites.
The initial impacts of climate change on natural systems are already apparent, with documented
accounts of changes in the seasonal timing of events like bud-break or flowering and species
range shifts across the Northern Hemisphere. Within the northeastern United States, researchers
have documented earlier bloom dates of woody perennials, earlier spring arrival of migratory
birds, and other biological and ecological responses. Species and ecosystems are responding
directly to climate drivers and indirectly to secondary effects, such as changes in timing and
abundance of food supply, changes in habitat, and increased pest, disease, and invasive species
pressure. Ultimately, biodiversity, net primary productivity, and biogeochemical cycles could be
affected by climate change. To date, however, there is not yet clear evidence of climate change
impacts on important ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration, or water storage and
quality in New York State; our understanding of climate change impacts diminishes as
2-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

projections are scaled up from individual species and ecosystem structure to ecosystem function
and services.
Within the next several decades, New York State is likely to see widespread shifts in species
composition in the state's forests and other natural landscapes, with the loss of spruce-fir forests,
alpine tundra, and boreal plant communities. Warmer temperatures will favor the expansion of
some invasive species into New York, such as the aggressive weed kudzu and the insect pest
hemlock woolly adelgid. Some habitat and food generalists (such as white-tailed deer) may also
benefit. Additionally, higher levels of carbon dioxide tend to preferentially increase the growth
rate of fast-growing species, which are often weeds and other invasive species. Both of these
climate factors could also increase the productivity of some hardwood tree species, provided
growth is not limited by other factors such as drought or nutrient deficiency.
Lakes, streams, inland wetlands, and associated aquatic species will be highly vulnerable to
changes in the timing, supply, and intensity of rainfall and snowmelt; groundwater recharge; and
duration of ice cover. Increasing water temperatures will negatively affect brook trout and other
native coldwater fish.
In coastal areas, sea level rise may become the dominant stressor acting on vulnerable salt
marshes. Loss of coastal wetlands reduces fish and shellfish populations. Higher water
temperatures also affect these populations. Some marine species, such as lobsters, are shifting
their ranges north out of New York State, while other species, such as the blue claw crab, are
increasing in the warmer waters.
The impacts of climate change cannot be viewed in isolation, as other stressors are also affecting
ecosystems and will affect vulnerability to climate change. While society and policy makers are
likely to focus on ecosystem services, adaptation interventions by natural resource managers
often will be implemented at the level of species, communities, and habitats. As climate changes
and the habitable zones of wild species continue to shift northward and/or up in elevation
throughout the century, natural resource managers will face new challenges in maintaining
ecosystem services and difficult decisions regarding changes in species composition of natural
communities.
For revenue-generating aspects of the ecosystem sector, including winter tourism and
recreational fishing, climate change may impose obvious economic costs. For other facets, such
as forest-related ecosystem services, heritage value of alpine forests, and habitat for endangered
species, the economic costs associated with climate change are real but more difficult to
quantify.
Energy
New York State’s electricity and gas supply and distribution systems are highly reliable. As they
are designed to operate under a wide range of temperature and weather conditions, the system is
deliberately robust and resilient. However, threshold conditions (as opposed to the mean or
standard conditions) or shifts in thresholds caused by climate change can create vulnerability
within the energy sector and substantially increase the cost of maintaining reliability.

2-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Climate change is anticipated to impact the energy sector in several ways: First, energy demand
will change due to a changing combination of heating and cooling needs, stressing power
supplies and increasing peak demand loads. With higher mean temperatures and increased
numbers of extremely hot days, the cost of maintaining a reliable supply of electricity is likely to
increase in all parts of the state. In particular, climate change will place additional pressures on
New York City, where the system is already taxed during very hot summer days. Extreme
weather events may also increase costs of meeting electricity demand.
Second, the physical structures (power plants, electrical lines, etc.) will be affected by changing
climate conditions. Increased air and water temperatures may affect the operation of some power
plants. Transformers and distribution lines for both electricity and gas supply are vulnerable to
extreme weather events, temperature, and flooding. Coastal infrastructure is vulnerable to
flooding as a result of sea level rise and severe storms.
Renewable generation may also be affected. Hydropower is vulnerable to drought and changes in
precipitation patterns. The availability and reliability of solar power systems are vulnerable to
changes in cloud cover (although this may be offset by advances in technology), and wind power
systems are similarly vulnerable to changes in wind speed and direction. The extent to which
cloud cover and wind will be affected by climate change is currently unclear. The effect of
climate change on low-carbon biomass as an energy feedstock is also unclear, though it is
important to note that biomass availability depends to some degree on the suitability of weather
conditions during the growing season.
Additional indirect impacts on the energy sector, such as the financial impacts on investors or
insurance companies linked to vulnerable energy system assets or on customers forced to grapple
with more volatile energy prices resulting from changing climate conditions, may be even more
important than the direct impacts. New York’s energy and electricity sector is a key focus for a
variety of the mitigation policy options presented in the Interim Report. Reliance on this sector to
help power the clean-energy economy must consider the expected impacts from an already
changing climate.
Public Health
Climate change vulnerabilities in the public health sector are, to a large extent, ones in which
public health and environmental agencies are already engaged. However, climate change places
an additional resource and cost burden on public health agencies. Climate-related risk factors
include heat events, extreme storms, disruptions of water supply and quality, decreased air
quality, changes in timing and intensity of pollen and mold seasons, and alterations in patterns of
infectious disease vectors and organisms. Demand for health services and the need for public
health surveillance and monitoring will increase as climate continues to change.
As a result of these climate risks, some climate-related health vulnerabilities have emerged.
Heat-related illness and death are projected to increase, while cold-related death is projected to
decrease. Increases in heat-related death are projected to outweigh reductions in cold-related
death. Cardiovascular and respiratory-related illness and death will be affected by worsening air
quality, including possibly more smog, wildfires, pollens, and molds.

2-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Vector-borne diseases, such as those spread by mosquitoes and ticks (such as West Nile virus),
may expand or their distribution patterns change. Water- and food-borne diseases are likely to
increase without adaptation intervention. Water supply, recreational water quality, and some
food production will be at increased risk due to increased temperatures and changing
precipitation patterns.
More intense storms and flooding could lead to increased stress and mental health impacts,
impaired ability to deliver public health and medical services, increased respiratory diseases such
as asthma, and increased outbreaks of gastrointestinal diseases.
These vulnerabilities span a range from the relatively direct, data-rich and well understood to
more complex, multi-factorial systems for which both data and models are currently
underdeveloped. Uncertainties pervade any effort to predict either direct or indirect health
impacts of climate change. These uncertainties increase the importance of building resilience
into the public health system to cope with inevitable surprises to come.
Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure
Telecommunications infrastructure is vital to New York State's economy and welfare; its
capacity and reliability are essential to the effective functioning of global commerce and the
state's economy and is especially vital during emergencies. The sector has important public
functions, but it is largely privately operated. The sector poses special challenges to climate
change analysis. Businesses in the sector are reluctant to disclose some classes of information
that would be relevant to climate change assessments because of competitive pressures.
The rapid technological changes inherent in technology and information systems mean that the
planning horizons and life spans for much of its infrastructure are at best on the order of a
decade. The sector is tightly coupled to the energy sector, with power outages affecting the
reliability of communication services; many of its communication lines also are located on the
same poles as power lines. Modern digital technologies, including communication services based
on fiber optics, broadband, and the Internet, can be more vulnerable to power outages than
traditional landline technology.
A central concern of the communication infrastructure sector is how to ensure that the perpetual
introduction of new technologies enhances the reliability and uninterrupted access to services.
Such a focus is essential both now and in the future, when the risks from climate change may
increase.
Communication service delivery is vulnerable to hurricanes, lightning, ice, snow, wind storms,
and other extreme weather events, some of which are projected to change in frequency and
intensity. Communication lines and other infrastructure are vulnerable to the observed and
projected increase in heavy precipitation events and resulting flooding and freezing rain. In
coastal and near-coastal areas, sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge flooding
will be a considerable threat especially later this century. The delivery of communication
services is sensitive to power outages, such as those resulting from the increased demand
associated with heat waves, which are expected to increase with climate change.

2-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Under current climate conditions and severe weather events, there are already serious
vulnerabilities that often prevent the telecommunications sector from delivering services to the
public.
Transportation
There is a very large range of potential climate change impacts on the state’s transportation
system, but the primary impacts and costs will be on infrastructure investment and management
of rising sea levels and the accompanying increase in storm surges for coastal areas.
The highest concentration of transportation infrastructure is located in regions that are population
centers and vital drivers of the New York economy. Climate change threatens many of these
dense metropolitan transportation systems. Ground transportation systems (roads and rails) in
coastal population centers, for example, are often placed underground in tunnels very close to or
below sea level and are vulnerable to sea level rise. Since transportation is a networked system,
delays, failures, and catastrophic failures in one system often have cascading effects on other
parts of the system.
Over the next few decades, heat waves, heavy precipitation events, and windstorms are likely to
dominate the causes for moderate, more frequent transportation problems such as flooded streets
and delays in mass transit. By 2050 at the latest, sea level rise and storm surge will become more
significant threats. By later this century, these threats will be so severe that major adaptations
will have to be in place, not only in the coastal zone, but up the Hudson River estuary to cities
including Troy and Albany. Low-lying transportation systems such as subways and tunnels,
especially in coastal and near-coastal areas, are at particular risk of flooding as a result of sea
level rise and heavy-precipitation events.
Materials used in transportation infrastructure, such as asphalt and train rails, are vulnerable to
increased temperatures and frequency of extreme heat events. Air-conditioning requirements in
buses, trucks, and trains, and ventilation requirements for tunnels will increase. Runways may
require lengthening in some locations since hotter air provides less lift, necessitating higher
speeds for takeoff.
The Great Lakes may see a shorter season of winter ice cover, leading to a longer shipping
season. However, reduced ice cover is also likely to mean an increase in “lake effect” snow
events, which cause various transportation-related problems.
Air- and land-based transportation systems are vulnerable to ice and snowstorms, although
requirements for salting and snow removal may decrease as snow tends to turn more often into
rain. Freeze/thaw cycles that disturb roadbeds may increase as winter temperatures rise.
Currently, New York State has the most days per year of freezing rain in the nation, affecting air
and ground transportation directly and also indirectly through electric and communication
outages.
Water Resources
New York State’s water resources are managed by an array of large and small agencies,
governments, and institutions, with little statewide coordination. In 2000, New York State’s 19
million residents consumed approximately 2,200 million gallons per day of fresh surface water
2-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and 890 million gallons per day of fresh groundwater for public water supply, irrigation, and
industrial uses. This water comes from a diverse range of sources, each with different levels of
vulnerability to climate change.
Although there are several water quality concerns directly linked to average air temperatures, in
general, hydrologic processes are dependent on multiple interacting climate factors. In addition
to temperature, possible future changes in timing and quantity of snow, rainfall, and evaporation
may have the following impacts on the state’s water resources:
•

Rising air temperatures intensify the water cycle by driving increased evaporation and
precipitation. The resulting altered patterns of precipitation include more rain falling in heavy
events, often with longer dry periods between rain events. Such changes can have a variety of
effects on water resources.

•

Increasing water temperatures in rivers and streams will affect aquatic heath and reduce the
capacity of streams to assimilate effluent from wastewater treatment plants.

•

Heavy downpours have increased over the past 50 years and this trend is projected to
continue, causing an increase in localized flash flooding in urban areas and hilly regions.
Flooding has the potential to increase pollutants in the water supply and inundate wastewater
treatment plants and other vulnerable development within floodplains.

•

At the same time as downpours occur more often, more moderate rain events are expected to
become less frequent during the summer, resulting in additional and possibly longer summer
dry periods and affecting water supply systems with limited storage. Reduced summer flows
on large rivers and lowered groundwater tables could lead to conflicts among competing
water users.

Although New York is a water-rich state, it is already experiencing water resource challenges.
The most economically significant risks may be to coastal infrastructure, including wastewater
treatment plants and water supply systems (ground and surface) from rising sea levels and
associated storm surges. The state’s water and wastewater treatment infrastructure is in dire need
of repair and upgrade; the anticipated challenges associated with a changing climate will only
exacerbate the situation.
Inland flooding is also an important risk. Other economically important risks and vulnerabilities
include the costs of droughts of potentially increased intensity and frequency, losses in
hydropower production, and increased costs of water quality treatment. If there are morefrequent climate-related power losses, this could be costly in both economic and regulatory terms
to water supply and wastewater treatment plants.
Demand for water continues to grow, including for human consumption, agricultural use, and
energy production. As other parts of the country experience large changes in drought frequency
and intensity, New York’s water resources may become a defining economic asset resulting in
the migration of people and businesses into the state. This may bring some economic benefits,
but will present new challenges as pressure on water resources increases.

2-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Conclusion
The impacts of climate change in New York State will vary across sectors. However, it is likely
that significant societal and natural resource disruption will result, and associated costs incurred
in all sectors if the climate change threat is not addressed. Adaptation planning and GHG
mitigation efforts can reduce the potential economic impacts.

2-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 3
Inventory and Forecast of
New York State's Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Introduction
This chapter summarizes New York’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and sinks (carbon
storage) from 1990 to 2030. The inventory and reference case forecasts were prepared to inform
the climate action planning effort outlined in Chapter 1 by providing a comprehensive
understanding of current and possible future GHG emissions. The information in this chapter
reflects the information presented in the New York Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and
Forecast report (hereafter referred to as the Inventory and Forecast report).
Historical GHG emissions estimates (1990 through 2008) 1 were developed using a set of
generally accepted principles and guidelines for state GHG emissions inventories, relying to the
extent possible on New York-specific data and inputs. The reference case forecasts (2009- 2030)
are based on a compilation of various existing forecasts of electricity generation, fuel use, and
other GHG-emitting activities, along with a set of simple, transparent assumptions described in
the final Inventory and Forecasts report.
Several demographic trends 2 that could affect future emissions are not fully captured in the
current approach to developing New York's energy demand forecasts. Current patterns suggest
per capita emissions could fall as the downstate population grows and as the population increases
in age. Per capita emissions are generally lower downstate than upstate, and people over 65
generally live in smaller housing units and travel less than people under 65. However, total
statewide emissions are expected to rise, driven by increased total population, growth in
economic activity, aging housing stock and increased vehicle miles traveled.
The average age of housing stock could increase as the proportion replaced declines. However,
new housing units that are built may be smaller on average than the current stock to
accommodate increased numbers of smaller families and empty nesters. Given that relatively few
new housing units are expected to be built in the next thirty years, opportunities to achieve
emissions reductions through improved transportation and land use planning may be limited.
The Inventory and Forecast report covers the six types of gases included in the U.S. GHG
inventory: 3 carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). Emissions of these GHGs are
presented using a common metric, CO2 equivalent (CO2e), which indicates the relative

1

The last year of available historical data for each sector varies between 2005 and 2008.

2

See box, Demographic Trends, in Ch. 4.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2008.April
2010. EPA430-R-08-006. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html.

3

3-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

contribution of each gas, per unit mass, to global average radiative forcing on a global warming
potential-weighted basis. 4
It is important to note that the emissions estimates reflect the GHG emissions associated with the
electricity sources used to meet New York’s demands, corresponding to a consumption-based
approach to emissions accounting that includes emissions from imported electricity. Another
way to look at electricity emissions is to consider the GHG emissions produced by electricity
generation facilities in the state, a production-based method. The study covers both methods of
accounting for emissions, but for consistency, all total results are reported as consumption-based.

New York GHG Emissions: Sources and Trends
Figure 3-1 shows the relative apportionment of New York’s GHG emissions in comparison with
the rest of the U.S. as well as the world, all for 2005 (the latest year for which global emissions
data were available). New York’s share of emissions within the U.S. (3.8 percent) was smaller
than its share of the U.S. population (6.5 percent). In contrast, the U.S. share of the world’s GHG
emissions in 2005 (18 percent) was much greater than its share of the 2005 population (4.6
percent). Nonetheless, New York’s GHG emissions accounted for 0.7 percent of the world’s
GHG emissions in 2005.

4

Changes in the atmospheric concentrations of GHGs can alter the balance of energy transfers between the
atmosphere, space, land, and the oceans. A gauge of these changes is called radiative forcing, which is a simple
measure of changes in the energy available to the Earth–atmosphere system. Holding everything else constant,
increases in GHG concentrations in the atmosphere will produce positive radiative forcing (i.e., a net increase in the
absorption of energy by the Earth). See: Boucher, O., et al. "Radiative Forcing of Climate Change." Chapter 6 in
Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group 1 of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Available at:
http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg1/212.htm.

3-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-1. 2005 National and Global Context for Greenhouse Gas Emissions

National and Global Context for Greenhouse Gas Emissions
(Carbon Dioxide Equivalent)

2005 U.S. Emissions Total:
7.1 Billion Metric Tons

2005 World Emissions Total:
38.9 Billion Metric Tons

Rest of World:
81.7%

Rest of United States:
96.2%

United
States:
18.3%

New York
State: 3.8%

Note: New York State represents 6.5% of the U.S. population. The U.S. represents 4.6% of the world population.

Table 3-1 provides a summary of GHG emissions estimated for New York by sector and gas in
2008, the most recent year for which historical data were available for most sectors. Since the six
major greenhouse gases—CO2, CH4, N2O, PFC, HFC, and SF6—have different global warming
potentials the emissions are stated in CO2e to give a common frame of reference. The sections
that follow discuss GHG emissions sources and sinks, trends, forecasts, and uncertainties.

3-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Table 3-1. 2008 New York State Greenhouse Gas Inventory (MMtCO2e)

PFC

HFC

SF6

Total (inc.
Net Imports
of
Electricity)

-

-

-

215.94

85.16%

-

-

207.30

81.75%

-

-

46.57

18.37%

-

-

8.64

3.41%

-

-

-

85.79

33.83%

-

-

-

34.74

13.70%

0.05

-

-

-

25.43

10.03%

0.04

-

-

-

14.77

5.82%

0.36

7.51

0.53

37.64

14.84%

-

-

0.53

3.00

1.18%

-

-

0.53

0.53

0.21%

0.06

-

-

-

2.48

0.98%

9.00

3.18

-

-

-

12.19

4.81%

-

2.70

-

-

-

-

2.70

1.06%

-

-

1.80

-

-

-

1.80

0.71%

-

4.46 -

-

-

-

4.46

1.76%

Manure Management

-

0.53

0.24

-

-

-

0.76

0.30%

Municipal Wastewater
Industrial Processes &
Manufacturing

-

1.33

1.15

-

-

-

2.47

0.98%

8.90

5.68

-

0.36

7.51

-

22.45

8.85%

Aluminum Production

-

-

-

0.26

-

-

0.26

0.10%

Sources
Fuel Combustion (inc. Net
Imports of Electricity)
Fuel Combustion (exc. Net
Imports of Electricity)

CO2

CH4

N2O

212.81
204.21

0.73

2.36

-

Electricity Generation

46.44

0.01

0.11

-

Net Imports of Electricity

8.61

0.01

0.03

-

Transportation

83.59

0.15

2.05

Residential

34.20

0.42

0.11

Commercial

25.27

0.12

Industrial

14.70

0.02

Other Sources

11.32

14.68

3.24

Power Supply & Delivery

2.42

-

0.06

Electricity Distribution
Municipal Waste
Combustion
Agriculture, Forestry &
Waste Management

-

-

2.42

-

-

Agricultural Animals
Agricultural Soil
Management
Landfills

0.73

2.39

-

% of Total
(inc. Net
Imports of
Electricity)

Cement Production

7.91

-

-

-

-

-

7.91

3.12%

Iron & Steel Production

0.63

-

-

-

-

-

0.63

0.25%

Limestone Use

0.20

-

-

-

-

-

0.20

0.08%

Natural Gas Leakage
Ozone-Depleting
Substances Substitutes
Semiconductor
Manufacturing

-

5.68

-

-

-

-

5.68

2.24%

-

-

-

-

7.51

-

7.51

2.96%

-

-

-

0.10

-

-

0.10

0.04%

0.16

-

-

-

-

-

0.16

0.06%

224.14

15.41

5.63

0.36

7.51

0.53

253.58

100%

88.39%

6.08%

2.22%

0.14%

2.96%

0.21%

215.53

15.41

5.60

0.36

7.51

0.53

Soda Ash Use
Total (inc. Net Imports of
Electricity)
% of Total (inc. Net Imports
of Electricity)
Total (exc. Net Imports of
Electricity)

100%
244.94

-

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; CH4 = methane; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CH4 = methane;
N2O = nitrous oxide; PFC = perfluorocarbons; HFC = hydrofluorocarbons; SF6 = sulfur hexafluoride

3-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Historical Emissions
Overview—2008 Inventory
As shown in Table 3-1, on a gross emissions consumption basis (i.e., excluding carbon sinks),
New York accounts for approximately 254 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
(MMtCO2e) emissions in 2008, an amount equal to 3.7 percent of total U.S. gross GHG
emissions. 5 This estimate includes emissions from net imports of electricity.
Figure 3-2 shows the breakdown of New York’s 2008 gross GHG emissions by gas. This figure
shows that 85 percent of the gross GHG emissions in 2008 are from fuel combustion, with most
of these emissions coming from CO2. The remaining 15 percent of the 2008 GHG emissions, the
majority of which are CH4, are from other non-fuel combustion sources.
Figure 3-2. 2008 Percentage of GHG Emissions by Gas and Source (Includes Net Imports
of Electricity)
Total CO2 Equivalent from Greenhouse Gases:
254 Million Metric Tons

Percent of Total GHG Emissions

Perf luorocarbons

0.14%

Sulf ur Hexaf luoride

0.21%

Nitrous Oxide

2.2%

Hydrof luorocarbons

3.0%

Methane

15%
Other Sources
(38 Million Metric
Tons)
85%
Fuel Combustion
(216 Million Metric
Tons)

6.1%

Carbon Dioxide

88.4%
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Million Metric Tons of CO2 Equivalent

Fuel Combustion

Other Sources

CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas.

Figure 3-3 provides a further breakdown of the CO2 emissions from fuel combustion. As shown
in this figure, the transportation sector accounts for approximately 40 percent of the CO2
emissions from fuel combustion. The residential and commercial sectors are each responsible for
roughly 25 percent of the CO2 fuel combustion emissions, including emissions from the share of
electricity generation required by each of these sectors. The residential sector shows greater
emissions from fuel combustion on-site than from the emissions associated with electricity
generation or imported electricity, while the commercial sector shows the reverse—emissions for
this sector from electricity generation and imported electricity are higher than the emissions from
on-site fuel combustion. The industrial sector contributes the lowest amount of CO2 emissions
from fuel combustion, accounting for approximately 10 percent of the CO2 fuel combustion
emissions in New York, with a majority of these emissions coming from on-site fuel combustion.
5

The national emissions used for these comparisons are based on 2008 emissions from U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2008, April 2010, EPA430-R-08006. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html.

3-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-3. 2008 CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion by End Use Sector (Includes Net
Imports of Electricity)

CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas.

Figure 3-4 shows the fuels that contribute to the CO2 fuel combustion emissions in 2008 in New
York. This figure shows that natural gas accounts for the largest amount of CO2 fuel combustion
emissions, with emissions occurring in all five fuel combustion sectors (transportation, electricity
generation, residential, commercial, and industrial). An additional 28 percent of the CO2 fuel
combustion emissions result from the burning of gasoline by the transportation sector. The
remaining fuel combustion emissions result from the burning of coal, distillate oil, aviation fuel,
residual oil, diesel, and other petroleum sources as well as imported electricity. In addition to
releasing CO2, these fuel combustion sources also emit a small amount of N2O and CH4,
accounting for about 1 percent of the 2008 New York GHG emissions from fuel combustion.

3-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-4. 2008 CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion by Fuel Type (Includes Net
Imports of Electricity)
Total CO2 from Fuel Combustion: 213 Million Metric Tons (84% of Total GHGs)
GHG Emissions from Fuel
Combustion

3.0%

Other Petroleum

Other
Gases,
1%

4.0%

Net Imports of Electricity
Diesel Fuel

4.6%

Residual Oil

5.2%
Carbon
Dioxide,
99%

6.6%

Aviation Fuel

8.8%

Distillate Oil

10.4%

Coal

27.6%

Gasoline

29.8%

Natural Gas
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Million Metric Tons CO2
Transportation

Electricity Generation

Residential

Commercial

Industrial

CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas.

The origin of emissions from the non-fuel combustion or “other sources” category is shown in
Figure 3-5. This figure includes emissions from all 6 of the GHG gases, with CH4 accounting for
the greatest portion of GHG emissions from these other sources at 5.8 percent of the gross GHG
emissions in 2008. The major sources that emit CH4 are natural gas leakage (at 2.2 percent of the
2008 gross GHG emissions) and landfills (at 1.8 percent of the 2008 gross GHG emissions). The
sectors with the greatest non-fuel combustion emissions are cement production, which produces
CO2 emissions accounting for 3.1 percent of the total 2008 GHG emissions, and the use of
ozone-depleting substance (ODS) substitutes, which contributes HFC emissions that account for
3.0 percent of the 2008 gross GHG emissions.

3-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-5. 2008 Emissions from Non-Fuel Combustion Sources (Total Emissions Include
Net Imports of Electricity)

Emissions from Non-Fuel Combustion Sources - 2008
Subtotal for Other Sources = 37.6 Million Metric Tons of CO2
Equivalent, or 14.8% of Total GHGs (253.6 Million Metric Tons)
SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE - 0.2%
Electricity Distribution

0.2%

HYDROFLUOROCARBONS - 3%
ODS Substitutes

3.0%

PERFLUOROCARBONS - 0.1%
Semiconductor Manufacturing

Percent of Total GHGs

0.04%

Aluminum Production

Other Sources: 37.6
Million Metric Tons
(14.8%)

0.1%

NITROUS OXIDE - 1.3%
Municipal Waste Combustion

0.02%

Manure Management

0.1%

Municipal Wastewater

0.5%

Agricultural Soil Management

0.7%

METHANE - 5.8%
Manure Management

0.2%

Municipal Wastewater

0.5%

Agricultural Animals

1.1%

Landfills

1.8%

Natural Gas Leakage

Fuel Combustion:
215.9 Million Metric
Tons (85.2%)
2.2%

CARBON DIOXIDE - 4.5%
Soda Ash Use

0.1%

Limestone Use

0.1%

Iron & Steel Production

0.2%

Municipal Waste Combustion

1.0%

Cement Production

3.1%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Million Metric Tons of CO2 Equivalent
CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas; ODS = ozone-depleting substance.

Emissions Trends
Table 3-2 shows the trend in New York’s historical GHG emissions in 5-year increments from
1990 to 2005, as well as for the reference case forecasts from 2015 to 2030. New York’s gross
GHG emissions, in total, increased by about 9 percent (or 23 MMtCO2e) from 1990 to 2005,
with a peak around 2000. This compares to a national increase in gross GHG emissions of 16
percent from 1990 to 2005.

3-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The sectors that showed the greatest increase during this time period were the ODS substitutes
category (more than 27 fold increase), 6 imported electricity (more than quadrupling),
semiconductor manufacturing (more than doubling), and municipal waste combustion (nearly
doubling).
In terms of the magnitude of emissions growth, the transportation sector showed by far the
greatest growth, with emissions increasing by 17 MMtCO2e from 1990 to 2005. In contrast,
emissions from electricity generated in-state decreased by about 10 MMtCO2e during this same
period.
Table 3-2. New York Gross GHG Emissions, Historical and Reference Case Forecast
(MMtCO2e)*
Gas and Category
Carbon Dioxide

1990
224.73

1995
223.99

2000
248.23

2005
241.45

2015
223.47

2020
225.27

2025
226.92

2030
231.67

Fuel Combustion
Electricity Generation
Net Imports of Electricity
Transportation
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Other Sources
Municipal Waste Combustion
Cement Production
Iron and Steel Production
Limestone Use
Soda Ash Use

214.76
64.01
1.63
68.11
33.65
26.61
20.75
9.97
1.26
6.68
1.65
0.17
0.20

212.93
51.39
4.24
72.17
34.29
26.99
23.85
11.06
1.54
7.63
1.55
0.16
0.19

236.92
55.99
5.66
83.05
39.30
31.99
20.93
11.31
1.87
7.98
1.07
0.21
0.18

230.13
54.19
6.52
85.89
39.10
28.57
15.86
11.32
2.37
7.94
0.63
0.21
0.17

212.12
39.83
6.61
85.18
35.14
29.34
16.01
11.35
2.41
7.91
0.65
0.21
0.16

213.92
41.51
7.06
85.05
34.50
29.90
15.89
11.35
2.41
7.91
0.65
0.21
0.16

215.57
42.91
7.61
85.25
34.10
29.85
15.86
11.35
2.41
7.91
0.65
0.21
0.16

220.32
46.34
7.61
86.85
33.92
29.83
15.78
11.35
2.41
7.91
0.65
0.21
0.16

Methane

14.22

15.91

16.44

15.22

15.00

15.10

14.76

14.63

Fuel Combustion
Electricity Generation
Net Imports of Electricity
Transportation
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Other Sources
Agricultural Animals
Landfills
Manure Management
Municipal Wastewater
Natural Gas Leakage

0.84
0.03
0.00
0.36
0.31
0.09
0.04
13.38
2.83
4.90
0.35
1.21
4.08

0.90
0.02
0.00
0.33
0.40
0.13
0.03
15.01
2.69
5.30
0.39
1.22
5.41

1.10
0.02
0.00
0.26
0.60
0.18
0.03
15.34
2.67
5.31
0.44
1.28
5.66

0.75
0.03
0.00
0.18
0.39
0.13
0.02
14.46
2.65
4.77
0.50
1.30
5.23

0.70
0.01
0.00
0.13
0.40
0.13
0.02
14.30
2.54
4.32
0.50
1.39
5.55

0.71
0.01
0.01
0.14
0.40
0.13
0.02
14.39
2.45
4.27
0.48
1.44
5.76

0.72
0.01
0.01
0.16
0.39
0.13
0.02
14.04
2.35
3.81
0.46
1.49
5.93

0.74
0.02
0.01
0.17
0.39
0.13
0.02
13.89
2.27
3.42
0.44
1.54
6.22

Nitrous Oxide

7.00

7.46

7.80

6.51

4.68

4.50

4.61

4.71

Fuel Combustion
Electricity Generation
Net Imports of Electricity
Transportation
Residential
Commercial
Industrial

3.74
0.19
0.01
3.31
0.09
0.05
0.09

4.38
0.14
0.01
4.01
0.11
0.06
0.06

4.61
0.16
0.02
4.14
0.16
0.06
0.07

3.21
0.15
0.02
2.82
0.12
0.06
0.05

1.39
0.11
0.02
1.05
0.11
0.05
0.05

1.17
0.11
0.02
0.82
0.11
0.05
0.05

1.23
0.11
0.03
0.89
0.10
0.05
0.05

1.29
0.11
0.03
0.95
0.10
0.05
0.05

6

Emissions from ODS substitutes are expected to grow in line with national forecasts at over 5% a year.
3-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

Other Sources
Agricultural Soil Management

Gas and Category

3.26
1.93

3.08
1.74

3.19
1.78

3.29
1.88

3.29
1.81

3.33
1.82

3.38
1.83

3.42
1.84

Manure Management
Municipal Waste
Combustion
Municipal Wastewater
Perfluorocarbons

0.30

0.27

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.21

0.21

0.20

0.05
0.98
0.43

0.05
1.02
0.39

0.05
1.10
0.44

0.05
1.12
0.36

0.05
1.20
0.36

0.05
1.24
0.36

0.05
1.29
0.36

0.05
1.33
0.36

Aluminum Production

0.38

0.31

0.33

0.27

0.26

0.26

0.26

0.26

Semiconductor Manufacturing
Hydrofluorocarbons

0.04
0.02

0.07
1.97

0.11
4.80

0.09
6.54

0.10
12.14

0.10
15.89

0.10
16.10

0.10
16.35

ODS Substitutes
Sulfur Hexafluoride

0.02
1.28

1.97
0.93

4.80
0.63

6.54
0.58

12.14
0.53

15.89
0.53

16.10
0.53

16.35
0.53

Electricity Distribution

1.28

0.93

0.63

0.58

0.53

0.53

0.53

0.53

247.68

250.65

278.34

270.65

256.19

261.65

263.28

268.25

Fuel Combustion

219.35

218.20

242.63

234.10

214.21

215.79

217.53

222.35

Electricity Generation

64.24

51.54

56.18

54.36

39.96

41.64

43.03

46.47

Net Imported Electricity

1.63

4.26

5.69

6.55

6.64

7.09

7.64

7.64

Transportation

71.78

76.50

87.44

88.89

86.36

86.02

86.30

87.96

Residential

34.06

34.80

40.05

39.61

35.64

35.00

34.60

34.42

Commercial

26.75

27.17

32.23

28.75

29.52

30.09

30.03

30.01

Industrial

20.88

23.93

21.04

15.93

16.09

15.96

15.93

15.85

TOTAL
All Gases by Source Category

Other Sources

28.34

32.44

35.71

36.55

41.97

45.85

45.75

45.90

TOTAL

247.68

250.65

278.34

270.65

256.19

261.65

263.28

268.25

NOTE: Values for 1990–2005 are based on historical data, while values for 2015–2030 are forecasted.
GHG = greenhouse gas; MMTCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
* Totals may not equal exact sum of subtotals shown in this table due to independent rounding.

As illustrated in Figure 3-6, on a per-capita basis, New York residents emitted about 13.7 metric
tons (t) of gross CO2e on average from 1990 to 2008, which is much lower than the national
average of about 24.4 tCO2e over the same time period. Both New York and national per-capita
emissions remained relatively constant during this period. This indicates New York’s population
increase of about 8 percent from 1990 to 2008 resulted in a similar increase in overall gross
GHG emissions during this time.
Figure 3-7 compares New York’s emissions intensity with that of the United States from 1990 to
2008. This emissions intensity represents GHG emissions per unit of economic output—gross
state product (GSP) for New York and gross domestic product (GDP) for the United States. As
with emissions per capita, emissions per dollar GSP is much lower in New York than in the U.S.
throughout this historical period, with an average of 0.09 kilograms (kg) CO2e per dollar GSP in
New York and 0.74 kg CO2e per dollar GDP in the United States. In both New York and the
nation as a whole, economic growth exceeded emissions growth throughout the 1990–2008

3-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

period. From 1990 to 2008, emissions per unit of gross product dropped by 31 percent nationally,
and by 36 percent in New York. 7
Figure 3-6. New York and U.S. Gross GHG Emissions per Capita

30

metric ton CO2e/person

25

20

15

10

5

0
1990

1995

2000

New York State Per Capita Emissions

7

2005

U.S. Per Capita Emissions

Based on real gross domestic product (chained 2000 dollars) that excludes the effects of inflation. U.S. Department
of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. "Gross Domestic Product by State." Available at:
http://www.bea.gov/regional/gsp/.

3-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-7. New York and U.S. Emissions Intensity

1.00
0.90

kg CO2e/$GSP

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1990

1995

2000

New York State Emissions Intensity

2005

U.S. Emissions Intensity

Figure 3-8 compares emissions by major sector in 2008 from New York and the United States.
The principal sources of New York’s GHG emissions in 2008 are the residential,
commercial/institutional, and industrial sector; the transportation sector; and the power supply
and delivery sector. These account for 38 percent, 34 percent, and 23 percent of New York’s
gross GHG emissions, respectively. These are also the three largest emitting sectors in the US,
but in a different order, with the power supply and delivery sector at 35 percent, the RCI sector at
30 percent, and the transportation sector at 26 percent. In New York, emissions from waste and
agriculture combine to account for the remaining 5 percent of gross GHG emissions in 2008,
while these two sectors account for 9 percent of gross GHG emissions in the US.
Figure 3-8. 2008 Gross GHG Emissions by Sector: New York and U.S.

NY

Agriculture
2%
Waste
3%

US

Power
Supply &
Delivery
23%

Waste
2%

Agriculture
7%
Power Supply
& Delivery
35%

Transport
26%

Transport
34%

RCI
38%

RCI
30%

Notes: RCI = Residential, commercial/institutional, and industrial sector. Emissions for the residential, commercial,
and industrial fuel use sectors are associated with the direct use of fuels (natural gas, petroleum, coal, and wood) to

3-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
provide space heating, water heating, process heating, cooking, and other energy end-uses in the residential,
commercial/institutional, and industrial sectors. This sector also accounts for GHG emissions from non-fuel sources in
the industrial sector, such as CO2 emissions from cement production, as well as emissions from the fossil fuel
industry (e.g., natural gas leakage). The transportation sector accounts for emissions associated with fuel
consumption by all on-road and non-highway vehicles. Non-highway vehicles include jet aircraft, gasoline-fueled
piston aircraft, railway locomotives, boats, and ships. Emissions from non-highway agricultural and construction
equipment are included in the RCI sector. The power supply and delivery sector includes emissions associated with
electricity generated within the state and electricity imported from outside of New York as well as the emissions
associated with municipal waste combustion (waste-to-energy facilities) and electricity transmission and distribution.
The waste category includes emissions from landfills and wastewater. The U.S. agriculture emissions also include
CH4 and N2O emissions from forest fires.

Trends in Emissions Sinks
New York’s forests serve as sinks of GHG emissions, as shown in Table 3-3. The forestry sector
includes both forested lands as well as urban forestry. The largest sink is due to the net CO2 flux 8
from forested lands in New York. In addition to the forestry sector, Table 3-3 shows that
cultivation practices in the agriculture sector are also found to be sinks of CO2e emissions in
New York.
Table 3-3. New York GHG Emissions Sinks, Historical and Reference Case Forecast
(MMtCO2e)
Emissions Sinks
Soil Carbon (Cultivation
Practices)

1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

–1.20

–1.20

–1.36

–1.36

–1.36

–1.36

–1.36

–1.36

Compost

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

–0.11

Forest Carbon Flux

–19.61

–23.60

–23.60

–23.60

–23.60

–23.60

–23.60

–23.60

Urban Trees
Landfilled Yard Trimmings
and Food Scraps

–1.97

–2.09

–2.21

–2.33

–2.38

–2.38

–2.38

–2.38

–1.66

–0.92

–0.72

–0.61

–0.51

–0.51

–0.51

–0.51

TOTAL

-24.55

-27.92

-28.00

-28.01

-27.96

-27.96

-27.96

-27.96

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMTCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; N2O = nitrous oxide.

Reference Case Forecasts
Relying on a variety of sources for forecasts, a simple reference case forecast of GHG emissions
through 2030 was developed. As illustrated in Figure 3-9 and shown numerically in Tables 3-1
and 3-2, under the reference case forecasts, New York’s gross GHG emissions increase by about
12 MMtCO2e from 2008 over the forecast period to reach about 268 MMtCO2e by 2030, or 8
percent above 1990 levels. This equates to a 0.2 percent annual rate of growth from 1990 to
2030. Relative to 2008, the share of emissions associated with the transportation, RCI, and power
supply and delivery sectors are still forecasted to be the highest, in the same order.

8

“Flux” refers to both emissions of CO2 to the atmosphere and removal (sinks) of CO2 from the atmosphere.

3-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 3-9. Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Source Category, 1990–2030

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

300
250

247

250

1990

1995

278

270

FORECAST
256

261

263

268

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

200
150
100
50
0

Residential, Commercial/Institutional & Industrial

Transportation

Power Supply & Delivery

Agriculture

Waste

A Closer Look at the Major Source of Emissions: Fuel Combustion
The transportation sector accounts for the largest share of GHG emissions in New York, at 34
percent of New York’s gross GHG emissions in 2008. Emissions from this sector rose at an
average annual growth rate of 1.0 percent from 1990 to 2008. In 2008, motor gasoline, used by
on-road vehicles and recreational marine vehicles, accounts for the majority of transportation
GHG emissions; jet fuel contributes the second-highest transportation GHG emissions; and
diesel fuel, used by on-road vehicles, commercial marine vehicles, and locomotives, ranks third
among fuels contributing to transportation emissions. Residual fuel, liquefied petroleum gas, and
other transportation fuels account for the remaining transportation GHG emissions in 2008.
Emissions from the transportation sector are forecasted to increase at an average annual growth
rate of 0.1 percent from 2008 to 2030, growing from 86 MMtCO2e to 88 MMtCO2e during that
time. The mix of GHG-emitting transportation fuels in 2030 is expected to be relatively similar
to the 2008 mix.
Activities in the RCI 9 fuel combustion sector produce GHG emissions when fuels are combusted
to provide space heating, process heating, and other applications. Fuel combustion within the
RCI sector accounts for 30 percent of New York’s gross GHG emissions in 2008. From 1990 to
2008, emissions from RCI fuel combustion decreased at an annual rate of 0.5 percent. In 2008,
the residential sector’s contribution toward the total RCI emissions from direct fuel use was 46
percent (35 MMtCO2e), while the commercial/institutional sector accounted for 34 percent (25
MMtCO2e) and the industrial sector accounted for 20 percent (15 MMtCO2e). Overall, emissions
9

The industrial sector includes emissions associated with agricultural energy use and fuel used by the fossil fuel
production industry.

3-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

from fuel combustion within the RCI sector are expected to increase by 0.3 percent annually
between 2008 and 2030. Fuel combustion emissions from the commercial/institutional and
industrial sectors are forecasted to annually increase by 0.75 percent and 0.32 percent between
2008 to 2030,respectively. In contrast, fuel combustion emissions from the residential sector are
forecasted to decrease by 0.04 percent annually during that time. Total GHG emissions from fuel
combustion in the RCI sector are expected to be 80 MMtCO2e in 2030.
In 2008, emissions from fuel combustion associated with New York’s electricity consumption
(55 MMtCO2e) are 8 MMtCO2e higher than those associated with in-state electricity production
(47 MMtCO2e). The higher level for consumption-based emissions reflects GHG emissions
associated with net imports of electricity from other states to meet electricity demand. 10
Electricity generation in New York is dominated by natural gas and nuclear-powered units, with
coal, oil, and hydro also important sources of historical generation in New York.
Forecasts of electricity sales for 2008–2030 indicate that New York will remain a net importer of
electricity. Emissions from electricity imports are forecasted to decrease slightly (by
approximately 1 MMtCO2e) from 2008 to 2030. In contrast, the reference case forecast indicates
that production-based emissions (associated with electricity generated in-state) in 2030 will be
approximately the same as those in 2008. Given these trends, it is anticipated that consumptionbased emissions (associated with electricity consumed in-state) will only decrease slightly during
that time period, from 55 MMtCO2e in 2008 to 54 MMtCO2e in 2030.

Key Uncertainties
Some data gaps exist in this inventory, particularly in the reference case forecasts. Key tasks for
future refinement of this inventory and forecast include review and revision of key drivers, such
as the transportation, RCI fuel use, and electricity demand growth rates that will be major
determinants of New York’s future GHG emissions. These growth rates are driven by uncertain
economic, demographic, and land-use trends (including growth patterns and transportation
system impacts), all of which deserve closer review and discussion.

10

Estimating the emissions associated with electricity use requires an understanding of the electricity sources (both
in-state and out-of-state) used by utilities to meet consumer demand. The current estimate reflects some very simple
assumptions, as described in Appendix A of the Inventory and Forecast report.

3-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 4
Envisioning a Low-Carbon Future – 2050
This chapter describes the visioning process employed by the Climate Action Council as one of
the foundational components for New York’s Climate Action Plan. Envisioning a Low-Carbon
2050 for New York State, a white paper prepared by Brookhaven National Laboratory, details
much of the Climate Action Plan visioning work and is included as Appendix F of this report.
New York State Demographic Trends
Future economic activity and population growth in
New York State are important factors in estimating the
greenhouse gas emission reductions necessary to meet
the 80 by 50 goal. Current projections suggest that
New York’s population and housing stock will continue
growing through 2030, although the rate of growth will
slow slightly compared to current trends. Economic
activity, as measured by the gross state product, and
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) are expected to continue
their recent growth rates over the same period.

rates of removal of units from the total housing stock.
A simple trend analysis of population, number, and age
of housing units, and number of new housing units
built conducted by NYSERDA suggests that New York’s
housing stock will increase by about 6%, from 8 million
3
to 8.5 million, between 2010 and 2030. The housing
stock will also get older, on average, as fewer old
homes are removed from use and the percentage of
homes built in the previous 20 years continues to
decline. The proportion of New York’s housing units
less than 20 years old fell from 21% in 1990 to 15% by
2000, and projections suggest that only 8 to 10% of
housing units (approximately 700,000) will be less than
20 years old by 2030.

Population: The state population is expected to
increase by approximately 800,000, or 4%, from 19.6
million to 20.4 million people over the next 20 years,
but this statewide projection masks two distinct
regional trends. The downstate population (New York
City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, and
Rockland counties) is projected to increase by 1.1
million people, from 12.7 million to 13.8 million; the
upstate population, however, is projected to decrease
1
by 300,000 people, from 6.9 million to 6.6 million. A
substantial shift in age distribution of the population is
also expected as the proportion of the population over
65 will grow faster than the rest of the population,
both upstate and downstate. The total number of
people over 65 is expected to increase by 1.1 million,
from 2.5 million to 3.6 million as the number of people
under 65 falls by 300,000 statewide, from 17.1 million
to 16.8 million.

Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT): On‐road VMT are
expected to continue growing by 15 to 20 percent each
decade for the next 20 years, as they have for the past
20 years, reaching 202.6 billion per year by 2030, from
4
149.7 billion per year in 2010. VMT per capita will
continue to grow quickly with increased economic
activity per capita. This trend will be offset somewhat
by increases in both the proportion of residents living
downstate and in the proportion of residents over 65,
both groups that tend to drive fewer miles per person
than the state average.
Trends in GHG Emissions: Current patterns suggest per
capita emissions could fall, given the trends for an
aging population and overall population growth in
downstate areas. Per capita emissions are generally
lower downstate than upstate, and people over 65
generally live in smaller housing units and travel less
than do people under 65. However, total statewide
emissions are likely to rise, driven by increased total
population, growth in economic activity, aging housing
stock and increased VMT.

Gross State Product (GSP): New York’s economy is
expected to continue growing by 25 to 30 percent each
decade through 2030 as it has for the past two
decades with GSP reaching $6.4 trillion in 2000 dollars
2
by 2030, from $3.9 trillion in 2010. GSP is expected to
continue growing significantly faster than the state’s
population, implying significant productivity gains and
rising per capita income.

These trends underscore the need for New York to
seek optimal strategies to reduce the carbon intensity
of its economy (tons of CO2 emitted per dollar of GSP).

Housing Stock: The number of housing units in the
state is growing faster than the population, reflecting
smaller family sizes and an increasing proportion of
“empty‐nesters” in the population. This trend is a
factor of both new home construction and decreased

For example, if VMT increases as expected, New York
State will have to achieve even greater improvements

4-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
Preliminary Population Projections by Age and Sex, New York State
and 62 counties, 2005‐2035,”
http://pad.human.cornell.edu/che/BLCC/pad/data/projections.cfm

in vehicle efficiency or reductions in the carbon
intensity of fuels to be able to reduce total GHG
emissions from the transportation sector. The
population trends and housing stock projections
provide an opportunity for reducing VMT growth
through implementation of smart growth strategies:
For example, a growing and aging downstate
population could benefit from new development close
to public transportation and designed around mixed
residential‐commercial areas, which typically have
lower VMT per capita than other areas.

2

NYSERDA projections for State Energy Plan

3

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 1990 and 2000 Form DP‐4: Profile of
Selected Housing Characteristics, 2000,
http://www.census.gov/census2000/dp_comptables.html
U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Population and Housing Unit
Counts, New York, http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/phc‐3‐
34.pdf
U.S. Census Bureau, Housing Unit Estimates: 2000‐2009,
http://www.census.gov/popest/housing/HU‐EST2009.html
4

1

Cornell University Program on Applied Demographics, “New York
State and County Population Projections by Age and Sex –

NYSDOT Vehicle Miles Traveled projections 2007‐2033

Visioning Process and Approach
The ability to visualize a sustainable New York by 2050 and to explore its implications is as vital
to achieving that future as the clean energy technologies and policies, best management
practices, and behavioral changes that will constitute the Climate Action Plan. The Climate
Action Council and its technical and integration working groups began their planning task by
building a shared vision of a low-carbon, clean energy future in an 80 by 50 New York. Through
a formal visioning process, the council explored technologies and greenhouse gas management
strategies.
New York’s formal visioning process worked backward from an imagined mid-century New
York with far lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions than today, using four tools:
•

Scenario development, which was based on a coupled energy-sector model and sets of
assumptions about future energy demand, patterns of energy use, and low-emission
technologies that might reasonably be available to power the low-carbon economy;

•

Visioning workshop at the New York Academy of Sciences (conducted January 5, 2010 –
full session and presentations available online at
http://www.nyas.org/Events/WebinarDetail.aspx?cid=e7a4211c-fd9e-4683-849129c46fe03651;

•

White paper (Appendix F) incorporating workshop outcomes and information from other
expert sources: Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State, submitted to the New
York State Climate Action Council; by Gerry Stokes and Patrick Looney, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Upton, NY.

•

Sectoral visions developed by the technical work groups for each sector of the economy.
Guided by the visioning workshop and scenario information, each Technical Work Group
developed an 80 by 50 vision for each mitigation sector: Power Supply and Delivery;
Transportation and Land Use; Agriculture; Forestry; Waste/Materials Management; and
Residential/Commercial/Institutional/Industrial Buildings. Summaries of this visioning work
appear in the sector chapters of this report; the full vision documents as drafted by the work
groups are available online at http://www.nyclimatechange.us.

The visioning process continues to enable examination of possible technologies with research
and development needs, assessment of technical issues, design of policies to reduce GHG
4-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

emissions, and identification of necessary management and societal changes. The formal
visioning technique supports discussion of option if other interested parties generate their own 80
by 50 scenarios and develop analyses based on them, meaningful comparisons among options are
possible.
New York’s visioning process revealed that reaching the 80 by 50 goal required aggressive
assumptions and transformative change, but is potentially achievable, at least from a technical
point of view.

Scenarios
Scenarios are sets of assumptions describing conditions in 2050 that should yield total GHG
emissions 80 percent lower than those of 1990.
Carbon dioxide and other GHGs [total GHGs are expressed as carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e)]
are emitted by millions of homes, vehicles, farms, businesses, institutions and other sources. So
in New York, achieving 80 by 50 would mean that total GHG emissions from these numerous
and varied sources would fall from the current (i.e., year 2008) 254 million metric tons of CO2e
to approximately 50 million metric tons per year. Scenario analysis is commonly used as a tool
for exploring options and contingencies in such complex situations.
New York’s visioning process used three scenarios to explore the technical feasibility of
reaching the 80 by 50 goal through energy efficiency, new energy conversion technologies, fuel
switching, best practices, and other measures to shape a low-carbon future.
The three scenarios use different sets of assumptions about future energy demand, patterns of
energy use, technologies available to supply energy with reduced emissions and their levels of
performance. The specific assumptions making up each scenario, along with the modeling and
other methodologies used to develop estimates for energy demand and technology performance,
are described in detail in the Brookhaven National Laboratory white paper and its appendices.
The three scenarios are the same in several important ways:
•

An end state is postulated for each major energy-consuming sector of the economy—
Transportation; Electricity Production and Distribution; Residential Buildings, Commercial
Buildings, Institutional Buildings, and Industrial Buildings. This end state includes low
carbon-emitting central generation of electricity, as well as transportation and building
sectors approaching zero carbon emissions, and accounts for emissions from non-energy
producing activities. The scenarios constrain emissions and energy production to within the
borders of New York State.

•

Implications of the postulated technology options are examined. For example, one scenario
evaluates GHG emissions assuming adoption of electricity as a transportation fuel and
explores how electricity generation could be expanded to meet the increased demand while
limiting emissions; another scenario considers the same for hydrogen.

•

Each scenario’s outcome is compared with the business-as-usual forecast in which no
additional carbon mitigation measures are taken.

4-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The model used to analyze GHG reductions for the technical strategies considers interactions—
how switching technologies in one sector may raise or lower energy demand in another (an
example would be higher demand for electricity if electric vehicles were widely adopted).
However, the model does not take into account whether technologies are scalable, nor does it
include economic, regulatory, and other social barriers to technology adoption. The model also
does not include full lifecycle GHG analyses of nuclear power and renewable energy, possible
effects of a changing climate on energy use or technology performance, or detailed analysis of
the feasibility of transition rates or of rates of implementation.
All the scenarios include four core strategies to reduce GHG emissions:
•

Energy conservation through energy efficiency, which is the simplest and the most costeffective strategy.

•

Reducing combustion of fossil fuels, another obvious strategy because combustion accounts
for about 85 percent of all GHG emissions in New York State. All scenarios minimize point
sources of combustion (such as vehicles and oil or natural gas heating appliances), and rely
principally on low-emission electricity. The scenarios assume combustion of fossil fuels only
when and where necessary, or with controls to effectively limit GHG emissions.

•

Fuel switching to minimize the GHG footprint where combustion must still be used, as in
aviation and cement production.

•

Local, point-of-use renewable energy technologies (such as solar) employed to reduce the
reliance of homes and businesses on centrally generated electricity.

Summary of Scenario Assumptions

All scenarios recognize the importance of commercial and industrial sectors to the overall
economic health of the state and preferentially “invest” emissions in these sectors.
The Yellow Scenario assumes the most obvious emission-reduction strategies: significant
energy conservation; significant changes to the light-duty vehicle fleet with a mix of high mpg
conventional, hybrid-electric, and plug-in electric vehicles; very significant increases in utilityscale renewable electricity generation, with widespread adoption of carbon capture and storage
on the remaining fossil-fired generating plants; replacement of most fossil fuel used in buildings
with electricity, and significant reductions in non-CO2 greenhouse gases. Although it assumes
significant changes to current practices, this scenario falls far short of achieving 80 percent
emissions reduction by 2050.
The Deep Blue Scenario begins with all the reductions in the Yellow scenario, but makes a
dramatic shift of the entire light-duty vehicle fleet to hydrogen fuel produced with nuclear or
other low-carbon electricity (including fossil fuel combustion with carbon capture and
sequestration). Additional measures include elimination of fossil fuel combustion in the
residential/commercial/industrial sector and significant use of locally-sourced biofuels for trucks
and aircraft. This scenario (79 percent reduction) essentially meets the 80 percent reduction goal
by 2050.
The Ultraviolet Scenario adds to the reductions in the Yellow scenario but makes a dramatic
shift of the entire light-duty vehicle fleet to all plug-in hybrids. Ninety-five percent of all vehicle

4-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

miles traveled are assumed to be all-electric miles, with the remainder in-state-sourced biofuels.
It assumes elimination of residential and commercial fossil fuel combustion, with part of the
resultant increase in electricity demand met through local, point-of-use solar and much of the
remainder with low-carbon generation and the wide-spread use of carbon-capture and
sequestration. This scenario meets the 80 by 50 goal.

Visioning Workshop
The Climate Action Council formed a 2050 Visioning Advisory Panel of experts from many
fields. The panel was convened at a workshop held on January 5, 2010, entitled Envisioning a
Low-Carbon Clean Energy Economy in New York.
Led by subject matter experts, workshop participants explored strategies for meeting the state’s
energy needs, reducing energy demand, managing GHG emissions, driving technological
change, and creating economic opportunities for “green technology” in New York. The
workshop considered the three scenarios not to validate a particular pathway to reaching the
goal, but rather to explore possibilities and implications, and to identify obstacles to achieving
the goal.
The Visioning Advisory Panel consisted of 13 experts in diverse elements of New York’s energy
and climate future:
Geoff Anderson, President and CEO, Smart Growth America
Katharine Frase, Vice President, Industry Solutions and Emerging Business, IBM
Research; Member, National Academy of Engineering
Peter Goldmark, Program Director, Climate and Air, Environmental Defense
Nathan Lewis, George L. Argyros Professor of Chemistry, California Institute of
Technology
Patrick Looney, Assistant Laboratory Director, Strategic Planning, Brookhaven National
Laboratory
Elizabeth Malone, Joint Global Change Research Institute
James Misewich, Associate Laboratory Director for Basic Energy Sciences, Brookhaven
National Laboratory
John Novak, Executive Director, Federal and Industrial Activities, Electric Power Research
Institute
William Sisson, Director of Sustainability, United Technologies Corporation; Co‐Chair,
World Business Council for Sustainable Development Energy Efficiency in Buildings
Project
Gerald Stokes, Associate Laboratory Director for Global and Regional Solutions,
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Larry Walker, Professor and Director, Biomass Conversion Laboratory, Cornell University
Johanna Wellington, Technology Leader for Sustainable Energy, General Electric Global
Research

4-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Rae Zimmerman, Professor of Planning and Public Administration, New York University
Links to a webinar of the workshop sessions, workshop presentations in PDF format and the
visioning white paper, Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State, are available at
http://nyclimatechange.us/2050_Visioningn.cfm.

Outcomes of the Visioning Process
The visioning process makes it clear that an 80 by 50 New York requires low-carbon
technologies serving an economy and society that have moved beyond dependence on fossil
fuels to accept the true value and cost of energy. The recurring themes of the visioning
discussion include technological elements that can be realized only with vigorous economic and
social support:
•

Maximum energy efficiency and conservation,

•

Near-zero-carbon electricity generation,

•

"Smart" electric transmission/distribution system with energy storage,

•

Carbon-free energy carriers for transportation systems,

•

Net energy-neutral buildings, including homes,

•

Low-carbon liquid fuels,

•

Carbon sink maintenance/enhancement.

Specifics and Insights

Exploration of these visioning themes led to more nuanced conclusions about the interactions of
technology with the state’s economy and society as we move through the next four decades. To
illustrate the insights that flow from the visioning process, a selection of these conclusions is
given here. The full list is found in the white paper.
•

The 80 by 50 goal is very ambitious, and achieving it will require investments in new energy
systems and infrastructure that have very low or no net carbon emissions. Patterns of energy
use will also need to change radically.

•

As policies and plans to meet the 80 by 50 goal are adopted, they need to be informed by the
directions of the state’s economy. The scenarios developed are consistent with the energy
needs of a 21st-century economy based on clean energy technology, information technology,
biotechnology, and nanotechnology.

•

Incremental, short-term planning cannot achieve the goal. Near-term decisions—both those
taken and not taken—can foreclose longer-term options, such as infrastructure projects with
long lead times. Key climate strategies must reflect this inexorable reality.

•

Major decisions are necessary to achieve the 80 by 50 goal, and many of those decisions
must be made soon, as they deal with long-lead-time projects, such as infrastructure
investments and research and development strategies, which can help or hinder progress.

4-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

The goal must be pursued in part through extensive, long-term partnering among all levels of
government and across the region, and between the public and private sectors. Achieving 80
by 50 will take sustained effort on the part of all.

•

Energy efficiency is an essential, but not sufficient, strategy for reaching the 80 by 50 goal. It
can be aggressively pursued today. A broad shift from reliance on burning fossil fuels to
electricity or possibly hydrogen generated from low- or no-carbon sources, or widespread use
of carbon capture and sequestration, will be needed.

•

Electrification as a substitute for fossil fuel combustion is an essential strategy that will lead
to a significant increase in demand and change in the patterns of electricity generation,
transmission, and distribution. Therefore, ongoing planning for the smart grid and associated
technologies, and storage of energy from intermittent energy resources must be part of the
Climate Action Plan strategy.

•

Transportation and buildings (residential and commercial) will have to move from reliance
on fossil fuel combustion to use of alternate sources with significantly lower carbon or no
carbon emissions. The buildings sector can reach net zero emissions through efficiency,
electrification, energy storage technologies, and integration of renewable energy sources like
solar and geothermal.

•

Development and redevelopment based on smart growth principles, along with efficient
building design practices, technologies, and construction methods, can reduce energy
demand for buildings and transportation.

•

Smarter means for shipping goods, including greater use of intermodal transportation and rail
for freight movement, will save significant energy and reduce GHG emissions.

•

All scenarios call for the phase-out of fossil fuel generation that free-vents carbon to the
atmosphere. The schedule for this phase-out needs to be developed soon.

•

Centrally-generated electricity must be decarbonized. This means that renewable energy
generation must expand; existing nuclear power plants must be re-licensed or replaced; and
carbon capture and storage added to any remaining fossil fuel-fired plants.

•

Reducing vehicle miles traveled requires increased availability of mass transit, as well as
travel-efficient community design, development, and redevelopment.

•

Transformation to a hydrogen economy would require a new infrastructure for producing and
delivering hydrogen to consumers.

•

The interdependencies—and consequent vulnerabilities—of transportation, water, energy,
and communication systems have direct consequences for system performance and thus for
climate change adaptation and mitigation. System managers and operators must be helped to
understand and manage those interdependencies.

•

Greenhouse gas reduction has pervasive interconnections with the state‘s economy and social
fabric: local, state and federal policies may facilitate or hinder achievement of the 80 by 50
goal. For example, interstate commerce (tourism, freight, and aviation) is shaped by federal
policy, while large-scale renewable energy involves local land-use choices.

4-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 5
Overview of Mitigation Policy Development
To assist with the development of policy options, the Climate Action Council (Council)
convened three external advisory panels to assist and advise in areas requiring special expertise
or knowledge: technical analysis, multi-sector integration, and 2050 visioning. The 2050
Visioning Advisory Panel, the Integration Advisory Panel, and five Technical Work Groups have
provided direct input to the Climate Action Plan.
The Technical Work Groups served as advisors to the Council and consisted of Council memberagency staff and additional public, private, and non-profit sector stakeholders with specific
interest and expertise. Policy options described in this interim report are principally the product
of Technical Work Group deliberations, with feedback and guidance from the Integration
Advisory Panel, Council, and public commenters. The Technical Work Groups, which were
charged with developing policies to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions or enhance
sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2), developed policy option scenarios that were analyzed in
order to estimate GHG reduction potentials and net savings or costs.
Policy Options and Vision Map
The development of policy options has been informed by the results of the visioning process
described in Chapter 4. The portfolio of policy options provides New York State with a
comprehensive set of choices that could place the state on the path to the vision of a low-carbon
future. A ‘mapping’ of policy options and the core vision strategies is presented as Figure 5-1.

5-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 5-1 –Policy Options and Vision Strategies Map

RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL
Building Codes, Appliance Standards, & Enforcement, RCI-7
Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, & Upgrades, RCI-8
Energy Efficiency Incentives, RCI-2
Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives, RCI-3
Industrial Process Incentives, RCI-11
Workforce Training & Development, RCI-6
Outreach, Education, and Behavior Change RCI-5
Rate Restructuring & Flexible Metering, RCI-10
Energy Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund, RCI-1
Tax Structure & Private Financing, RCI-4
Research, Development, & Demonstration, RCI-9
TRANSPORTATION & LAND USE
Vehicle Efficiency, TLU-1
Vehicle Incentives & Disincentives, TLU-2
Fleet Incentives & Disincentives, TLU-3
Alternative Fuel & Infrastructure, TLU-4
Research, Development, & Demonstration, TLU-5
Decreased Travel & Less Commuting, TLU-6
Mass Transit & Rail, TLU-7
Freight Strategies, TLU-8
Priority Growth Centers, TLU-9
Transit-Oriented Development, TLU-10
Location Efficient Land Use, TLU-11
Intergovernmental & Regional Initiatives, TLU-12
POWER SUPPLY & DELIVERY
Renewable Portfolio Std & Renewable Incentives, PSD-2
Cap-and-Invest & Low-Carbon Portfolio Std, PSD-6
Siting and Permitting of New Generation, PSD-1
New Facility Emissions and Nuclear Power, PSD-10
Existing Fossil Plant Policies, PSD-8
Distribution Network Upgrade, PSD-4
Transmission Network Upgrade, PSD-5
Energy Storage, PSD-3
Research, Development, & Demonstration, PSD-9
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY & WASTE
Production of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-Energy, AFW- 1
Conversion of Sustainable Feedstock for Bio-Energy, AFW-2
Maximize Waste Reduction, AFW-3
Integrated Farm Management, AFW-4
Farm Efficiency & Renewable Energy, AFW-6
Conserve Open Space, AFW-5
Improved Forest Management, AFW-7
Local Food Production, AFW-8
Research, Development, & Demonstration, AFW-9

5-2

Carbon Sink
Maintenance /
Enhancement

Low-Carbon Liquid
Fuels

Net Energy-Neutral
Buildings

Carbon-Free
Transportation Systems

Smart Electric
Transmission,
Distribution & Storage

POLICY OPTIONS

Near- Zero-Carbon
Electricity Generation

Maximize Energy
Efficiency &
Conservation

CORE VISIONING STRATEGIES

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Analysis Methodology
The analysis of policy scenarios is intended to establish the potential GHG reductions for the
policies amenable to quantitative analysis and the direct costs to achieve those reductions. The
approach to the analysis was full transparency—all data sources, methods, key assumptions, and
key uncertainties were documented and subjected to stakeholder review. The Interim Report
presents the first stage of the analysis, which consists of evaluating each policy on a stand-alone
basis. The next stage will evaluate the policies on an integrated basis (i.e., after accounting for
any overlaps between the policies). A third stage will consist of a macroeconomic analysis that
will include consideration of indirect effects on employment, income, gross state product, and
consumer energy costs.
The details of the stand-alone analysis methodology are presented in the Quantification Memo
found in Appendix E and are summarized below.
Overall framework for the Analysis: The overall framework for the analysis of individual
options was consistent across all four Work Group areas: Power Supply and Delivery (PSD);
Residential, Commercial/Institutional and Industrial (RCI); Transportation and Land Use (TLU);
and Agriculture, Forestry and Waste Management (AFW). It is important to note that not all
options were deemed amenable to analysis (e.g., R&D and other enabling policies). Hence the
framework below applies only to a subset of policies.
Analysis period: The overall period of analysis is 2011 through 2030.
Baseline GHG emissions: As a starting point, the analysis relies on the comprehensive
inventory and forecast of New York State GHG emissions summarized in Chapter 3 and
described in great detail in the New York Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and Forecast
report. This Inventory and Forecast is based upon a GHG emissions inventory for 2008 and
forecast to 2030 for all emission source sectors prepared by NYSERDA. The GHG reduction
impact of each policy is measured relative to this baseline. The forecast assumes New York does
not adopt any new policies or measures to mitigate GHG emissions beyond those already in
place or recent actions that have been approved but for which emissions reductions have not yet
been realized. The forecast does not take into account the effects of a changing climate.
Emissions Coverage: The analysis considers six GHGs: CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous oxide
(N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6).
Emissions are presented using a common metric, carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e), which
accounts for the relative contribution of each gas to global average radiative forcing. Emission
factors are used based on the assumptions used by NYSERDA in the development of the
baseline and can be found in Appendix E.
Geographic distribution of emission reductions: Emission reductions associated with policies
in the Climate Action Plan are presented based upon the direct emissions at the point of release
to provide an apples-to-apples comparison with the Inventory and Forecast. For many policies
these direct emissions can seriously understate the GHG benefits, so in the detailed Policy
Options Documents developed by the Technical Work Groups, emissions reductions were also
5-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

tracked regardless of where they occur. Referred to as a “fuel cycle” approach, this framework
allows for the quantification of the GHG reduction impact of policies no matter where they
occur, either within or beyond New York State borders.
Costing approach: Estimating the costs of achieving GHG reductions for the options focused on
the direct (or microeconomic) costs and savings borne by New York State households and
businesses (e.g., the additional cost of energy efficient equipment and the fuel savings associated
with that equipment). Indirect (or macroeconomic) costs such as the number of jobs created and
lost or the impact on Gross State Product are not considered in this report but will be included in
the final report.
Box 1: Overview of levelized costs

Methodological Approach
The methodological approach applied to the analysis of
options in all Work Groups is briefly described in the
bullets below.
•

Major cost categories: These include net
capital/equipment costs, operations and maintenance
(O&M), fuel, interconnection costs, and costs of
financing.

Levelized cost is defined as a constant
annual cost that is equivalent on a present
value basis to the actual annual costs. That
is, if one calculates the present value of
levelized costs over a certain period, its
value would be equal to the present value of
the actual costs of the same period. This is
illustrated in the figure below. The present
value of the levelized costs is exactly equal
to the present value of the annual costs.
Levelized costs allows for a ready
comparison of technologies in any year,
something that would be more difficult to do
with differing annual costs.
$250

Cost ($/MWh)

Analytical Outputs: There are several key outputs of
the analysis, namely annual GHG reductions for the
years 2020 and 2030; cumulative GHG reductions over
the 2011-2030 period; the net cost or savings to achieve
these reductions on a present value basis; and the cost
per metric ton of CO2e avoided. Note that net savings are
shown as ‘negative costs’ throughout this report.

Levelized costs ($/MWh)
Annual costs ($/MWh)

$200
$150
$100
$50

•

Discounting: Discounting begins in the initial year of
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Year
the analysis period (2011) and applies a 5% real
annual discount rate. The discount rate is kept
constant for the evaluation of all GHG mitigation
options. Risk and uncertainty are accounted for by
calculating option-specific cash flows that account for policy, practice, or technology
differences.

•

Treatment of capital costs: Capital investments are represented in terms of their “levelized
cost” over the project period (see Box 1 for an overview of the concept of levelized costs). In
the case of certain technologies (e.g., solar photovoltaics) where capital costs have been
declining, technology learning effects were included.

•

Emission Reductions: Emission reductions for individual policies are calculated relative to
baseline emissions based on the change (reduction) in emissions activity (e.g., physical
energy units) or sequestration that the policy achieves.

•

Cost-effectiveness: The cost effectiveness for each quantified policy is determined by
dividing the present value cost by the cumulative (undiscounted) reduction in tons of GHG
emissions.

$0

5-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

End effects: For GHG mitigation options whose lifetimes extend beyond the end of the
analysis period (i.e., beyond 2030), only costs and benefits that fall within the analysis period
are included in the analytical results.

•

Non-GHG (external) impacts and costs: Environmental co-benefits such as reductions in
criteria air pollutants that lead to improved public health outcomes are considered in a
qualitative manner only in this report. The final report will include an in-depth examination
of the major environmental co-benefits of these policy options.

•

Uncertainty / Sensitivity Analysis: Key uncertainties and feasibility issues were identified and
where possible subjected to sensitivity analysis on a policy by policy basis. These include
energy and carbon price forecasts, discount rate 1 , cost and performance assumptions,
technology learning, and other parameters. Given the uncertainty surrounding federal climate
legislation, the analysis assumed no future cost of carbon.

When quantifying the GHG emission reduction potentials of several of the PSD, RCI, and TLU
mitigation policies, direct emission calculations exclude CO2 emissions associated with the use
of bioenergy, which includes the combustion of biogenic materials such as ethanol, biodiesel,
and woody biomass. Historically, many national and international reporting protocols treat
bioenergy as "carbon neutral." While there is now general scientific consensus that this
assumption is incorrect, consensus on how to properly assign the appropriate carbon intensity is
lacking.
On June 3, 2010, EPA published the final Prevention of Significant Deterioration and Title V
Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule. In that Rule, EPA acknowledged the Agency did not have
sufficient information to address the issue of the carbon neutrality of biogenic materials and has
called for a rigorous review of carbon accounting procedures. New York State will continue to
follow the development of carbon accounting procedures and will update the GHG emission
reduction calculations as interactions between the policies and their potential to achieve GHG
reductions are analyzed.

Climate Action Plan Goals
In August of 2009, Governor David A. Paterson signed Executive Order 2009-24 establishing
the goal of reducing GHG emissions from all New York State sources to 80 percent below 1990
levels by 2050. To support development of a plan that will demonstrate New York’s ability to
meet this goal, the Council established an interim benchmark to reduce GHG emissions from all
New York State sources to 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030. This benchmark was provided
to the Technical Work Groups so that the stakeholders would have a near-term target by which
they could measure progress towards the 80 by 50 goal.
The 1990 reference emission levels, along with current levels, are presented in Figure 5-2. The
forecasted GHG emission level for 2030, 268 million metric tons, is also presented along with
1

Public-sector projects that result in durable, long-lasting effects, such as the expansion of transit and other
infrastructure projects with long life-spans, may be evaluated with a lower discount rate than what is commonly
used in the private sector. For example, the U.S. Department of Transportation allowed for the use of a 3% discount
rate for its benefit-cost analyses under the Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER) grant
program, which is part of the federal government’s $878 billion stimulus program.
5-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

the emission limits implied by the 2030 benchmark (148 million metric tons) and the 2050 goal
(50 million metric tons).
Figure 5-2. New York State GHG Emission Levels (1990 and 2008) and Forecast
(2030) with Benchmark and Goal
300

268

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

250

248

254

40%

200

148

150

80%

100

50

50

0
1990

2008

40 by 30 Interim
Benchmark
Transportation & Land Use
Agriculture, Forestry & Waste

Residential, Commercial/Institutional & Industrial
Power Supply & Delivery

80 by 50 Goal

The required emission reduction for 2030 is therefore 120 million metric tons, as shown in
Figure 5-3. While the precise pathway to the 80 by 50 goal is not discernible at this time, the
interim benchmark does provide a plausible mid-point target for the purpose of policy
evaluation.

5-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 5-3. Required Emission Reduction by 2030 and 2050
300

268

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

250

248

254
Required Reduction
by 2030

200

148

150

100

50

50

0
1990

2008

40 by 30 Interim Benchmark

Residential, Commercial/Institutional & Industrial
Power Supply & Delivery

80 by 50 Goal

Transportation & Land Use
Agriculture, Forestry & Waste

Preliminary Results
Table 5-1 presents preliminary quantitative analysis of the mitigation policy options relative to
the 2030 benchmark year. The preliminary analytical results presented here describe the potential
effectiveness of the mitigation policy options on a stand-alone basis, without considering
interactions among policies or overlapping emissions reductions. Table 5-1 presents an estimate
of the total annual GHG emission reduction anticipated by 2030 as a result of the individual
policy options (i.e., as measured by Millions Metric Tons CO2e). In order to make this estimate,
specific targets and goals were developed, where possible, for individual policy options. This is
referred to as a “policy scenario”. Note, not all policy options are amenable to this type of
quantification. The results also present an estimate of the total cost or savings of the policy
option through 2030, as measured by net present value (NPV). This reflects the total capital
costs, anticipated operation and maintenance costs/savings, and fuel costs/savings associated
with the policy. As with any NPV analysis, a negative NPV reflects a savings and implies an
economically desirable investment. Table 5-1 also presents an indicator of cost-effectiveness for
the policy option, as measured by $/ton CO2e avoided; this provides a metric to determine which
policy options will deliver the most CO2e on a dollar-for-dollar basis. As with NPV, a negative
$/ton CO2e implies that we save money as we reduce GHGs.
While further analysis is needed to better understand a more full range of economic impacts and
to eliminate potential overlap, some general observations can be made from the analysis to date:

5-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

No single policy can deliver the level of emission reduction needed to achieve a 40 by 30
target. A portfolio of policies will be needed to reduce emissions from the many different
GHG sources throughout our economy.

•

A linear path to achieving 80 by 50 may not be feasible. We may need to further ratchet
up the stringency of the policies over time to increase the rate of emission reduction, as
technologies and markets mature.

•

There are a number of policies —particularly in the Buildings, Industry, and
Transportation sectors —that represent cost-effective ways to take a meaningful step
toward a low-carbon future. These “No Regrets” policies, which are primarily efficiency
policies, could represent options for early action. Further analysis of benefits and costs,
and strategies to finance and/or fund will be needed.

•

Energy efficiency policies alone, however, will not deliver the level of emission
reduction needed to achieve a 40 by 30 target (and ultimately the 80 by 50 goal). To
make appreciable progress toward these aggressive goals and to break our dependence on
finite fossil-fuel resources, the State will need to continue to strategically advance lowcarbon energy supply-side policies and infrastructure investments, particularly focusing
on policies that provide significant co-benefits to New Yorkers (e.g., improvements in
local air quality, opportunities for economic development and job creation).

Table 5-1. Preliminary Results of Policy Scenario Analyses.

Policy
No.

GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
Policy Option

Net
Net Present Cost/Savings
Value:
per Avoided
Cost/Savings Emissions
Total
(Million $)
2011–2030
($/tCO2e)

2020

2030

Energy Efficiency Incentives

3.0

17

120

-$29

$0

Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
Incentives

0.2

1.1

7.1

$14

$2

Solar Electricity Incentives

0.7

3.3

22

$4,400

$200

Solar Thermal Incentives

0.5

2.8

21

$2,600

$130

Bioenergy Incentives

5.1

5.1

84

-$5,100

-$61

RCI-7

Enhanced Building Codes, Appliance
Standards, and Enforcement

1.4

6.3

43

-$1,200

-$27

RCI-8

Building Commissioning, Benchmarking,
and Upgrades

2.3

3.3

34

-$790

-$23

RCI-11

Industrial Process Incentives

1.2

2.6

26

-$2,500

-$95

TLU-1

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

5.3

17

130

$7,900

$62

TLU-2

Vehicle Incentives and Disincentives

0.9

2.0

20

-$2,300

-$120

TLU-3

Fleet Incentives and Disincentives

0.2

0.6

5.6

-$750

-$130

TLU-4

Alternative Fuel Related Measures and
Infrastructure – Low Carbon Fuel
Standard (LCFS)

3.9

8.5

84

$6,700

$79

RCI-2

RCI-3

5-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Policy
No.

Policy Option

Net
Net Present Cost/Savings
Value:
per Avoided
Cost/Savings Emissions
Total
(Million $)
2011–2030
($/tCO2e)

2020

2030

1.0

1.0

18

-$15,000

–$870

0.3
0.4

0.3
0.4

0.5
0.8

$720
-$480

$1,400
-$610

Telecommuting

1.0

1.0

18

-$15,000

-$870

Congestion Pricing

0.2

0.2

2.4

-$1,100

-$460

TLU-7

Expand Transit

3.7

4.9

64

$25,000

$390

TLU-9

Priority Growth Centers

0.1

0.3

2.6

-$1,600

-$610

TLU-10

Transit-Oriented Development / Transit
Supportive Development

0.3

0.5

5.7

-$5,000

-$870

TLU-11

Location Efficient Land Use

0.6

1.2

13

-$11,000

-$870

PSD-2

Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) and
Incentives for Grid-Based Renewable
Generation

2.8

7.9

64

$1,700

$27

PSD-4

Distribution System Upgrades

0.3

0.8

6.3

-$460

-$73

PSD-6

Low Carbon Portfolio Standard (LCPS):
High Penetration of Renewables

7.3

29

220

$5,600

$26

AFW-3

Maximize Waste Reduction, Recycling,
and Composting—In-State Only

0.5

0.7

8.0

$280

$35

AFW-4

Integrated Farm Management Planning
and Application

0.3

0.6

6.5

-$201

-$31

AFW-5

Conserve Open Space, Agricultural
Lands and Wetlands

4.5

5.5

95

$1,500

$16

AFW-6

Increase On-Farm Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy

0.2

0.4

3.8

$3

$1

Forest Restoration

2.3

4.7

49

$290

$6

1.0

2.0

22

$3,200

$140

1.8

2.4

34

$1,200

$36

Commuter & Traveler Assistance
Parking Pricing—
Upstate
NYC Metro Region

TLU-6

AFW-7 Urban Forestry
Reforestation

The data presented in Table 5-1 are also illustrated graphically in Figure 5-4. Figure 5-4 shows
the potential annual emission reductions in 2030 and the net-savings or net-cost per ton CO2e
avoided for each policy. The 2030 benchmark goal has been drawn as a line in the figure to
provide a basis for judging effectiveness of each policy. Some general observations can be made:
•

Policies that provide the largest potential emission reductions in 2030 include the lowcarbon portfolio standard (PSD-6), increased vehicle fuel efficiency standards (TLU-1),
building energy efficiency incentives (RCI-2), and a low-carbon fuel standard (TLU-4).

•

Polices that provide the largest savings per avoided metric ton of emissions include smart
growth policies (TLU-9, -10, and -11), and commuter assistance (TLU-6).

5-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Policies that provide both significant emission reductions and net savings include
building energy efficiency incentives (RCI-2), improved building codes and standard
(RCI-7), and vehicle incentives (TLU-2).

The petroleum and non-petroleum fuel savings associated with these policies are presented in
Table 5-2 and Table 5-3. Based on the estimated reductions in 2030 derived from the scenario
analysis and on current consumption levels, RCI-2 would save enough electricity to power 4.6
million homes and enough home heating oil and natural gas to heat more than 1.9 million homes
for a year. Similarly, based on the estimated reductions in 2030 derived from the scenario
analysis and on current consumption levels, TLU-1 would save enough motor gasoline to power
7.3 million cars for a year.

5-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 5-4. Policy Scenario Analytic Results

120

Required Reduction Based on 40 by 30 Interim Benchmark

100

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO2e / Year)

80

RCI
60

PSD
AFW
TLU

40

LCPS: High Renewables Penetration
Location
Efficient
Land Use

Priority Growth Centers

20

Energy
Efficiency
Incentives

Telecommuting
Transit‐
Oriented
Development

Commuter
Assistance

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

Enhanced Codes &
Standards

Alternative Fuels/LCFS
Solar Electric Incentives

Vehicle Incentives
& Disincentives

Expand Transit
Reduction, Recycling & Composting

0

‐900

‐700

‐500

‐300

3.1

RPS & Grid‐Based Renewable Generation

‐100

100

300

500

Net Cost

Net Savings

Dollar Per Metric Ton CO2e Avoided
NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

5-11

700

900

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Table 5-2. Preliminary Fuel Savings from Petroleum Products.
Policy
No.

Annual Petroleum Products (Millions of
Gallons of Gasoline Equivalent)

Policy Option

2020

2030

RCI-2

Energy Efficiency Incentives

58

360

RCI-3

Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives

230

340

RCI-7

Enhanced Building Codes, Appliance Standards, and
Enforcement

36

160

RCI-8

Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and
Upgrades

50

68

RCI-11

Industrial Process Incentives

54

120

TLU-1

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

1,000

3,500

TLU-2

Vehicle Incentives and Disincentives

100

220

TLU-3

Fleet Incentives and Disincentives

26

69

TLU-4

Alternative Fuel Related Measures and Infrastructure
– Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS)

870

2,000

Commuter & Traveler Assistance

110

120

Upstate

3.0

3.0

NYC Metro Region

5.0

5.0

Telecommuting

110

120

Congestion Pricing

18

18

TLU-7

Expand Transit

670

900

TLU-9

Priority Growth Centers

13

36

TLU-10

Transit-Oriented Development / Transit Supportive
Development

49

100

TLU-11

Location Efficient Land Use

110

230

Parking Pricing
TLU-6

5-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Table 5-3. Preliminary Fuel Savings from Non-Petroleum Fuels.

Policy
No.

Policy Option

Annual Electric
Energy
(GWh)

Annual Natural
Gas
(BCF)

2020

2030

2020

2030

Annual Other Fuels
(BBtu)
2020

2030

RCI-2

Energy Efficiency Incentives

5,300

32,000

22

130

2,700

8,900

RCI-3

Customer-Sited Renewable Energy
Incentives*

2,300

11,000

60

83

0

0

RCI-7

Enhanced Building Codes, Appliance
Standards, and Enforcement

2,000

9,500

11

51

1,100

5,100

RCI-8

Building Commissioning,
Benchmarking, and Upgrades

3,200

4,900

16

23

630

860

RCI-11

Industrial Process Incentives

230

460

7

14

3,900

8,700

Other Fuels include non-petroleum fuels such as coal and wood.
*Other fuel savings do not include the increased consumption of biofuel associated with RCI-3. This consumption
amounts to an increase of 90,000 BBtu.

5-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 6
Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial
Mitigation
Sector Vision for a Low-Carbon Future
In 2050, New Yorkers will enjoy safe, comfortable, well-functioning and sustainable buildings
and communities whose construction and renovation activities, building operations, and
Industrial Process Incentives are designed and operated to maximize energy and resource
efficiency, to minimize fossil fuel inputs, and to meet remaining energy needs from a mix of
local low-carbon resources and low-carbon imports. More specifically, buildings in New York
will have the following characteristics:
Building design and renovation: Building design and renovation along with integrated site
planning will optimize resource conservation opportunities from envelope, mechanical, lighting,
site/landscaping, and other building systems. Building and site designs will emphasize passive
solar energy, solar thermal systems, and onsite or local renewable electricity generation.
Performance-based building codes will continue to save consumers substantial energy costs
while avoiding unnecessary power generation and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Design,
renovation, and enforcement activities will be supported by a well-trained workforce.
Building operation: Supported by marketing, outreach, and education efforts, building owners,
designers, operators, and users will implement building operations, upgrades, and Industrial
Process Incentives that achieve high levels of energy efficiency, while improving occupant
comfort and indoor air quality. Building upon RD&D efforts, equipment that meet advanced
efficiency standards will minimize the energy demand of buildings and industrial processes.
Building energy supply: Instead of relying on combustion of fossil fuels for comfort control and
daily operations, buildings will primarily use customer-sited renewable energy resources and
import low-carbon resources as needed. Sources of waste heat, especially industrial process heat,
will be used to the maximum extent possible; supplementary heating and cooling draws on
carbon-neutral energy sources, such as wind, solar photovoltaic, or geothermal.
Land use planning and community development: Building developers and communities
maximize location efficiency by integrating patterns of home, work, shopping, and
entertainment, in accordance with Smart Growth principles and methods, maximize resource
conservation, and minimize GHG emissions.
Adaptation: Through building codes and siting guidelines that place buildings and other
facilities away from projected flood zones and favor designs and materials appropriate for future
climate conditions, New York’s communities will make themselves resilient to climate change.

6-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Overview of GHG Emissions
The RCI sector is the largest source of gross greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in New York,
accounting for about 40 percent of gross GHG emissions in 2008. The residential,
commercial/institutional, and industrial (RCI) sector includes onsite fuel combustion, industrial
process, and manufacturing emissions, as well as fugitive 1 methane emissions from natural gas
transmission and distribution. Energy-related RCI emissions result principally from the onsite
combustion of oil and natural gas, with a smaller contribution by onsite combustion of coal. 2 The
onsite combustion of these fuels in the RCI sector accounted for an estimated 75 million metric
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MMtCO2e) gross GHG emissions in 2008. Industrial process
emissions, primarily fluorinated gases and emissions from cement production, added another 9
percent of statewide emission in 2008. Fugitive emissions of methane from natural gas
transmission and distribution contributed another 5.7 MMtCO2e (2 percent of total emissions) in
2008.
Considering only the onsite fuel combustion emissions that occur within buildings and
industries, however, ignores the fact that nearly all electricity sold in the state is consumed as the
result of RCI activities. 3 Emissions from the generation of electricity that RCI buildings
consume contribute an additional 20 percent of emissions. Together with electricity generation,
these sources of emissions that are all attributable to RCI sector activities are responsible for
about 60 percent, or 151 MMtCO2e, of total statewide GHG emissions in 2008. Figure 6-1 shows
the relative contributions of the RCI, electricity, and industrial process sectors to New York State
emissions from 1990 to 2030 under the reference scenario. New York’s future GHG emissions
will depend heavily on future developments in the consumption of electricity, industrial
processes, and fuel use in these critical subsectors.

1

The general definition of fugitive emissions given in the IPCC Guidelines is “an intentional or unintentional
release of gases from anthropogenic activities excluding the combustion of fuels”. http://www.ipccnggip.iges.or.jp/public/gp/bgp/2_6_Fugitive_Emissions_from_Oil_and_Natural_Gas.pdf p.3
2

The RCI inventory and forecast methodology accounts for only emissions from direct fuel and electricity usage.
Thus, the GHG estimates presented here do not include GHG emissions associated with the extraction, processing,
and transportation of RCI fuels, with the exception of natural gas leakage. Electricity sector emissions include GHG
emissions from electricity imported from outside the state as well as from transmission and distribution losses.

3

Emissions associated with the electricity sector (discussed in Chapter 8) have been allocated to each of the RCI
subsectors for comparison of those emissions to the emissions associated with on-site fuel combustion. Note that this
comparison is provided for informational purposes and that emissions are not double-counted in the total emissions
for the state.
6-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 6-1. Historical and Forecasted New York GHG Emissions by Sector, 1990–2030
300
Waste Management

250

Agriculture

MMtCO2e

200
Transportation & Land Use

150
Residential,
Commercial/Institutional &
Industrial

100

Power Supply & Delivery

50

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

RCI Sector Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Fuel
Figure 6-2 shows historical and forecasted RCI GHG emissions by fuel and source. 4 Emissions
from the four relevant RCI subsectors including RCI onsite fuel combustion, RCI electricity
consumption, industrial processes, as well as fugitive methane emissions are expected to increase
from 152 to 166 MMtCO2e between 2008 and 2030. Figure 6-2 also indicates that the vast
majority of GHG emissions from the RCI sector come from electricity and natural gas (76
percent). RCI emissions associated with electricity use are expected to be largely unchanged
between 2008 and 2030, at about 55 MMtCO2e under the reference scenario. However, as
discussed below, the unchanged overall emissions from electricity generation mask large
forecasted declines in emissions from the residential and industrial subsectors and an increase in
the commercial/institutional subsector’s GHG emissions. While GHG emissions from the onsite
combustion of petroleum remain flat or slightly decline, emissions from the onsite combustion of
coal are forecasted to increase moderately by 15 percent from 2008 to 2030. Coal is expected to
remain an important source of fuel for the industrial sector throughout the period in the reference
case forecast. Natural gas is also expected to remain an important industrial fuel during this time,
with a forecasted increase of 13 percent in emissions from onsite combustion.

4

See Chapter 3 for reference case forecasts.
6-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

RCI Sector GHG Emissions and Trends
Figure 6-3 shows historical and forecasted GHG emissions by RCI subsector, including those
associated with electricity consumption. Overall, Figure 6-3 shows that emissions from the RCI
sector are forecasted to increase by 17 percent between 2008 and 2030 under the reference case
scenario. Emissions associated within the RCI subsectors are forecasted to experience a wide
variety of emissions growth and decline. Residential emissions are forecasted to decline by 6
percent between 2008 and 2030, while commercial/institutional and industrial sector emissions
are expected to increase by 21 percent and 14 percent, respectively.

RCI Subsector GHG Emissions and Trends
Residential Subsector Emissions
Figure 6-4 shows that between 2008 and 2030, emissions for the residential subsector are
expected to decrease by 6 percent to reach approximately 50 MMtCO2e. The GHG emissions
associated with the generation of electricity for this subsector are forecasted to decline by 17
percent from 2008 to 2030, while emissions associated with the onsite combustion of natural gas
are forecasted to increase by 7 percent over this 22-year period. Figure 6-4 also shows that
residential subsector emissions associated with the onsite combustion of petroleum are
forecasted to decline by 14 percent from 2008 to 2030.
Commercial/Institutional Subsector Emissions
Figure 6-5 shows commercial/institutional subsector emissions are expected to increase by 21
percent from 2008 to 2030 to nearly 67 MMtCO2e. Figure 6-5 also indicates that the increase in
emissions from the subsector is due primarily to emissions from electricity used by
commercial/institutional consumers, which are forecasted to increase by 24 percent. Emissions
from the onsite combustion of natural gas are also forecasted to increase by 24 percent from
2008 to 2030. Commercial/institutional subsector emissions associated with the onsite
combustion of petroleum are also expected to increase by 9 percent during the period.
Industrial Subsector Onsite Fuel Combustion and Process Emissions
Figure 6-6 indicates that industrial subsector emissions are expected to increase by 14 percent
from 2008–2030 to almost 47 MMtCO2e, although this aggregate forecast masks wide variation
in emissions by fuel source. GHG emissions associated with the generation of electricity to meet
industrial demand are forecasted to decrease by 84 percent from 2008 to 2030 due to less carbonintensive electricity generation as well as decreased electricity demand from the subsector.
However, emissions associated with the onsite combustion of coal, petroleum, natural gas, and
wood are forecasted to increase by 17 percent, 8 percent, 1 percent, and 12 percent, respectively.
Figure 6-7 shows forecasted industrial process GHG emissions in New York State, which are
dominated by emissions from cement production and substitutes for ozone-depleting
substances. 5 Emissions from this source are expected to grow in line with national forecasts at
5

New York emissions from substitutes for ozone-depleting substances (ODS) for 2010, 2015, and 2020 were scaled
from EPA’s estimates of total US emissions based on state and national population projections. New York’s
emissions for the missing years from 2008 through 2020 were estimated using linear interpolation. From 2021
through 2030, New York emissions were estimated by applying the New York projected population growth rate to
the 2020 New York ODS emissions value.
6-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

over 5 percent a year, which equates to emissions more than doubling of GHG emissions
between 2008 and 2030 from 7.5 to 16.4 MMtCO2e.
Finally, Figure 6-8 shows methane emissions from the transmission and distribution of natural
gas in New York State. The New York estimate is extrapolated from forecasted national fugitive
methane emissions. The forecast shows an increase in methane emissions of 10 percent from
2008 to 2030 to approximately 6.2 MMtCO2e.
Figure 6-2. Historical and Forecasted Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial
(RCI) GHG Emissions by Type of Fuel, 1990–2030

180

Wood

MMtCO2e

160
140

Natural Gas

120

Petroleum

100
80
60
40

Coal
Electric
Production

20
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
* Figure 6-2 does not include fugitive methane and industrial process emissions. GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e
= million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Substitutes for ozone-depleting substances, which include chlorofluorocarbons, halons, carbon tetrachloride, methyl
chloroform, and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HFCs), are used in a variety of industrial applications including
refrigeration and air conditioning equipment, aerosols, solvent cleaning, fire extinguishing, foam blowing, and
sterilization. Although their substitutes, HFCs, are not harmful to the stratospheric ozone layer, they are powerful
GHGs. (EPA’s Draft User’s Guide for Estimating Carbon Dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, HFC, PFC and SF6 Emissions
from Industrial Processes Using the State Inventory Tool, February 2010)
6-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 6-3. Historical and Forecasted Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial
(RCI) Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Subsector, 1990–2030

180
160

Residential

MMtCO2e

140
Commercial

120
100

Industrial

80
60
40
20
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

Emissions associated with the direct use of natural gas, petroleum, coal, and wood and the consumption of electricity.
Figure 6-3 does not include fugitive methane and industrial process emissions. GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e =
million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Figure 6-4. Historical and Forecasted Residential GHG Emissions by Fuel Type, 1990–2030

70
Wood

60

Natural Gas

MMtCO2e

50

Petroleum

40

Coal

30

Electric Power

20
10
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

6-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 6-5. Historical and Forecasted Commercial/Institutional GHG Emissions by Fuel
Type, 1990–2030

80

Wood

70

Natural Gas

MMtCO2e

60

Petroleum

50

Coal

40

Electric Power

30
20
10
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Figure 6-6. Historical and Forecasted Industrial Subsector GHG Emissions by Fuel Type,
1990–2030

40
Wood

30

Natural Gas

25

Petroleum

20

Coal

15

Electric Power

MMtCO2e

35

10
5
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

6-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 6-7. Historical and Forecasted Industrial Process GHG Emissions by Source,
1990 –2030

30
Aluminum Production
Electric Power Transmission
and Distribution Systems
Semiconductor Manufacturing

MMtCO2e

25

ODS Substitutes

20

Nitric Acid Production
Iron & Steel Production

15
Ammonia & Urea
Soda Ash

10

Limestone and Dolomite Use
Cement Manufacture

5

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; ODS = substitutes for ozonedepleting substances.

Figure 6-8. Historical and Forecasted Fugitive Methane Emissions, 1990–2030
7
6

MMtCO2e

5

Methane
Emissions

4
3
2
1
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

6-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Overview of Policy Options and Estimated Impacts
To achieve mid-century GHG reduction goals in its building stock, New York must implement
an integrated, diverse set of policy options. Over the next 40 years, Residential,
Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial buildings and processes will need to maximize energy
and resource efficiency, minimize fossil fuel inputs, and provide remaining required energy
inputs from local low-carbon sources and carbon-neutral imports.
New York has already put policies in place to begin this needed transformation. The 45 by 15
clean energy policy challenges the state to meet 45 percent of its electricity needs by 2015
through increased energy efficiency and renewable energy. The 45 by 15 policy proposes to
reduce electricity end-use in 2015 by 15 percent below forecasted levels, while simultaneously
meeting 30 percent of the state’s electricity supply needs through renewable resources.
Building upon 45 by 15 policies, which focus on increased near-term statewide energy efficiency
and renewable energy use, the RCI Technical Work Group has recommended a number of
policies to further reduce the GHGs emitted by New York’s existing homes, businesses,
industries, and new construction. These policies can be organized into three categories: statutory
and regulatory policies that reduce carbon emissions in new and existing buildings, voluntary
incentive policies that promote energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements in
buildings and industrial processes, and supporting policies.
At the core of the RCI policies, the Technical Work Group recommends that the State enact two
statutory and regulatory policies: Building Codes, Appliance Standards, and Enforcement (RCI7) and Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and Upgrades (RCI-8). RCI-7 encourages New
York to aggressively update and enforce the State Energy Code in the near-term, which will lead
to long-term emission reductions in code-compliant new and renovated existing buildings.
Providing municipalities with the choice of adopting a State-set stretch code, as recommended in
the 2009 State Energy Plan, and establishing a flexible code compliance framework will further
reduce GHG emissions at the local level. RCI-8 focuses on reducing existing buildings’
operating costs and achieving energy savings through regular energy benchmarking, audits and
commissioning activities and installing cost-effective energy efficiency measures. Together,
these policies will ensure that an increasing percentage of New York’s building stock will have
significantly lowered GHG emissions and operating costs by 2050.
To encourage additional GHG emission reductions beyond those generated by the mandated
policy options, the Technical Work Group recommends three additional voluntary policies to
provide incentives for owners of existing buildings to undertake renovations that bring buildings
above current code compliance and accelerate the rate of building renovation necessary to
achieve the 80 by 50 goals. Energy Efficiency Incentives (RCI-2) uses a whole-building,
integrated analysis approach to identify high-performance efficiency measures that could be
installed in existing and new buildings. Onsite use of renewable energy would be incentivized
through Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives (RCI-3). Improving the state’s industrial
competitiveness, Industrial Process Incentives (RCI-11) enhances industrial activity and reduces
carbon intensity through more efficient, productive and cost-effective operations. Given that
6-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

most existing buildings will not be subject to code-mandated improvements, encouraging owners
to voluntarily implement upgrades is vital to meeting New York’s GHG emission reduction
goals.
Six additional supporting policies are critical to the successful implementation of the RCI
statutory and voluntary policies. Investment and deployment of a trained workforce is a core
component of the clean energy economy and will significantly contribute toward achieving the
State’s climate policy objectives. Workforce Training and Development (RCI-6) recognizes the
need for effective development of a skilled workforce equipped with the knowledge, skills, and
ability to directly meet the energy service demands of RCI-2, 3, 7, 8 and 11. New technologies,
along with a well-trained workforce to support the design, installation and maintenance of those
technologies, are integral to successful reduction of GHG emissions in New York. Research,
Development, and Demonstration (RCI-9) recommends continued investment—coordinated
activity by federal, State and private-sector entities—in the research, development,
demonstration, and deployment (RDD&D) of next-generation technologies that will help the
State achieve its 80 by 50 goal. These initiatives would accelerate the development and
commercialization of new products and technologies that will enhance the State’s ability to
achieve the 80 by 50 goal at lower cost, while also stimulating a clean energy economy.
Achievement of the State’s climate action goals is dependent upon action by consumers to invest
in energy efficiency and renewable energy equipment and infrastructure. Building upon the
State’s progress in this area, Education, Outreach, and Behavior Change (RCI-5) will increase
consumer and State employee awareness of the benefits of clean energy, motivating immediate,
and long-term action. Rate Restructuring and Flexible Metering (RCI-10) also recognizes the
importance of providing real-time energy price signals to electricity customers and increasing the
penetration of smart metering. Together, these policies enhance the energy savings information
provided to consumers and State employees at the time of purchase or use. This would facilitate
informed decisions that may have a long-term effect on energy consumption and bills, and
provide a powerful incentive for retailers and manufacturers to provide products that satisfy
consumer energy efficiency expectations. RCI-10 further explores electric rate structures that
foster energy efficiency and renewable energy activities in RCI-2, 3, and 11, and encourage
plug-in electric vehicle use, while promoting rate equity for vulnerable populations. Redesigning
electric rates to vary by time of use for all electricity users and providing cost/use information to
users on a “real-time” basis would enable customers to make informed decisions about when and
how they can reduce their electricity use.
Last, Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund (RCI-1) and Tax Structure and Private Financing (RCI4) work in unison to leverage public funding and private financing to fund the clean energy
activities in RCI-2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11. Funds for incentives would be provided by RCI-1 and
other sources, such as federal and foundation grants and private co-funding. RCI-4 recommends
that the State undertake a comprehensive review of the current tax structure and financing
programs and their impact on current and future carbon reduction activities and identify policy
options for future shifts to support carbon reduction activities. RCI-1 and 4 recognize that
dedicated and continuous funding is essential for the overall success of the RCI statutory,
voluntary and supporting policy options and the attainment of long-term carbon reduction goals.

6-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

All of the RCI policy options have important co-benefits in terms of reduction of energy demand
and the corresponding energy savings, bill reductions, improved occupant comfort, job creation,
and clean air.
Figure 6-9. Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial Policy Options

6-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy Scenario Quantification Summary Table

Policy
No.

GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Policy Option

Total 2011–
2030

Net Present
Value:
Cost/Savings
(Million 2005$)

Net
Cost/Savings
per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

2020

2030

Energy Efficiency Incentives

3.0

17

120

–$29

–$0.3

Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
Incentives

0.2

1.1

7.1

$14

$2.0

Solar Electric Incentives

0.7

3.3

22

$4,400

$200

Solar Thermal Incentives

0.5

2.8

21

$2,600

$130

Bioenergy Incentives

5.1

5.1

84

–$5,100

–$61

RCI-7

Enhanced Building Codes, Appliance
Standards, and Enforcement

1.4

6.3

43

–$1,200

–$27

RCI-8

Building Commissioning, Benchmarking,
and Upgrades

2.3

3.3

34

–$790

–$23

RCI-11

Industrial Process Incentives

1.2

2.6

26

–$2,500

–$95

RCI-2

RCI-3

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

The numbering used to denote the above policy recommendations is for reference purposes only;
it does not reflect prioritization among these important policy recommendations. The policy
numbers that appear in this table are not consecutive because they reflect only those policies for
which quantification has been completed and not all policies are amenable to quantification.
Table 6-1. Summary of Electric and Fuel Savings

Policy
No.

Policy Option

Annual
Electric Energy
(GWh)

Annual
Natural Gas
(BCF)

Annual
Petroleum
Products
(Million GGE)

Annual
Other Fuels
(BBtu)

2020

2030

2020

2030

2020

2030

2020

2030

RCI-2

Energy Efficiency
Incentives

5,300

32,000

22

130

58

360

2,700

8,900

RCI-3

Customer-Sited
Renewable Energy
Incentives (Scenario #2)

2,300

11,000

60

83

230

340

0

0

RCI-7

Enhanced Building
Codes, Appliance
Standards, and
Enforcement

2,000

9,500

11

51

36

160

1,100

5,100

RCI-8

Building Commissioning,
Benchmarking, and
Upgrades

3,200

4,900

16

23

50

68

630

860

6-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy
No.

RCI-11

Policy Option

Industrial Process
Incentives

Annual
Electric Energy
(GWh)

Annual
Natural Gas
(BCF)

Annual
Petroleum
Products
(Million GGE)

Annual
Other Fuels
(BBtu)

2020

2030

2020

2030

2020

2030

2020

2030

230

460

7

14

54

120

3,900

8,700

BBtu = billion British thermal units; GWh = gigawatt-hour; BCF = billion cubic feet; GGE = gallons of gasoline
equivalent.
Totals may not sum exactly due to rounding. “Other Fuels” estimates do not include increased use of bioenergy
feedstock.

Figure 6-10. Estimate of Cost and GHG Emissions Reductions for RCI Policy Options
20

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO 2e / Year)

Energy Efficiency Incentives

16

12
Enhanced Codes & Standards

8

Building Commissioning,
Benchmarking & Upgrades

Solar Electric Incentives
Solar Thermal Incentives

4

Bioenergy
Industrial Process Incentives
Combined Heat & Power Incentives

0

3.1

‐250

‐200

‐150

‐100

‐50

0

50

100

Net Savings

150

200

250

Net Cost

Dollar Per Metric Ton CO 2e Avoided
NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

BUILDING CODES, APPLIANCE STANDARDS AND ENFORCEMENT (RCI-7)

Policy Summary
New York should aggressively update and consistently enforce the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code (SECCC or State Energy Code), and provisions of the Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code (such as water conservation) that have an energy impact. In

6-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

addition to the State-mandated base code (SECCC), local municipalities should be given the
choice to adopt a State-set stretch code, 6 as recommended in the 2009 State Energy Plan.
The prescriptive SECCC should increasingly become performance-based and include sustainable
and whole building design provisions through the adoption of International Energy Conservation
Code (IECC), the International Green Construction Code, and the National Green Building
Standard (International Code Council [ICC] 700). 7
To facilitate code compliance, the State should establish a flexible framework by 2015 that
allows municipalities, which often lack the necessary resources or expertise, to enforce codes
through inter-municipal and county-level agreement or through the services of privately
operated, accredited or licensed third-party oversight entities. Third-party certification, training,
and project-certification fees could help fund code compliance activities.
Currently, the State Energy Code applies to building renovations that involve replacement of 50
percent or more of a building subsystem (“Fifty Percent Rule”), and the ability to amend the
State Energy Code is contingent on obtaining a study to confirm that the cost of compliance with
the amended code will be paid back through energy savings in ten years or less (“Ten Year
Payback”). Abolishing the Fifty Percent Rule and Ten Year Payback legislative mandates would
help the State achieve American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)-required rates of code
compliance, ensure that each renovation activity that triggers a building permit also triggers an
appropriate level of compliance, and enable the timely adoption of new energy conservation
measures.
As specified under Article 16 of the Energy Law, the State should also continue to establish and
update energy efficiency performance standards for appliances and products that are not
federally preempted. For those appliances and products with federal preemption, the State should
lobby the federal government to increase those performance standards.
This policy option should be re-evaluated and adjusted in 2020 and 2030 to take into account the
future evolution of codes and appliance standards as well as economic development
opportunities.
Quantification
The policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group includes the following:
Transition to performance-based codes: The State should work with model code development
organizations, like the ICC, to develop a performance-based international model energy code by
2021, which New York could adopt by 2023.

6

Article 11 of the Energy Law allows municipalities to adopt and enforce a local energy conservation construction
code more stringent than the Energy Code. Such programs are referred to as stretch codes.

7

Performance-based codes provide architects and engineers with the flexibility to meet requirements while attaining
higher efficiency.
6-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New and existing buildings: The base and stretch codes are a specified percentage more
efficient than current code, defined as the IECC 2009 with State Code Council approved
modifications:
Table 6-2. Base and Stretch Codes for New and Existing Buildings
Year

Base Code

Stretch Code

2020

50%

60%

2030

60%

70%

2050

70%

80%

Given the available information on future code update trends, New York’s base code scenario
appears to lead or be on par with federal and other states’ code efforts, e.g., Florida and
Massachusetts, with the exception of California’s goal for net-zero energy buildings by 2030.
However, New York’s proposed stretch code scenario represents a smaller increase between
stretch and base code, compared to states that utilize stretch codes, like Massachusetts.
Existing buildings would be subject to energy efficiency upgrades, and the corresponding code
compliance requirements, through the following:
•

Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and Upgrades (RCI-8) mandated
benchmarking requirements, which may be triggered at the time of sale of a building or in
conjunction with periodic energy audits

•

Voluntary building renovation or alterations, which may be triggered when a building
owner applies for a building permit

Code updates and compliance: The State would accelerate updating its codes to every three
years. This would be coordinated with the latest edition of international codes, so that the
SECCC and Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code would be updated within 18 months of
international code publication. Further, code compliance is assumed at 90 percent in 2017, as
required by the ARRA, increasing to 95 percent in 2030.
Appliance standards: The State should review the energy efficiency performance standards for
products that are not federally preempted every five years and update them as needed.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent [$/t CO2e]) for
the policy scenario, which did not include Appliance Standards, are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

6.3

43

Net Present
Value: Savings
(Million $)

Savings per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

–$1,200

–$27

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

6-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
• The State Energy Code should accommodate all building types and apply energy efficiency
performance thresholds that are appropriate to an aggregated building classification
framework, e.g., residential, commercial, institutional, versus industrial buildings, and new
versus existing buildings. The State should also explore requiring government owned and
operated buildings to meet this policy’s scenario.
•

To avoid discouraging building renovations, the State should consider establishing a
regulatory “ability to pay” relief mechanism that adjusts the required level of "incremental"
retrofit when owners of existing buildings and affordable housing have demonstrated that
they would suffer extreme financial hardship through satisfaction of the required retrofit
work.

•

Building codes and siting guidelines should include adaptation considerations, such as
placing buildings and other facilities away from projected flood zones and favoring designs
and materials appropriate for future climate conditions, to help make New York’s
communities resilient to climate change.

•

Workforce Training and Development (RCI-6) will be critical to the successful
implementation of this policy. The continued development and demonstration of efficient
and renewable energy technologies, as outlined in Research, Development, and
Demonstration (RCI-9), will work to help building owners reduce costs to achieve code
compliance and maximize co-benefits such as reductions in harmful air pollutants.

•

This policy option could have a direct positive effect on jobs through the required code
compliance activities and training. In addition, the flexible code compliance framework
facilitates municipal compliance activities while reducing home rule concerns. Lastly,
under the flexible code compliance framework, third-party certification, training, and
project-certification fees should be considered as a potential revenue source for New York
State.
BUILDING COMMISSIONING, 8 BENCHMARKING, 9 and UPGRADES (RCI-8)

Policy Summary
The State could mandate, through legislation, that all private buildings greater than 50,000
square feet or public buildings greater than 10,000 square feet publicly report their annual energy
8

Commissioning is the systematic process of verifying that newly installed building systems perform interactively
according to design intent, that they meet the operational needs of the owners and occupants, and that staff
responsible for operation and maintenance are sufficiently trained. Retro-commissioning is defined as the same
activities as commissioning, but applied to existing building systems.

9

Benchmarking, which entails the public issuance of a building‘s energy consumption, indexed against buildings of
comparable size and use, would provide information regarding a building’s energy use to building owners and
managers, prospective tenants and prospective purchasers, thereby increasing the incentive for building owners and
managers to reduce energy consumption.
6-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and water benchmarking scores using the ENERGY STAR internet-based benchmarking tool
(Portfolio Manager). For the aforementioned-sized “covered” existing buildings, this policy
recommends the following:
•

Performing an energy audit every ten years by an energy auditor;

•

Retro-commissioning and installing all energy efficiency measures identified in the energy
audit that have less than a seven-year payback, within five years of completing the energy
audit;

•

Commissioning of new buildings of the aforementioned size during the design and
construction process by a certified commissioning agent.

The State could also mandate, through legislation, the following:
•

Every new one- to four-family home should receive a Home Energy Rating System
(HERS) rating or an equivalent energy efficiency scoring methodology from a qualified
rater. Each new home should obtain a legislatively-established rating to indicate that it
meets minimum energy efficiency standards.

•

Every existing one- to four-family home sold in the State should receive a HERS rating
from a qualified rater and that the rating should be disclosed to all prospective buyers.

Quantification
The policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group includes the following:
•

By 2020, 50 percent of all one- to four-family homes sold in the State will receive a
HERS rating, increasing to 100 percent by 2030.

•

By 2020, 100 percent of covered private buildings and 50 percent of covered public
buildings will routinely file benchmarking reports, increasing to 100 percent of covered
buildings by 2030.

•

By 2020, 50 percent of covered private buildings and 25 percent of covered public
buildings will have completed commissioning or retro-commissioning, energy auditing
and installation of cost-effective retrofits resulting in an average of 20 percent reduction
in total energy use for participating buildings, increasing to 75 percent of covered private
buildings and 50 percent of covered public buildings by 2030.

The policy scenario does not include the costs and benefits of the HERS rating on one- to fourfamily homes.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/t CO2e) for the policy scenario are presented below.

6-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

3.3

34

Net Present
Value: Savings
(Million $)

Savings per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

–$790

–$23

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
• There is uncertainty about whether the predicted energy, carbon, and cost savings of this
policy will be achieved. Incorporating rigorous evaluation, monitoring, and verification
into the policy design from the start would directly address this concern.
•

A further uncertainty is the impact of the affected building owners. The policy creates the
potential to significantly improve the energy efficiency of buildings occupied by businesses
in New York, reduce their operating costs, improve health and safety of work
environments, and increase property values. However, the new policy requirements could
require capital commitments from building owners, and owners may have concerns with
their energy usage information being made public. Coordinated with Education, Outreach,
and Behavior Change (RCI-5), effective outreach to educate building owners on the
programs and their benefits will be needed to effectively implement this program. Access
to funding for studies and capital for the installation of energy efficiency measures are
issues that should be coordinated with policies, such as Energy Efficiency Incentives (RCI2) and Tax Structure and Private Financing (RCI-4).

•

The State should consider establishing limited exceptions to the benchmarking
requirements for specific building types not currently in Portfolio Manager or if businesssensitive information would be publicly disclosed.

•

This policy option could have a direct positive impact on jobs through the required
benchmarking and commissioning activities, energy audits, and installation of energy
efficiency measures.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY INCENTIVES (RCI-2)

Policy Summary
This policy option would provide energy efficiency incentives that address building stock in
New York, including existing homes, businesses, and industry, as well as all new construction.
The policy and its scenario are both constrained and informed by the current economic
potential 10 of energy efficiency. That potential will be re-evaluated every three years with a
10

Technical potential for efficiency and renewable energy represents the theoretical outer bounds of the resources
physically available for exploitation, without any regard for cost or market acceptability. Economic potential for
6-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

concomitant re-setting of efficiency scenario and re-examination of energy efficiency program
offerings to achieve them.
The role of this policy is to provide incentives for owners of existing buildings to undertake
renovations that bring buildings above current code compliance such that the rate of building
renovation is accelerated above the norm, and for owners of existing buildings that meet the
current State Energy Code to install efficiency measures that provide additional energy savings
up to the economic potential. The presumption under this policy is that Building Codes,
Appliance Standards, and Enforcement (RCI-7) aggressively ramps up code requirements so that
new construction energy savings would be captured under RCI-7’s quantified savings.
A whole-building, integrated analysis approach will be used to identify efficiency measures that
could be installed in existing buildings to achieve the economic potential, including building
envelope, lighting, HVAC (heating, ventilating and air conditioning), insulation, monitoring or
control systems, plug-load, and CHP (combined heat and power). Onsite renewables providing a
portion of the buildings’ electricity load, industrial process efficiency and building
commissioning would be incentivized through other RCI policy actions. R&D incentives would
accelerate the development and commercialization of new, lower cost, higher performance
products and technologies. Supporting policies include Education, Outreach, and Behavior
Change (RCI-5), Workforce Training and Development (RCI-6), and Rate Restructuring and
Flexible Metering (RCI-10).
The policy incentive structure is in the form of loans and direct payments to buy down the cost of
installed efficiency measures. Funds for the incentives will be provided by Efficiency and Clean
Energy Fund (RCI-1) and other sources, such as federal and foundation grants, and corporate
contributions. Participants in the incentive programs would provide co-funding for their projects.
Quantification
The policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group includes full achievement of the
economic potential for energy efficiency in New York’s buildings. The following schedule of
energy savings was assumed for this scenario; these reductions represent savings available after
implementation of ‘15 by 15,’ RCI-7 and RCI-8:
Electric efficiency savings: 5,300 gigawatt-hours (GWh) by 2020 and 32,000 GWh by 2030
Fuel efficiency savings: 32 trillion British thermal units (TBtu) by 2020 and 170 TBtu by
2030
The scenario also assumed that the policy would lead to additional Combined Heat and Power
generation capable of producing 890 GWh/year in 2020 and 4,600 GWh/year in 2030.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the policy scenario are presented below.

efficiency and renewable energy is the amount of technical potential available at technology costs below the current
projected costs of conventional energy that these resources would avoid.
6-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Energy Efficiency
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

17

120

Net Present Value
Savings
(Million $)

Savings per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

–$29

–$0.3

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Combined Heat and Power
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.1

7.1

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$14

$2.0

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Special Considerations
• The policy will define strategies to stimulate owners of existing buildings to make energy
efficiency improvements that meet the current code at a minimum. Consistent with RCI-7,
this action presumes new construction will meet code-mandated efficiency levels, but given
voluntary code triggers for existing building stock, most existing buildings will not be
subject to code-mandated improvements. In such an environment, building owners may be
content to maintain the status quo unless significant energy savings and short-term
paybacks from renovations are possible. In low-income, high-density communities, where
problems with basic maintenance and upkeep of residential buildings are not uncommon, it
will be even more challenging to ensure that building owners invest in code-mandated
improvements. Targeted mechanisms for incentivizing action in these communities may be
needed.
•

The policy could consider a set of incentives for renovating existing buildings to exceed
current code. The incentives for exceeding code are intended to help the State achieve a
goal of obtaining all economic potential, which is the “gap” between the then current code
(baseline) and the economic potential. Creative incentives are needed to reach the
economic potential as some fraction of this potential is not achievable without them. This
policy recognizes that as codes become increasingly aggressive, the difference between
incentivized and code mandated efficiency levels will correspondingly shrink.

•

Consistent with the “ability to pay” relief mechanism outlined in RCI-7, the State could
explore establishing tandem scaled incentives for owners of existing buildings and
affordable housing that face extreme financial hardship upgrading their buildings.

6-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

As the State designs its incentive structure, it is encouraged to consider the savings to the
end-user, the societal benefits of reduced GHG reductions as well as the co-benefits to New
York, such as reduced energy demand, offsetting the need to site and build energy
infrastructure, and reduced health care costs associated with improved air quality. This
policy could have a direct positive co-benefit on jobs based on energy audits and increased
installation and maintenance of energy efficiency measures. Properly installed energy
efficiency measures, in accordance with a whole building approach, can also help building
owners reduce their energy bills and increase occupant comfort.

CUSTOMER-SITED RENEWABLE ENERGY INCENTIVES (RCI-3)

Policy Summary
The use of renewable energy resources to meet energy service demands offers a number of
benefits including the production of electricity without emissions of GHGs. As outlined in the
2009 State Energy Plan, New York State should continue to support the use of a diverse portfolio
of customer-sited renewable energy technologies. However, given the magnitude of the 80 by 50
challenge and the required scale of low-carbon energy production, this policy design focuses on
increasing the use of New York's solar and bioenergy resources to meet consumer energy needs.
There are a number of potential policy mechanisms that would further encourage the use of
renewable energy systems in New York. These mechanisms can be organized into five broad
categories (many of which are currently in use at the state and federal levels): (1) up-front
payments, (2) performance payments, (3) tax policies, (4) financing policies, and (5) supporting
policies. New York State could expand the use of the existing mix of policy mechanisms, which
include up-front and performance payments coupled with tax and financing policies. For solar
thermal applications, the existing programs could be expanded to include incentives for
displacing fossil fuels currently used for heating space and water. As the installed price of solar
technologies continue to decline, policy can transition away from up-front payments and focus
on financing policies. While performance-based policies using solar renewable energy credits are
not currently in use, New York could explore the potential use of these mechanisms given their
wide-spread use in other states and the European Union.
Quantification
The Technical Work Group explored two scenarios that set different targets for solar energy use
and also included use of bioenergy, as provided under AFW-2, to displace heating fuels. The
scenarios assumed all bioenergy use would consist of direct combustion of solid biomass, e.g.,
wood pellets; however, liquid biofuels, e.g., biodiesel, could also provide meaningful carbon
emission reductions.
The first policy scenario:
Solar Electric: 1,000 megawatts (MW) by 2020 and 3,000 MW of customer-sited solar electric
by 2030. (Additional policy options to support solar electric investments at the utility scale
are addressed in Chapter 5 Power Supply and Delivery).
6-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Solar Thermal: 2,000 megawatts, thermal (MWth) by 2020 and 4,000 MWth by 2030
Bioenergy: By 2030 utilize 90 TBtu of sustainable bioenergy resource (See AFW-2 for further
discussion).
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the first policy scenario quantified by the
Technical Work Group are presented below.
Scenario 1: Solar Electric
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.0

8.1

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$1,800

$220

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Scenario 1: Solar Thermal
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.0

10

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$1,500

$150

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Scenario 1: Bioenergy
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

5.1

84

Net Present Value
Savings
(Million $)

Savings per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

–$5,100

–$61

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

The second scenario:
Solar Electric: 2,100 MW by 2020 and 9,700 MW by 2030
Solar Thermal: 2,000 MWth by 2020 and 15,000 MWth by 2030
Bioenergy: Same as the first scenario.

6-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the second policy scenario quantified by the
Technical Work Group are presented below.
Scenario 2: Solar Electric
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

3.3

22

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Costs per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$4,400

$200

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Scenario 2: Solar Thermal
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

2.8

21

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$2,600

$130

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Scenario 2: Bioenergy
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

5.1

84

Net Present Value
Cost
(Million $)

Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

–$5,100

–$61

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
• As compared to the generation of electricity and the provision of heat using fossil fuels,
most renewable energy technologies avoid the production of harmful air pollutants (such as
oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter, and hydrocarbons), increase system security of
energy supplies by reducing energy imports, and reduce energy price volatility in the longterm. Customer-sited distributed generation increases reliability by lowering peak demand
and relieving transmission and distribution bottlenecks in the electricity generation system,
and use of in-state renewable resources also creates jobs, income, and economic
development opportunities for New York State. Finally, early investment in emerging
technologies will contribute to lowering the price of such technologies so that they can be
more competitive in the future.

6-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Distributed renewable energy technologies are available in the marketplace and can be
deployed without overcoming some of the significant siting barriers that slow the
installation of large-scale low-carbon technologies such as wind turbine farms and nuclear
power plants.

•

The cost of solar energy technologies is forecasted to decrease over time. As this cost
changes, incentive levels will need to be adjusted to maximize the use of public funds.
Future analysis should be conducted to evaluate the cost and benefits of solar electricity
generation under a real-time (time-of-use) pricing regime.

•

There is considerable uncertainty surrounding carbon-accounting of bioenergy pathways
given differing methods for modeling and measuring the release of carbon during land
conversion processes and the rate of carbon uptake as new biomass is grown. As new
methods and findings are published by organizations such as the U.S. EPA, the benefits
associated with bioenergy use will need to be reevaluated.

•

This policy depends on funding and financing policies as outlined in Efficiency and Clean
Energy Fund (RCI-1) and Tax Structure and Private Financing (RCI-4). Eventually, codes
may require the use of distributed renewable energy depending on the transition to a
performance based system, as discussed in Building Codes, Appliance Standards, and
Enforcement (RCI-7). Workforce Training and Development (RCI-6) and Education,
Outreach, and Behavior Change (RCI-5) will be critical to the successful implementation of
this policy. The continued development and demonstration of clean and efficient renewable
energy technologies as outlined in Research, Development, and Demonstration (RCI-9)
will work to both reduce costs and maximize co-benefits such as reductions in harmful air
pollutants.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS INCENTIVES (RCI-11)

Policy Summary
Voluntary incentive programs would be established to reduce the carbon intensity of industrial
operations within the state, while fostering increased industrial activity through programs that
result in more efficient, productive and cost effective operations. These programs would be
available to both existing facilities and new facilities and processes, particularly those new
industrial facilities involved in the clean energy economy. These programs would complement
the Cap and Invest Program (PSD-6) if industrial sources are included in that program.
The policy option would establish a voluntary program, similar to existing energy efficiency
programs, which provides technical assistance and financial incentives. Similar to Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), the voluntary program would also provide
recognition to industrial facilities that have met defined targets for reduction of their carbon
intensity on a per-facility basis. The programs would include, but are not limited, to:
•

Efficiency measures, including building energy efficiency, process optimization, water
usage minimization, minimization of waste generation, e.g., solid wastes and wastewater;

6-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Adoption of advanced process technologies, including electro-technologies, which result
in an immediate net reduction in carbon intensity;

•

Installation of CHP systems;

•

Waste heat capture and reuse, either onsite, including the production of electricity from
waste heat (bottoming cycles), or shared with neighbors through district energy systems;

•

Application of renewable energy systems, including the use of renewable fuels.

Quantification
The policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group includes a reduction in statewide
carbon intensity, defined as carbon dioxide-equivalent (CO2e) per industrial Gross State Product,
of 15 percent by 2020 and 30 percent by 2030.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the policy scenario are presented below. This is one
of the more cost-effective policy options considered for this sector.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 20112030

2.6

26

Net Present Value
Savings
(Million $)

Savings per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$2,500

-$95

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent; N/A =not applicable; R&D = research and development.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
• If not properly designed and absent other economic development programs, state-level
GHG reduction mandates applied to energy-intensive industries that are subject to
interstate or international competition, could be a factor in industry decisions to relocate
to other locations, which could lead to the loss of employment in the state with no
reduction in global GHG emissions. If well-designed cap-and-invest and other mandatory
programs are implemented, complementary incentive programs can provide an effective
stimulus for plant improvements that increase efficiency and reduce emissions. Similarly,
if national policies are put in place that limit industrial GHG emissions either through
emission controls or cap and trade mechanisms, state-level incentive programs will still
be needed to ensure that investments in new and upgraded facilities are made in New
York instead of other locations.
•

Improved efficiency of an industrial facility tends to result in improved economic
viability and job growth/retention. The incentives offered by the programs will only
cover a portion of the total cost of the GHG reduction measures. The industrial facilities
will need to provide the remaining capital requirements.

•

Commencing in 2011, federal new source review requirements will apply to GHG
emissions from new or modified industrial sources. Those requirements are likely to

6-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

require new or modified sources to utilize highly efficient processes and incorporate
energy efficiency measures into their design.
•

The make-up and size of industry in New York State in the future are difficult to predict,
as are the products that those industrial facilities will produce, and the processes that will
be employed.

WORKFORCE TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT (RCI-6)

Policy Summary
The effective development of a skilled workforce equipped with the knowledge, skills, and
ability to directly meet energy service demands is an enabling policy effort. Workforce training
and development is primarily intended to improve productivity (quality of production output) by
improving the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the workforce.
Workforce training and development is primarily intended to improve productivity (quality of
production output) by improving the knowledge, skills and abilities of the workforce. This
bundle will examine the following current workforce development strategies and programs:
energy efficiency; customer-based clean and renewable energy resources; power supply and
demand; smart grid; codes and standards; agriculture, forestry, and waste; transportation;
manufacturing; and other related areas. Opportunities to prepare and expand upon current
workforce training, continuing education, credentialing, licensing, on-the-job training,
recruitment, and job placement efforts will be identified. The following initiatives will be the
focus: midstream decision makers and building professionals in the residential, multifamily, and
commercial/institutional building sectors; industrial, power systems, and manufacturing
engineers and skilled technicians; bio-refinery, upstream, or feedstock production training related
to biomass energy, as well as downstream training for conversion facility personnel; integrated
farm management processes and systems; forest management focusing on upstream workers and;
waste reduction, recycling, and composting.
Workforce training and development implementation mechanisms require a coordinated effort
across State agencies, such as the work of the State Energy Technology Partnership to define the
characteristics of the future workforce based on demographics (languages spoken, age,
educational level, location), expectations for displaced workforce due to shrinking job sectors,
and expectations regarding communities in need. New York State Department of Labor
(NYSDOL) actions include identifying those industries critical to meeting the 80 by 50 goal,
determining the areas that currently lack or will soon lack sufficient numbers of adequately
skilled workers, and defining the training needs to move that workforce into green energy career
pathways.
The Technical Work Group has established a policy scenario to further encourage a stronger
workforce responsive to needs of the clean energy economy: (1) quantify the training needs in
terms of the number of individuals to be trained and dollars to be spent on workforce
development activities; (2) establish a process for early identification of these new needs,
6-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

defining the training and education needs, developing training curriculum and certifications, and
delivery of the same; (3) define the characteristics of the future workforce based on
demographics, expectations for displaced and underemployed workers as well as others who
have faced barriers to equal employment opportunities due to shrinking job sectors, and
expectations regarding communities in need, and define the training needs to move that
workforce into the green energy career pathway; (4) better define the career ladders and training
needed to advance the clean energy economy; (5) identify the education and training needs for
green professionals; (6) ensure the educational system supports the development of green career
training; (7) make workforce training and development investments to address skill shortages in
the energy efficiency labor market that will significantly contribute toward achieving the 80 by
50 goals and maximize the use of public resources; and (8) commit to train building
professionals involved in the clean energy field to reach 35 percent of these participants by 2020,
and 70 percent by 2030.
Quantification
This policy was not quantified; however, studies have shown quantifiable energy and emissions
reductions benefits from training participants directly involved in efficiency work.
Special Considerations
• An unskilled workforce poses a significant potential risk of compromising the State’s
ability to achieve carbon reduction goals. If one assumes that about 20 percent of the
performance of measures is attributable to the ability of the workforce to properly
analyze, design, install, and maintain systems, then the absence of a trained workforce
could reduce the potential environmental benefits by a similar amount. This policy, along
with policy mechanisms outlined in Education, Outreach, and Behavior Change (RCI-5)
will be critical to the successful implementation of most policy initiatives under the New
York State Climate Action Plan.
Environmental justice (EJ) stakeholders have strongly endorsed the following principles with
respect to "green jobs" workforce development initiatives:
They should include strong Minority and Women-owned Business Enterprise contracting and
hiring standards.
Whenever possible and feasible, they should incorporate 1) a community-based delivery
system that establishes and funds local groups as hubs for the program to generate
homeowner interest and develop training-to-jobs networks, and 2) local environmental
and community-development goals whenever feasible.
o The future workforce will be different from today’s workforce in many
ways. Data from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) and the U.S. Census implies that the workforce will suffer a shortage in
well-educated, highly skilled workers due to the retirement of the baby boomers;
the projections from this data extend to the year 2018. However, many factors,
such as potential changes in immigration and education policy, make it difficult to
confidently predict the demographics and training needs of the workforce in the
long term. In the short term, NYSDOL receives continuous updates on the state of
the workforce through projections from BLS and the Census, unemployment

6-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

insurance data, layoff notices, and services through the One-Stop Career
Centers. These projections and updates can inform future initiatives.
o A skilled workforce will have a positive impact on the State’s industrial
competitiveness and promote economic development activities.

EDUCATION, OUTREACH AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE (RCI-5)

Policy Summary
The State would conduct a thorough review and evaluation of existing academic and market
research and engage the academic community to better understand New Yorkers’ attitudes and
behaviors as they relate to energy decision making. Building on this research, which will drive
program design and implementation both at the onset and duration of this policy, the State would
create market-based and educational approaches that inform end-users and encourage reduction
of energy use, energy efficiency, and renewable energy. The State would also ensure that the
outreach, education, and marketing efforts reflect best practices in terms of design and delivery,
and are properly integrated, coordinated, and evaluated. Incorporating state-of-the art behavioral
change tools and principles, the State would pilot test these market-based and educational
approaches and establish evaluation methods to analyze the success of these pilots before
programs are rolled out on a regional or statewide basis. Regular evaluation would also occur
through the program’s duration to gauge the policy’s effectiveness.
This policy option would develop methods and incentives to increase consumer awareness and
understanding of the benefits of reduced energy use, and to 1) motivate people to take immediate
energy efficiency action, and 2) bring about fundamental change in attitudes that will result in
long-term behavior change related to energy efficiency and renewable energy. This policy
recommends focusing efforts on several key areas:
•

Changes in retail sales and stocking preferences in New York State through a statewide
training program to educate and train all retailers on how to effectively sell energyefficient and renewable energy products and plug-in electric vehicles. The training could
include introduction to new product standards and specifications; understanding product
life cycle costs and efficiency measurements; and other topics related to selling energyefficient and renewable energy products and plug-in electric vehicles.

•

Changes in education and testing through 1) a New York school district educational
initiative that would facilitate the full integration of energy efficiency and GHG emission
information into current curriculum and testing at all levels, and 2) a State employee
Lead-by-Example educational initiative that would require all State employees to
complete energy efficiency and sustainability training as a condition of employment.

•

Expansion of education of energy consumers with outreach programs and provision of
tools that provide more detailed and frequent information and feedback on energy use to
help consumers make more efficient and effective use of energy resources, and
encouraging plug-in electric vehicles. New York could explore expanding the scope and

6-28

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

funding for statewide consumer education programs and electronically accessible energy
efficiency tools and resources for all fuels.
A multimedia approach could include TV, print, radio, web, and collateral materials as well as
community-based outreach to reach diverse audiences across the state, including low-income,
senior, and environmental justice communities.
The Technical Work Group identified the following targets as appropriate given the magnitude
of the 80 by 50 challenge:
Retail
Retail workforce training: The percentage of New York retail stores where management will
have implemented employee training: 80 percent by 2020; 100 percent by 2030.
Sales and stocking: The percentage of energy-efficient products sold and stocked by New York
retailers above national baseline: 7 percent by 2020; 12 percent by 2030.
Education
School district: The percentage of New York school districts (K–12) reached with integrated
education programs about energy efficiency and broader sustainability issues: 70 percent of
public school districts by 2020; 100 percent of public school districts by 2030; 100 percent of
private and at-home school systems by 2030.
State employee training (lead-by-example): The percentage of New York employees receiving
energy efficiency and sustainability training with a refresher course every two years: 50 percent
by 2012; 100 percent by 2015.
Behavior
Implement clearinghouse of tools by 2012, expanding upon existing clearinghouses. Update and
revise statewide education programs to reflect state-of-the art best practices, including behavioral
changes approaches, every three years.
Quantification
This policy option has not been quantified.
Special Considerations
•

Several key uncertainties include measuring the impacts of behavior change programs
and tools motivating end-users to change their procurement habits, particularly in
unreached communities; fully integrating climate and energy information into evolving
school curriculums; temporal changes in energy consumption and use patterns; and the
duration and magnitude of the current fiscal crisis and its impact in program budgets,
retail establishments, and end-user finances.

•

In EJ communities, in particular, stakeholders maintain that lasting behavior change
emerges from sustained local dialogue and assistance provided by respected opinion
leaders. Setting standards and programmatic guidelines that promote or integrate
community-led capacity-building may be critical to the success of the proposed behavior
change programs. These kinds of approaches could help ensure that the proposed energy
6-29

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

efficiency programming reaches the scale needed to address climate impacts while
simultaneously promoting community centered job development.
•

This policy option could help end-users save on energy bills, and, correspondingly, New
York employees reduce state operational costs, which, in turn, may facilitate economic
growth.

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION NEEDS FOR THE
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL, AND INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
(RCI-9)
See Chapter 10 for a complete presentation of Research, Development and Demonstration needs
for this sector.

RATE RESTRUCTURING AND FLEXIBLE METERING (RCI-10)

Policy Summary
Building upon current initiatives, this policy option would focus on expanding use of more
effective, dynamic price signals and providing in-home displays that show detailed electricity
usage information to electricity customers as well as home automation, increasing customer
engagement and intelligent vehicle charging. The desired result is an overall reduction in
monthly electrical usage, shifting electrical usage to off peak periods, and encourage demand
response activities.
The policy option recognizes that rate structures must evolve as conditions change. For example,
alternative metering and pricing regimes may be needed in the near term to provide a clear
regulatory and pricing environment to encourage the widespread market penetration of electric
vehicles. This policy would be implemented through the following mechanisms:
Legislation and Regulations
Time-of-use pricing: After full implementation of the current policy of mandatory day-ahead
hourly pricing for large commercial customers, explore expansion to small commercial and enact
legislation that permits the Public Service Commission to implement mandatory time-of-use
pricing for residential customers upon finding that it is beneficial and in the public interest to do
so. Absent legislation, the State could explore voluntary residential real-time pricing options.
Net metering: Improve and evolve net metering regulations to facilitate installation of renewable
distributed generation and CHP resources that provide carbon reduction benefits.

6-30

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Smart Meters
Consumption information: Install smart meters and feedback tools; e.g., in-home displays, to
convey price and consumption data, and implement rate structures, potentially including critical
peak pricing or peak-time rebate programs, that encourage reductions in peak usage and shifting
of usage to off-peak hours, along with public education and outreach programs in RCI-5 and
energy efficiency activities in RCI-2.
Assessments and Surveys
Smart grid, smart metering, and plug-in electric vehicles pilot program design: Conduct a
survey and assessment of smart grid and smart metering pilot programs, including rates and
metering for plug-in electric vehicles, to determine the need for further in-state pilots, and to
determine best practices and programs suitable for adoption in New York. Based on findings and
analysis, the State could develop and implement New York-specific pilots or targeted programs.
Smart meter cost-benefit analysis: Perform a sector-based benefit-cost analysis of
implementing smart meters and initiate an assessment of available consumption and feedback
options; e.g., commercial and industrial meter data dashboards and in-home displays. Based on
findings and assessment, the State will determine the extent to which smart meters could be
deployed within New York.
Submetering best practice: Conduct a sector-based survey of regional and national best
practices for submetering to assess applicability and opportunities for the State. Investigate
extent to which such best practices can help support other subgroup policies, such as Energy
Efficiency Incentives (RCI-2), which address barriers to energy efficiency, e.g., landlord-tenant
split incentives, benchmarking, and monitoring based commissioning.
Carbon impacts and demand response: Conduct a survey and assessment of carbon impacts
associated with various rate options and demand response that encourage reductions in peak
usage and shifting of usage to off-peak hours.
Quantification
This policy was not quantified.
Special Considerations
• Some key uncertainties that could significantly affect the implementation of this policy
include: (1) the timing and likelihood of mechanisms to incorporate the price of GHG
emissions into energy prices and the energy sources to which such mechanisms will
apply; (2) the timing of broad market adoption of electric vehicles and electric building
heating systems; (3) the development of new low- or zero-carbon sources of electricity
production and the associated costs; (4) whether the recommended legislation and
regulations would be enacted; and (5) uncertainty with regard to the degree to which
consumers will alter their consumption in response to prices. The State could study the
relationship of carbon impacts on consumption patterns; e.g., reduced on-peak and
increased off-peak demand.

6-31

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Increased use of time-of-use pricing, and other rate and demand response options, could
lower critical peak usage in New York City, which is expected to reduce the hours that
higher emitting, electric peaking generating units run.

•

The State could explore residential rate designs and rate mechanisms that foster energy
efficiency, promote rate equity for vulnerable residential populations, such as low-income
households, and encourage plug-in electric vehicle use.

EFFICIENCY AND CLEAN ENERGY FUND (RCI-1)

Policy Summary
This policy option would create a Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund to further the State’s longterm efforts toward its 80 by 50 goal, building upon the State’s current near-term efforts to
implement 45 by 15. The purpose of the Fund is to facilitate investment in electricity, natural
gas, propane, fuel oil, thermal energy, and district heating energy efficiency and onsite
renewable energy options using a “whole-building” approach. A whole-building approach
involves implementing fuel-neutral, integrated steps to meet energy requirements. In addition,
adaptation of building energy capabilities for new technologies and uses, such as electric
transportation, may also be considered in developing the fund.
Through legislation, the State could possibly establish a Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund by
2015 that consolidates current funding streams (e.g., the Systems Benefit Charge [SBC], Energy
Efficiency Portfolio Standard [EEPS], Renewable Portfolio Standard [RPS], Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative [RGGI], weatherization) and be combined with new revenue sources
such as oil and propane public-benefit surcharges and code-based user charges. The legislation
would recognize that dedicated and continuous funding is essential for the overall success of the
individual programs and the attainment of long-term carbon mitigation strategies. The Fund
could be designed to support the entire spectrum of energy efficiency and clean energy product
and service development: from research and analysis through technology development and
demonstration through business and market development through market commercialization and
adoption to standardized practice.
A governing structure, headed by a Coordinating Council, would be established to provide
common administration and funding distribution of the State’s energy efficiency, renewable
energy, and low-carbon programs. Comprised of State agencies and authorities, this
Coordinating Council would have the flexibility to modify funding distributions, as needed, to
take advantage of evolving technological advances or programmatic needs. As revenue streams
are identified and implementation mechanisms developed, broad criteria for program
participation will be considered, including those that would apply for public and private
participation. An advisory group, including private advisers, would also be established to advise
the Coordinating Council during its decision making processes.
The outflow of the funding can be guided by proportional distribution based on the inflow of
revenue streams per source (fuel or, in the case of RGGI or another emission cap-and-invest
6-32

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

program, pollutant), but would not be wholly constricted by such revenue inflow, and may
consider the existent needs and opportunities as recognized by the Climate Action Plan, State
Energy Plan, or other State activities or studies and as deemed appropriate by the Coordinating
Council. Continuing the practices of current funding streams, private recipients will be eligible to
receive incentives.
Until the Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund is established, the current collection methods of the
existing 45 by 15 funding streams would continue as currently designed. The State should draft a
transition plan from 2011 to 2015 outlining how the current funding streams would be
transitioned to the Efficiency and Clean Energy Fund. The Fund will also recognize any
restrictions on non-state funding streams, such as federal weatherization funding, and will
accordingly continue to dedicate funding to the desired end-users; e.g., low income recipients of
weatherization funding.
Quantification
This policy was not quantified. However, it provides funding for Energy Efficiency Incentives
(RCI-2); Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives (RCI-3); Building Codes, Appliance
Standards, and Enforcement (RCI-7); Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and Upgrades
(RCI-8); and Industrial Process Incentives (RCI-11), which are quantified.
Special Considerations
A legislative mandate establishing this Fund will be necessary given the various regulatory
jurisdictions that apply to energy supplies. Such legislation can best identify the appropriate
revenue resource opportunities to support the Fund’s various program activities, including
whether to assess new user charges.
TAX STRUCTURE AND PRIVATE FINANCING (RCI-4)

Policy Summary
This policy option recommends that the State undertake a comprehensive review of the current
tax structure and financing programs and their impact on current and future carbon reduction
activities. As part of its review, the State would also identify gaps in the current tax structure and
financing programs and identify policy options for future shifts to support carbon reduction
activities.
Based on this analysis, New York could establish a two-phase comprehensive financing and tax
policy that supports the reduction of GHG emissions and encourages investment into clean
energy options. The first phase, to be implemented incrementally annually from 2011 to 2015,
includes suggested near-term modifications to existing programs that New York could evaluate
as part of its comprehensive financial and tax policy framework, implementing those options that
it deems viable. During this phase, the State is encouraged to advance PACE and on-bill
financing by 2011, and advocate for any necessary policy changes at the federal level as needed.
Given the complexity of the State’s tax policy, the modifications and new policies would be
incrementally rolled out in the second phase: modifications to existing programs to be completed
6-33

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

by 2015 and new policies to be fully rolled out by 2020, with pilot programs as appropriate from
2015 to 2020.
Quantification
This policy option was not quantified. However, it provides funding for Energy Efficiency
Incentives (RCI-2); Customer-Sited Renewable Energy Incentives (RCI-3); Building Codes,
Appliance Standards, and Enforcement (RCI-7); Building Commissioning, Benchmarking, and
Upgrades (RCI-8); and Industrial Process Incentives (RCI-11), which are quantified.
Special Considerations
• Access to capital and favorable economic considerations underpin the success and rate of
implementation of this policy. Complementary or competing programs, policies, and laws
on the federal level, such as PACE, will impact the success of the implementation and/or
need for modification of State proposals. Tolerance for modification of existing financial
mechanisms and creation of new such mechanisms will provide additional venues to fund
energy efficiency and renewables.
•

Financing mechanisms are demand-driven. The pace that the other RCI policies are
implemented will affect the timing and demand of the financial and tax recommendations
contained in this policy.

•

As the State evaluates the viability of the financing policy options, it will need to take
into account the limitations on State entities’ ability to provide financing, including their
statutory authorization, their covenants with bondholders, the overall capacity of their
balance sheet to provide large capital investments, and their ability to collaborate with
other agencies.

6-34

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 7
Transportation and Land Use Mitigation
Sector Vision for a Low-Carbon Future
The Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Technical Work Group—comprised of stakeholders from
government agencies, industry, academia, and nonprofit organizations—developed a vision
statement for the transportation and land use sector. Under that vision, New York’s transportation
system will have the following characteristics:
Vehicle types and fuels: Trips that are not made using mass transportation will be made in
vehicles fueled by electricity, hydrogen and/or sustainably derived biofuels. 1 Aviation, the goods
movement system, and the construction industry will be powered by a similar mix of low-carbon
fuels. Vehicles across the entire fleet population will approach carbon neutrality.
Mass transportation and vehicle miles of travel (VMT): Extensive mass transit systems will be
powered by very low- and/or zero-carbon fuels. Because so many attractive mass transportation
options will be available, per-capita personal vehicle miles of travel will be low.
Freight transportation: Goods will be moved over a variety of low-carbon modes—an emphasis
on non-highway systems will reduce overall VMT. The share of goods transported by each mode
(ship, rail, barge, truck, aviation) will be optimized to minimize greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
while accommodating a growing and thriving economy. Maintaining the public and freight
transportation system in a state of good repair will be an important baseline GHG reduction
strategy.
Land use planning: New York communities will be compact, mixed-use and interconnected,
keeping per capita VMT low. Residents, employees and visitors will rely primarily on public
transit, walking, biking, telecommuting, and limited, short distance car trips to reach central
locations with concentrations of commercial, residential, cultural, recreational, social, civic, and
educational activities. Neighborhoods will be designed to encourage non-motorized travel
including walking and biking. Centers for goods distribution and consolidation will be located near
consumer centers to minimize “last mile” transit; these centers will use advanced technology to
minimize emissions, light pollution, and noise pollution.
Adaptation: Transportation infrastructure decisions will take into account and adjust for the
effects and impacts of climate change. In particular, transportation infrastructure location,
elevation, and constituent materials will be appropriate for existing and projected climate

1

All three fuels of the future (electricity, hydrogen, and biofuels) can be produced using carbon intensive fuels such as
coal. For this reason, reliance on these fuels must only occur when they are produced in low-carbon ways, as measured
in terms of the total fuel cycle.
7-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

conditions: transportation infrastructure will be located above and inland from rising water levels,
and will employ heat resistant materials for optimal functioning in warmer temperatures.
Investment: Investment in mass transit will be serious and sustained, in and between cities and
towns, and in most regions of the state. Public incentives will favor smart growth planning, transitoriented development and revitalization of downtowns, main streets, and other central business
districts. Public investments in transit and alternative vehicles and fuels will increase significantly.
Investments will avoid subsidizing sprawl development. Existing infrastructure will be maintained
in a state-of-good-repair.

Overview of GHG Emissions
The transportation sector accounts for 34% of New York’s gross GHG emissions in 2008. Total
transportation sector emissions are forecasted to increase to 99 million metric tons of carbon
dioxide equivalent (MMtCO2e) in 2030 under the reference scenario, compared to 86 MMtCO2e in
2008. The increase in transportation sector emissions from 2008 to 2030 can be attributed in part to
the increase in VMT, which is partly offset by the increased fuel economy values for on-road
vehicles over this same period.
Figure 7-1. Transportation Gross GHG Emissions by Fuel, 1990–2030
100

80

MMtCO2 e

Other
60

Natural Gas
Residual Fuel

40

Jet Fuel, Kerosene
Distillate Fuel

20

Motor Gasoline

0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

As shown in Table 7-1 and Figure 7-1, emissions from this sector rose at an average annual growth
rate of 1.4% from 1990 to 2005. Emissions from the transportation sector are forecasted to increase
slightly in the forecast years, with an average annual growth rate of 0.12% from 2015 to 2030. The
mix of transportation fuels responsible for GHG emissions is expected to remain relatively similar

7-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

between 2005 and 2030, with motor gasoline, jet fuel, and diesel fuel forecasted to account for
64%, 21%, and 12% of gross 2030 transportation emissions, respectively.
Table 7-1. Historic and Forecasted New York State Gross GHG Emissions from
Transportation, 1990–2030 (MMtCO2e)
Fuel Types

1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

Motor Gasoline

52.0

56.2

62.3

64.5

61.6

60.8

60.3

61.3

Distillate Fuel

7.20

7.66

9.32

10.2

10.5

10.6

10.9

11.3

Jet Fuel, Kerosene

11.4

11.0

11.2\

10.9

10.0

10.2

10.5

10.7

Residual Fuel

0.67

1.15

4.02

2.81

3.52

3.49

3.46

3.46

Natural Gas

<0.01

0.02

0.05

0.15

0.31

0.44

0.59

0.75

Other

0.49

0.47

0.55

0.44

0.43

0.43

0.43

0.43

Totals

71.8

76.5

87.4

88.9

86.4

86.0

86.3

88.0

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Overview of Policy Options and Estimated Impacts
An effective suite of transportation GHG reduction policies must address three determinants of
transportation emissions: vehicle efficiency, fuels emissions intensity, travel activity/system
efficiency. New York will not achieve its 2050 vision and goals simply by attaining only a lowGHG fleet, or only low carbon fuels, or only less driving in single occupancy vehicles. The range
of policy options presented herein recognizes this imperative that all dimensions be addressed.
Further, these GHG reduction strategies recognize that the existence of a safe, efficient, balanced
and environmentally-sound transportation infrastructure is critical.
The policy options identified by the Technical Work Group seek to:
•

Influence the future mix of technologies in New York’s fleet of vehicles (low-carbon vehicles,
or vehicle efficiency);

•

Influence the fuels used (low-carbon fuels or fuel emissions intensity);

•

Influence travel activity by reducing the need for individual trips, increasing public transit
options, reducing total VMT, and increasing overall transportation efficiency.

Some of the policy options address more than one of these dimensions. Figure 7-2 portrays
graphically how the transportation and land use policy options can be expected to interact with one
another across these different dimensions.
Policy options TLU-1, TLU-2, and TLU-3 seek to influence the future mix of technologies in New
York’s fleet of vehicles, while TLU-4 addresses fuels. These policies aim to shift the vehicle
market away from conventional internal combustion engine, petroleum fuel-dependent vehicles
towards a mix of alternative fuel vehicles including plug-in electric, hydrogen fuel cell, and biofuel
7-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

powered vehicles and toward more fuel-efficient vehicles in general. The more this shift occurs,
the more GHG emissions reductions will be realized. While the success of these technologyfocused options depends on technology development and commercialization, there is an important
role for the public policy that can provide certainty to the private sector and help technology
evolve.
TLU-6 and TLU-7 attempt to reduce VMT by increasing the efficiency of the transportation
system and reducing the share of trips that occur in single occupancy vehicles. Investment in
transit—both for maintenance and expansion—and investment in high speed rail are central to this
goal. These policies recognize the need to give most New Yorkers access to low-carbon mass
transit, and to create high speed rail corridors to serve the Empire State, the Northeast Corridor,
and the nearby provinces of Canada. Improved mass transit will provide efficient ways to travel
between cities and, if well connected, allow for complementary transit options within those cities.
TLU-8 is a group of strategies to reduce emissions from freight transportation, which can occur by
shifting freight from trucks to rail or water transport and by having more efficient and
alternatively-fueled trucks.
TLU-9, TLU-10, and TLU-11 are designed to influence future land use patterns in order to
minimize VMT and to offer New York residents more choice in places to live and work using
three policies: priority growth centers, transit-oriented development and location efficient land use.
These policies integrate much greater access to transit and shared modes with planning and land
use decision-making aimed at minimizing the need for motorized transportation by increasing
mixed use, density, and efficient design. Because both population and VMT are projected to rise in
New York, these smart growth measures are key strategies to reduce emissions over the long term.
Many of the recommended policy options could be applied at the state level or in partnership with
other states. There are certain options that are especially appropriate for coordinated, multi-state
and regional cooperative actions. These have been grouped and described under TLU-12 as
‘intergovernmental/regional proposals.”
The TLU policy options have important co-benefits in terms of public health, quality of life, clean
air, reduction of demand for imported petroleum-based fuels, and conservation of open space.
Many of these TLU policies will also spur economic development. For example, investment in
transit and rail could revitalize construction and manufacturing in the state. Economic benefits
could accrue from using high speed rail to link cities that enjoy robust economies with cities
working to develop stronger economies. Investment in rail will also increase freight capacity,
increasing efficiency and reliability in freight movement. Finally, by reducing dependence on
petroleum and minimizing the need for single occupancy vehicle travel, New York could reduce
the vehicle costs and fuel expenditures for residents and businesses. This would keep more energyrelated spending within the state economy.
While many of these recommendations are expected to have low associated costs or net savings to
the State of New York, there are notable exceptions:
•

Maintaining, expanding, and improving public transportation systems;

•

Creating high speed rail for key corridors within New York State and the Northeast Corridor;
7-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Enhancing New York’s rail infrastructure, especially eliminating freight rail bottlenecks;

•

Investing in the research, development, and deployment necessary to grow the next generation
of vehicle technologies and fuels.

Even programs that have a low State cost or result in net savings—like a revenue-neutral fee and
rebate system of vehicle purchasing incentives (“feebate”) or a new public low-interest loan
program for vehicle replacements—still require seed funding and program administrative support
to be successful. Further, revenue from current fuel-based taxes that currently fund the
transportation system will decrease if programs that encourage drivers to switch to more fuelefficient vehicles and reduce the number of miles they drive are successful. As a result, New York
will need policies that generate State revenue to support some of the GHG reduction policy
options, and to continue to support the state’s existing transportation system. New York will also
need policies specifically designed to leverage investment by the private sector and draw on capital
held by regional or national infrastructure banks.
For the transportation sector, the same pricing policies that are needed to generate revenue can also
be policies to directly reduce emissions. Financial incentives to reduce transportation emissions
can both influence choices and generate revenue that can be dedicated to programs to reduce
emissions. Examples include: VMT fees, fuel fees, emission-based road tolls, emission-based
vehicle registration fees, sales tax surcharges for high GHG vehicles, congestion pricing, or fees on
vehicle related expenses. Other important pricing mechanisms, such as pay-as-you-drive (PAYD)
insurance or a feebate system, are planned to be revenue-neutral but will reduce significant
amounts of emissions. Both the amount of emissions reductions and the amount of revenue that
will result from these types of policies will depend on the size and scope of the pricing mechanism
and the elasticity of demand for the type of vehicle, fuel, or travel mode.

7-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 7-2. Transportation and Land Use Policy Options

7-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy Scenario Summary Table Estimates
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
Policy
No.

Policy Option
2020

2030

Net
Net
Cost/Savings
Present
per Avoided
Value:
Total Cost/Savings Emissions
(2011– (Million $2005
($/tCO2e)
2030) (2011–2030) (2011–2030)

Energy
Savings
(million
gallons
fuel
saved in
2030)

TLU-1

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

5.3

17

130

$7,900

$62

3,600

TLU-2

Vehicle Incentives and
Disincentives

0.9

2.0

20

-$2,300

-$120

220

TLU-3

Fleet Incentives and
Disincentives

0.2

0.6

5.6

-$750

-$130

69

TLU-4

Alternative Fuel Related
Measures and Infrastructure—
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
(LCFS)

3.9

8.5

84

$6,700

$79

2,000

Commuter & Traveler
Assistance

1.0

1.0

18

-$15,000

–$870

120

Parking Pricing—
Upstate
NYC Metro Region

0.3
0.4

0.3
0.4

0.5
0.8

$720
-$480

$1,400
-$610

3
5

Telecommuting

1.0

1.0

18

-$15,000

-$870

120

Congestion Pricing

0.2

0.2

2.4

-$1,100

-$460

18

TLU-7

Expand Transit

3.7

4.9

64

$25,000

$390

910

TLU-9

Priority Growth Centers

0.1

0.3

2.6

-$1,600

-$610

36

TLU-10

Transit-Oriented Development /
Transit Supportive Development

0.3

0.5

5.7

-$5,000

-$870

100

TLU-11

Location Efficient Land Use

0.6

1.2

13

-$11,000

-$870

230

TLU-6

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent; TDM = transportation demand management; TSM = transportation system management.
Negative values represent savings.
The numbering used to denote the above policy recommendations is for reference purposes only; it does not reflect
prioritization among these important policy recommendations. The policy numbers that appear in this table are not
consecutive because they reflect only those policies for which quantitative analysis has been completed and not all
policies are amenable to quantification.

7-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 7-3. Estimates of Cost and GHG Emissions Reduction for TLU Policy Options

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO 2e / Year)

25

20
Vehicle Incentives &
Disincentives

Vehicle Efficiency Standards

15

10

Priority
Growth
Centers

Location
Efficient
Land Use

3.1

Fleet
Incentives &
Disincentives
Alternative Fuels/LCFS

NYC Metro
Region Parking
Pricing

5

Commuter
Assistance

Expand Transit

Congestion
Pricing

0
Transit‐
‐900
Oriented
Development

‐700

‐500

‐300

‐100

100

300

500

700

900

Net Savings
Net Cost
Dollar Per Metric Ton CO2e Avoided

NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

Note that for the Vehicle Efficiency Standards and Alternative Fuel Related Measures and Infrastructure—LCFS
policies, the elongated data points represent the range of potential costs of carbon based on differing petroleum price
forecasts.

VEHICLE EFFICIENCY STANDARDS (TLU-1)
Policy Summary
New York State could advocate for a stronger federal or California carbon dioxide emission
program 2 for light-duty vehicles (LDVs). Under current federal law (the Clean Air Act), New
York State cannot adopt its own CO2 emission standards for LDVs independently. If stricter
standards are adopted in California, New York has the option of adopting California’s program
through a rulemaking process. In the past, New York has always exercised this option and adopted
California’s clean car standards. New standards would be technology-neutral but could be
expected to significantly increase market penetration of zero-GHG vehicles as well as increase
fleet-wide fuel economy.

2

Current standards apply to vehicles up to model year 2016.
7-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

This policy could also include the implementation of an Eco-Driving Program to raise drivers’
awareness via an outreach and education component and an enforcement component (e.g., for
speeding).
Quantitative Analysis
To approach the 80 by 2050 vision and goal for the whole transportation sector, 100 percent of
new LDVs sold in 2035 would have to be near-zero-GHG. There would need to be a mix of plugin electric vehicles (PEVs), hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles, and bio-fueled vehicles. Toward this
vision, the GHG emission standards for LDV would strengthen over time, with a 50 percent
reduction in LDV GHG emissions by 2025 (for new fleet, from 2016 levels = 125 grams per mile
[g/mi]); and 90 percent reduction in LDV GHG emissions by 2035 (for new fleet, from 2016 levels
=25 g/mi). The TLU vision requires a near 100 percent reduction of GHG emissions for LDV,
assuming that other transportation types (aviation, heavy-duty trucks, marine, railroads) will not be
able to achieve as aggressive reductions.
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent
[$/tCO2e] reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the Technical Work Group are presented
below. The scenario assumed that New York will successfully advocate for a fleet wide LDV
standard of 75 g/mile by 2030.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

17

130

Net Present
Value Cost
($Million)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$7,900

$62

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

A price sensitivity analysis was performed to show how different fossil fuel price forecasts affect
estimated net present value and cost per metric ton. Using fuel price forecasts from the most recent
U.S. Department of Energy Annual Energy Outlook (AEO 2009), the net present value and net cost
per avoided emissions were respectively reduced to $770 million and 6 $/tCO2e. The use of higher
price forecasts transforms this policy scenario from a net-cost to approximately cost-neutral,
showing the sensitivity of this analysis to price forecasts. .
For purposes of illustration, the following vehicle mix would approximately achieve this standard:
•

69 percent of all new LDVs sold in 2030 are PEVs, and the remainder is conventional vehicles.

•

Of the new PEV fleet, about half (49 percent) are all battery electric vehicles, 17 percent are
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) with a 10-mile range (PHEV-10), and 34 percent are
plug-in electric with a 40-mile range.

•

Also in this scenario, cellulosic ethanol comprises 21 percent of fuel used in conventional and
plug-in hybrid vehicles.

7-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
•

In contrast to most other policy options, implementation of this policy is not fully within the
discretion of New York State and instead depends on federal or California action. 3

•

As defined here, this policy option results in the largest GHG reduction estimates, as a result of
the fact that the emission standards goals identified by the technical work group were
extremely aggressive. This represents a result-oriented, top-down approach, which starts with
the 80 by 50 vision and identifies an emission standard that would nearly achieve that goal. In
contrast, TLU-4 is a more constrained scenario that also results in substantially lower-carbon
mix of vehicles, but not to the same level as TLU-1.

•

The most significant co-benefit is a reduction in the emissions of other air pollutants, including
particulates, toxics, and oxides of nitrogen, which contribute to ozone formation (smog). These
pollution reductions would be noticeable and significant in terms of attaining federal healthbased air quality standards and improving public health and quality of life, especially in urban
areas and areas of high traffic volume.

•

While the indirect emissions from electric vehicles are not counted in the vehicle standards,
these emissions are taken into account in the Quantitative Analysis of GHG reductions
presented above.
VEHICLE INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES (TLU-2)

Policy Summary
The State of New York could create financial incentives for the purchase of low-GHG vehicles.
These incentives can take the form of feebates, tax credits, sales tax exemptions, registration fees
(or fee waiver), emission based tolls, or other mechanisms as appropriate.
To influence vehicle purchasing decisions, New York State could implement a revenue-neutral
feebate system for all new LDVs starting in 2015. There are a variety of ways to design a feebate
program. Under one approach, the program would establish a baseline GHG emission level for two
to four classes of vehicles based on their passenger capacity. Consumers who purchase vehicles
that emit fewer GHG emissions per mile than the baseline for their class could receive a
proportional rebate. Those that purchase vehicles that emit more GHGs per mile than the baseline
could pay a similarly proportional fee. The program could be designed to simply favor vehicles
with a higher fuel economy to affect purchasing decisions across the market, or to target the fees or
rebates only at the highest and lowest GHG-emitting vehicles on the market to influence
purchasing just at these margins.
New York State could also implement emissions-based registration fees and tolling based on a
vehicle’s GHG emissions per mile, providing further incentives to buy and operate low GHG
vehicles and potentially raising revenue for other transportation GHG reduction programs.
3

New York’s current State Energy Plan also directs New York to advocate for a stricter federal standard.
7-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that New York implemented a
feebate program that successfully reduced average GHG emissions from newly purchased vehicles
on average by 5% beyond the existing standards.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.9

20

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$2,300

-$120

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
•

In contrast to emission standards (TLU-1), incentive programs are fully in the control of New
York State.

•

The level of program success would depend on the level of fee or rebate put into place.
Because economic modeling of feebate programs at the national level suggests that most of the
GHG reductions would result from vehicle manufacturers reducing the GHG emissions of their
cars, a feebate program’s effectiveness increases if implemented over a larger market, such as
the northeastern states region or at a national level, similar to the options described in TLU-12.
However, it could also be effective if implemented exclusively in New York State.

•

By designing a revenue-neutral feebate system, where the total amount offered as incentives is
equal to the total amount charged as disincentives, New York could implement a program
without any General Fund expense. The rebates disbursed could be slightly smaller than the
fees collected, with a small amount of fees reserved each year to cover administrative costs and
in case of an unexpectedly large need to pay for rebates in future years. But a vehicle purchase
incentive program could also be designed to be revenue generating (e.g., gas-guzzler sales tax
surcharge), or to be revenue-negative (e.g., tax credit for purchase of electric cars or a cash for
clunkers program).

•

This policy option was developed independent of New York's ability to achieve TLU-1. Even
if TLU-1 standards were put in place, an incentive program would still be necessary to achieve
the 2030 vision for LDVs.

•

Co-benefits for this policy would be in the form of 1) reduced gasoline expenditures by New
Yorkers as the fleet becomes more fuel efficient, and 2) reduced vehicle pollution and the
accompanying improvement in air quality.

•

Low-income communities tend to have a much higher percentage of older vehicles, which has
implications for air quality. Programs that facilitate the retirement of such vehicles help to
address this problem.
7-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

HEAVY-DUTY FLEET INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES (TLU-3)

Policy Summary
This policy could establish a State revolving loan fund for replacing fleet vehicles with lower
GHG-emitting vehicles, or other financial incentives for both public and private fleet replacement.
The 2050 vision for the transportation sector includes a zero emission light-duty fleet and a heavyduty vehicle (HDV) fleet with GHG emissions as low as possible using available technology and
low-carbon biofuels. New soon-to-be-released federal standards mandating greater HDV
efficiency mean that normal vehicle turnover will reduce GHG emissions. However, accelerating
this HDV turnover will be necessary to achieve the 2050 vision. A low-interest revolving loan
program could be used to provide the necessary incentive to achieve fleet turnover in the required
timeframe. New York State could offer below market interest rates and extended loan terms based
on the useful life of the vehicle, reducing annual loan or lease payments. The state could also
enhance the financing incentive by offering lower interest rates to incentivize fleets to purchase
alternative vehicles; i.e. hydrogen fuel-cell or electric.
Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost-effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that New York put in place a
State revolving loan program that is successful in replacing 3% of the HDV fleet per year.
(Although LDVs could also be included in a loan program, the quantitative analysis focused on
HDVs.)
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.6

5.6

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$750

-$130

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Figure 7-4 provides an indication of the level of capitalization required to accelerate HDV turnover
and emission benefits achieved depending on the fraction of the fleet to be turned over:

7-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 7-4. Level of Capitalization Required to Accelerate HDV Turnover

Special Considerations
•

Due to its experience implementing loan programs with lower-than-market interest rates, the
New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation would be well positioned to take on the
role of administering this type of program. New statutory authority would need to be provided
by the Legislature.

•

Accelerated turnover in the HDV fleet would bring significant co-benefits in terms of air
quality, because diesel vehicles are a major source of particle pollution, toxics, black carbon,
and oxides of nitrogen. Although on-road diesel HDVs are considerably cleaner since 2007 due
to new federal standards, the longevity of vehicles slows fleet-wide emissions improvements.
Diesel emissions contribute to New York State’s non-attainment of air quality standards, and
urban environmental justice (EJ) neighborhoods often bear a disproportionate burden from
truck traffic due to their proximity to industrial areas, freight routes, or transit depots. A
cleaner HDV fleet will help New York State attain air quality standards and improve health
and quality of life in EJ neighborhoods.

•

Another important co-benefit is the provision of access to credit for small and large businesses,
non-profit organizations (e.g., paratransit agencies), and local governments that could use this
loan fund to replace and upgrade their fleet vehicles.

•

The environmental impacts associated with truck traffic, including emissions, noise, dust, and
congestion often represent one of the primary concerns of EJ communities, particularly those
burdened with solid waste management facilities. By incorporating an explicit focus on
overburdened communities and encouraging a shift to newer vehicles with lower emissions,
this policy could provide significant EJ benefits, while helping to meet New York State's GHG
reduction goals.

7-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

ALTERNATIVE FUEL RELATED MEASURES AND INFRASTRUCTURE (TLU-4)

Policy Summary
In December 2009, the governors of New York and 10 other states in the Northeast and MidAtlantic region signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), affirming each state’s
commitment to developing a low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS) program framework by 2011. This
policy supports this LCFS program: a market-based program to decrease the carbon intensity (the
amount of average GHGs released per unit of energy produced or g CO2e/megajoule) of all onroad transportation fuels sold in New York by some amount from current levels by 2020. The
LCFS would provide an incentive to commercialize new fuel technologies and encourage the
development of infrastructure to produce and distribute low-carbon fuels including biodiesel (B20
and B100), cellulosic ethanol (E10 and E85), and electricity.4
In addition, to help develop and expand alternative, low-carbon fuels New York State could
establish financial incentives for low-carbon fueling investment: sales tax exemption for low
carbon fuels, investment tax credits for retail fueling infrastructure, and production tax credits. As
part of the 11-state Transportation and Climate Initiative, New York State has proposed a planning
process to develop guidelines and a master plan for implementing a regional electric vehicle (EV)
network of charging stations that enable local and regional EV travel. New York State could
potentially invest in and construct charging/battery-exchange stations in the context of this
regional framework.
To support near-zero carbon vehicle deployment, New York could invest in research and modeling
to assess the in-state infrastructure needs for fueling for electrification and hydrogen, including the
standardization of electrical connections and voltages necessary for electric charging
infrastructure. New York could also develop policies and regulations that support the development
of business models that allow the sale of electricity by non-utilities (through both direct charging
and battery swapping), aggregation of loads for business transactions, private and public
investment in publicly accessible vehicle charging, and the development and deployment of
standardized quick charge technology. (See paper by the electric vehicle sub-group in Appendix
G.)
For this group of policy options, an important consideration will be the sequencing of
implementing a LCFS and investing in fueling infrastructure, so as to achieve the standard’s
carbon intensity reductions and to prevent stranding of significant investment.

4

B20 is a fuel blend of 20 percent biodiesel and 80 percent gasoline, and B100 is 100percent biodiesel fuel. E10 is a
fuel blend of 10 percent ethanol and 90 percent gasoline, and E85 is a fuel blend of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent
gasoline.

7-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed implementation of a LCFS that
achieves a 10 percent decrease in average carbon intensity by 2020 and a 12 percent improvement
by 2030.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

8.5

84

Net Present
Value Cost
($Million)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$6,700

$79

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

A price sensitivity analysis was performed to show how different fossil fuel price forecasts affect
estimated net present value and cost per metric ton. Using fuel price forecasts from the most recent
U.S. Department of Energy Annual Energy Outlook (AEO 2009), the net present value and net cost
per avoided emissions were respectively reduced to -$180 million and -1 $/tCO2e. The use of
higher price forecasts transforms this policy scenario from a net-cost to approximately cost-neutral,
showing the sensitivity of this analysis to price forecasts.
An LCFS program would be fuel technology-neutral—in other words, it would set a performance
standard but would not prescribe how fuel providers meet the standard. The LCFS would be
expected to lead to an increased market penetration of alternatively fueled vehicles. For purposes
of illustration, one mix of vehicles that would achieve this LCFS (10 percent improvement in
carbon intensity by 2020 and 12 percent by 2030) is: 50 percent of all new LDVs sold in 2030 are
PEVs, and the remainder of the LDV fleet uses a combination of conventional fuels, conventional
biomass, and advanced biomass.
Although the quantitative analysis did not propose specific goals for the complementary policies
(financial incentives, infrastructure installation) these policies are an important part of a
comprehensive fuel strategy, and would facilitate achieving an LCFS.
Special Considerations
•

Additional analyses will be conducted in the next phase of the Climate Action Plan process to
separately quantify the potential benefits and costs of utilization of biomass for application in
the TLU sector.

•

Assuming that the policy promotes the use of zero-emission electric or hydrogen vehicles, a
significant co-benefit is a reduction of pollutants, including particulates, toxics, and oxides of
nitrogen, which contribute to ozone formation (smog). These pollution reductions would be
noticeable and significant in terms of attaining federal health-based air quality standards and
improving public health, quality of life, especially in urban areas and areas of high traffic
volume.

7-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Only a portion of the sustainable level of biofuels production, as described in New York’s
Biofuels Roadmap, would be available to the transportation sector, and this Quantitative
Analysis takes this into consideration. The GHG emissions reductions presented above did not
take into account indirect land use changes.

•

For PEVs, quick charging technology is not currently commercially available and battery
swapping systems must be standardized to be widely used. If multiple technologies and
business models continue to develop, EV charging and long-range travel will become more
convenient for consumers.

•

Note that the scenario quantified for this policy option does not achieve the fleet-wide
emissions standards put forward in TLU-1, which was 75 grams of CO2/mile by 2030.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION NEEDS FOR THE
TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE SECTOR (TLU-5)

See Chapter 10 for a complete presentation of Research, Development and Demonstration needs
for this sector.
TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
MANAGEMENT (TLU-6)

Policy Summary
An essential strategy in reducing GHG emissions from transportation sources is improving the
energy efficiency of the road and highway network. This may include reducing the growth rate in
VMT, providing alternatives to single-occupant vehicle travel, and reducing delay and eliminating
bottlenecks on the highway system. Providing these elements may reduce GHG emissions by
reducing the number of trips on the highway system and VMT per person, and by generating a
significant mode shift to carbon-efficient and zero carbon modes of travel.
An important aspect of this is transportation system management (TSM). Effective TSM (such as
high-occupancy vehicle lanes, improved traffic flow) utilizes a variety of strategies including
advanced technologies, policies, and design standards. TSM strategies attempt to make travel more
efficient by shortening trip lengths, reducing vehicle delay, increasing the reliability of the
transportation network, and reducing idling and other transportation actions. System design
complements technology actions, and includes access management and intersection improvements.
An efficient system minimizes GHG emissions.
Another important component is the integrated implementation and delivery of travel demand
management (TDM) strategies and services (such as carpooling, van pooling, telecommuting) in
New York’s urban, suburban, and rural locations, built on market-based incentives and education
and outreach programs to reduce, eliminate, or shorten vehicle trips. When these strategies are
applied in concert, substantial gains can be achieved.
7-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. 5 The implementation in New York State of the
following programs was quantified:
•

Implement a Commuter and Traveler Assistance Program in upstate New York starting in
2011. This program aims to change commuter and traveler behavior by providing easily
accessible information that prompts the choice to use other commute modes or carpooling, and
includes other actions to maximize commuter and traveler mobility.

•

Implement parking pricing practices in New York urban areas using smart parking meters in
central business districts starting in 2011.

•

Implement a New York State Telecommuting Project, primarily in the New York metropolitan
area and secondarily on a statewide level.

•

Implement congestion pricing in the New York City metro area as previously proposed by
New York City starting in 2015. Implementing a congestion pricing program in the New York
metro area could reduce VMT and provide revenue for TSM and TDM activities by requiring a
fee for vehicles to enter designated parts of the New York metropolitan area. Legislation would
be needed to permit this strategy but is estimated to reduce VMT within the cordon area in
New York City by approximately 6%, with additional VMT reduction in the greater
metropolitan area due to reduction in trips to and from the City.

Commuter & Traveler Assistance
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.0

18

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$15,000

-$870

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

5

Note that quantitative analysis was not undertaken for the TSM measures.

7-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Parking Pricing: New York City Metropolitan Region
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.4

0.8

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$480

-$610

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Telecommuting
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.0

18

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$15,000

-$870

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Congestion Pricing
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.2

2.4

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$1,100

-$460

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
•

State legislation would be needed to allow a congestion-pricing program to be developed and
implemented in New York City.

•

TDM measures should be designed to reduce single-occupant vehicle commuting and overall
VMT; i.e., addressing both commute and non-commute trips. TDM measures should be
integrated with other related strategies that promote transit options.

•

Successful programs must use innovative, and non-traditional measures that consider and
reflect best practices; a customer-needs focus in delivery; enhanced marketing,
communications, outreach, and public relations including leveraging existing resources such as
511-NY and Clean Air NY; advanced, state-of-the-art information and communication; and
7-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

education, training, and development activities. Further, successful programs should monitor
for performance and effectiveness that track commuter and traveler behavior, response, and
change. There needs to be multi-agency coordination and collaboration to maximize
effectiveness.
•

Availability of information through the Internet must be maximized to provide travelers with a
full range of real-time travel options through on-line trip brokerages, travel planners, and
service databases. As trip brokerages and travel planners mature, new forms of demandresponsive taxi, transit, and paratransit services can be developed to operate more efficiently
and effectively in lower density areas as well as higher density, urbanized settings.

•

In developing parking pricing programs, particular care should be given to implement the
program so that it is not counter-productive to the State’s smart growth efforts; i.e., that it does
not discourage use and enjoyment of downtown areas. For existing employer-provided parking,
the State could implement a parking cash-out program with a tax credit for employers as an
incentive for their participation; and for new parking in developing areas, the true cost of
parking should be reflected in municipal development policies and zoning ordinances.

•

Co-benefits include improved travel mobility, flexibility, and choice, as well as a reduction in
congestion and travel time, and a reduction in other air pollutants from transportation.
TRANSIT and HIGH-SPEED RAIL (TLU-7)

Policy Summary
New York State could reduce GHG emissions from the transportation sector by encouraging a
major shift in mode share from predominantly single-occupant vehicle travel to public
transportation. This would occur through investment in the improvement and expansion of transit
systems to existing communities and the development of high speed rail with competitive trip
times along the Empire and Adirondack Corridors. In cooperation with other Northeast states, New
York State could also promote the development of high speed rail in the Northeast Corridor.
Sustained financial investment in public transportation, particularly transit infrastructure, could
provide affordable, convenient, and comprehensive travel options that would connect
communities, jobs, and long-distance travel centers. Construction of expanded subway, light rail,
bus rapid transit, and high speed rail networks would promote job growth and economic
development in the state in two ways. The expansion of transit systems in New York State could
spur a growth in the transit- and rail-related manufacturing sectors. High speed rail that offers
competitive trip times could boost economic output and prosperity by linking metro areas with
robust economies to metro areas trying to create strong economies, a strategy that would expand
the options of job seekers and employers. Dedicated high speed rail tracks would also free up
existing rail tracks for improved freight deliveries and efficiencies by reducing congestion and
competition for track availability. The strategies, investments, and high speed rail trip times
suggested in this policy are aggressive, but are suggestive of what would be needed to reach the 80
percent GHG reduction goals established for 2050. Achieving these goals would require funding
well above what is available today. It would require increased federal resources, including a
dedicated ongoing funding source for rail investments at the federal level, as well as ongoing
7-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

operating subsidies to support continued service and operations. Achieving these transit goals
would require a sustained long-term commitment to system planning and funding. Accomplishing
these high speed rail goals would require right-of-way acquisition, legislation to allow new
corridor construction in the Adirondack State Park, and interstate and international agreements.
The state could also promote the use of shared modes of transportation, such as transit, carpooling,
and ride sharing, by expanding available information about these services through improved
communications technology. The appropriate mix of technology and real-time information could
provide the kind of comparative data on costs or saving that would enable workers, residents, and
visitors to make more informed choices when they select a particular mode or combinations of
modes for work trips and discretionary trips. Expanded use of wireless technology could enable
new demand-responsive transit services to be developed that can operate more efficiently and
effectively both in lower-density areas and in higher-density and urbanized settings. Improvements
and expansions to inter-city train travel could also reduce GHG emissions by developing additional
shared modes of transportation in cities once a traveler reaches their destination city.
One short-term discrete action for New York is to invest in a multi-state high speed rail feasibility
and planning study that also examines the multitude of economic and environmental benefits.
Quantitative Analysis
Investment in transit and high speed rail would be pursued to bring about a major expansion of
mobility options for New Yorkers, such that the annual rate of VMT growth would decrease to 0.4
percent until 2020, stabilize at 0 percent by 2030 and reduce VMT 10 percent below 2030 levels
by 2050. (The current rate of VMT growth is greater than 1 percent per year.)
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that the percentage of trips
made in single occupancy vehicles would decrease from the current 50 percent downstate and 80
percent upstate to 35 percent by 2030 downstate and 65 percent by 2030 upstate.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

4.9

64

Net Present
Value Cost
($Million)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

$25,000

$390

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Although not included in the quantitative analysis, another key goal of these policy measures is to
make high speed rail more competitive with aviation in the Empire State and Northeast corridors,
which would decrease emissions from the aviation sector and well as shift travelers from
automobiles to trains. Please see TLU-12 for additional information.

7-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
•

This policy option is closely linked with TLU-6, which consists of TSM and TDM policies,
including those that encourage using shared modes. It is also linked to TLU-9, TLU-10, and
TLU-11, which consists of policies to promote the land use patterns that are particularly
supportive of increased use of public transportation and high speed rail. The Regional
recommendations are also linked to TLU-12.

•

Increased use of public transportation, with its accompanying reduction in VMT, would greatly
improve air quality, especially in the state’s urban centers, because public transportation and
shared modes of transportation generally emit less pollution per passenger mile traveled than
single occupancy vehicles. These measures could also drastically improve mobility and reduce
congestion in these same areas by taking vehicles off the road as drivers migrate toward shared
modes. Other important co-benefits include the expansion of travel mobility, flexibility, and
choice, which can be especially important to middle- and lower-income New Yorkers.
Integration of an expanded transit network with high speed rail on Empire Corridor lines and
the Northeast Corridor could have several other broad macroeconomic benefits, including
freeing up airport capacity and airspace, freeing up rail capacity for rail freight movements,
and better linking cities throughout the State.

•

VMT reductions in more rural areas could be very difficult to achieve, as these trips may not
lend themselves easily to shared mode travel.

•

Recognizing the significant climate benefits and co-benefits, expanding public transportation
options across the state to the extent described above would be very expensive. High speed rail,
subways, and even light rail or bus rapid transit systems require significant infrastructure
expenditures. Achieving large increases in transit ridership across the state will require major
expansions of transit infrastructure, which is largely absent in many communities. New rail
lines may require New York State to exercise its power of eminent domain, possibly over large
areas. The GHG impact of induced demand from development opportunities created by high
speed rail access should also be considered, as this would likely lead to both economic activity
and population increases in New York compared to business as usual.

•

Development of high speed rail would require ongoing, sustained funding and support to plan
and develop the corridors. A separate and sustained source of federal funding for rail would be
required.

•

To attain the reliability and higher speeds suggested along the Adirondack Corridor, significant
cross-border negotiations to reduce or eliminate border inspection delays (e.g., moving
passenger inspections to Montreal) would be required. Further, development of high speed rail
along the Adirondack Corridor would require a constitutional amendment to pursue new
alignments.

•

Moreover, providing transit services in diffuse communities, especially upstate, would likely
require significant operating support to keep fares at publicly acceptable levels. If the land use
policies in TLU-9, TLU-10, and TLU-11 are successful, a larger portion of the New York State
population will live in areas that are easier to service with transit options.

7-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

FREIGHT STRATEGIES THAT PROMOTE GHG REDUCTIONS (TLU-8)

Policy Summary
New York State, in conjunction with a broad-based stakeholder group including State agencies and
municipalities, adjoining states, the goods movement industry, and local community groups, could
establish a comprehensive Goods Movement GHG Policy, with the dual goals of increasing freight
efficiency while reducing GHG emissions.
The comprehensive policy should identify and prioritize key freight projects such as consolidation
and distribution centers (including important highway and non-highway modal connections), new
intermodal yards, rail system improvements, the development and expansion of non-highway
system capacity, and the operational enhancement of existing highway systems to support local,
regional, and transcontinental freight service into and out of New York State. Such projects would
provide alternative off-road clean transport systems to improve goods movement, reduce
congestion, and reduce emissions.
Once identified, key freight projects could also be subject to an efficient permit process that
considers the needs of the local community. The policy could establish state requirements for
system-wide GHG analyses and green technology advancement through the State Environmental
Quality Review (SEQR) and other permitting requirements; set specific performance standards to
incentivize low to zero emissions truck, rail, ship, and support equipment technology; and establish
freight fees dedicated to transportation system and infrastructure upgrades. The policy could draw
on existing efforts and partnerships, such as the New York State Rail Plan, the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey Comprehensive Long-Term Regional Goods Movement Plan, and the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, while acknowledging New York State specific issues.
Further, the plan should identify key freight corridors and connectors and establish land-use
guidelines for local and regional municipalities in those corridors that are specific to freight. It
should also consider rail clearance and track improvements to allow heavier loads, thereby
supporting a more viable rail system and should look for other investments and incentives to
support low GHG options. The Technical Work Group explored several policy options that
warrant further consideration:
•

Develop comprehensive Goods Movement GHG Policy, prioritizing increasing efficiency and
reducing GHG and congestion as main design metrics;

•

Increase non-highway mode shift;

•

Establish a network of freight villages/consolidation centers/urban distribution centers serving
the upstate and downstate regions;

•

Provide incentives to establish progressive performance standards and develop low-GHG rail
and truck technology, terminal equipment, and ships/tugs/barges acknowledging full life-cycle
emissions.

7-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential for the policy scenario analyzed by the Technical Work
Group was not fully analyzed in quantitative terms, since it was difficult to estimate reliable costs
of implementation for the multi-faceted program developed and described during the Technical
Work Group process.
Special Considerations
•

A Goods Movement Policy would first have to involve a baseline assessment of bottlenecks
and network capacity issues, to act as a benchmark. Following this baseline assessment, and
building from existing work, key freight corridors, connectors, and eventual projects
throughout the state and northeast region could be identified. An efficient permitting process
could be available to these resulting freight projects, with local and regional agencies able to
apply for direct federal and state funding.

•

Coordination both within and outside of New York State would be needed to ensure that
freight moves by the most efficient combination of modes and the most efficient route, and
utilizes a combination of VMT/unit of freight and total GHG per transit mode as metrics. Such
coordination will prioritize consistency in policies and permitting requirements to alleviate
administrative congestion such as differences in oversize/overweight rules between cities,
counties, states, and Canada. Coordination must also recognize that freight decisions are
largely under private sector control and that decisions are interstate, national, international, and
global in nature. Freight decisions in New York must be made in ways that do not disadvantage
the state’s economy.

•

Freight fees or congestion pricing could be established to promote efficient movement and
reduce both VMT and total GHG emissions. Ideally developed in partnership with the freight
industry, fees could be based on elasticity studies and consider existing tolls and taxes. Fees
could be collected by and administered through a regional partnership entity and go into a fund
dedicated solely to freight infrastructure improvements. Note: If a non-gas tax results from
federal transportation law in 2011, this fee may supplement freight fee efforts. Decisions must
be balanced in consideration of impacts on the state’s economy.

•

Progressive performance standards for trucks, rail, terminal equipment, ocean-going vessels,
and harbor craft will need to be developed. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency could
be lobbied to adopt national standards modeled after California. Standards for freight
consolidation/distribution centers will be needed to ensure minimal community impacts.

•

The 2009 New York State Rail Plan cites a study conducted by the American Association of
Railroads that reports that significant investment in the existing railroad freight infrastructure
will be required to account for the projected growth in rail freight through 2035. This
investment will be needed to maintain the current rail freight capacity. To allow for mode shift
of freight to rail, additional investment will be required.

7-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

PRIORITY GROWTH CENTERS (TLU-9)

Policy Summary
The State of New York could assist and incentivize municipalities in designating, planning,
zoning, and developing/re-developing priority growth centers. This could happen through a
combination of State assistance and State incentives, such as shifting State resource allocations
towards identified priority growth centers, which could be in urban, suburban, or rural areas. The
priority growth centers would be encouraged to have compact, mixed-use, walkable/bikeable
development in existing centers of activity, whether urban centers or hamlets and village centers.
New York State could accomplish this through incentive programs such as:
•

Assisting localities and regions in designating priority growth centers;

•

Accelerating and prioritizing permit and SEQRA review for smart growth projects, without
compromising outreach to, and input from, underserved populations or EJ areas;

•

Ensuring affordable housing options within priority growth centers;

•

Providing priority infrastructure funding (transportation, water, economic development,
schools, housing) for Smart Growth;

•

Incorporating principles of strategic land conservation and green infrastructure into open space
preservation funding, plans, and documents;

•

Providing public accessibility to parks and green spaces, both within and outside priority
growth centers;

•

Assisting with alternative local funding mechanisms, such as Tax Increment Financing;

•

Further rewarding such smart growth development as described above if it comports with a
regional land use and/or transportation plan; and

•

Using regional transportation and land use planning to encourage development patterns that
achieve prescribed transport-based GHG emission reductions.

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that the actions described
above, if aggressively pursued at the State level, would result in 50 percent of new construction
taking place in identified priority growth centers by 2030.

7-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.3

2.6

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$1,600

-$610

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Implementation costs were estimated by applying assumptions similar to those used for the Moving
Cooler 6 study’s Land Use and Smart Growth Strategies under the Maximum Deployment scenario.
These include costs for policy, planning, and visioning. Since these planning costs are assumed to
include all measures in TLU-9, TLU-10, and TLU-11, the cost was distributed between the three
policy options, weighted by the emissions reduction.
Special Considerations
•

Current and projected shifts in demographics and home/community preferences will in many
ways support the policy recommendations and GHG reduction goals in this policy option.
Population projections see an increase in more than 1 million residents in the urban areas
downstate by 2030, but a decrease of almost 300,000 residents upstate, which should
contribute to increasing access to smart growth land uses. Based on market and real estate
trends and projections, the increase in the over-65 population (projected to be over 20% by
2030) will concomitantly increase the demand for smaller dwelling units (including more
attached housing) in walkable/bikeable, transit-friendly, mixed-use communities, particularly
in municipal centers. The rise in the number of childless households, single parent households
and young, single professionals is projected to increase the market for compact, vibrant,
diverse, mixed-use, walkable/bikeable, transit-friendly communities, particularly in urban
areas. Furthermore, a larger nationwide trend toward urbanization could manifest itself in
supportive, climate-friendly real estate and home-buying trends in New York.

•

Implementation of this policy is especially relevant in those areas of the state that expect
population growth between now and 2030, and could be targeted to those areas in the short
term.

•

Considering the limitations of State incentives and assistance (vs. mandates for example, which
this policy doesn’t include), the scenario of having 50 percent of all new construction occur in
priority growth areas is very aggressive, but potentially feasible, given the long timeframe.
Achieving these results would require a sustained long-term State commitment to promoting
priority growth centers with assistance and incentives.

•

TLU-9 is closely linked with TLU-10 and TLU-11, which consist of related land use policies,
and TLU-6 and TLU-7, which consist of policies supporting transit and transportation demand
management that enable and thrive in partnership with compact, mixed land use.

6

“Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions,”
http://www.movingcooler.info/.
7-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Compact, mixed use developments, which could be encouraged through Priority Growth
Centers, offer significant co-benefits from improved public health and air quality; better
mobility through access to additional travel options such as public transportation, walking, or
biking; and reduction in building energy use (compact land use is generally associated with
lower building energy use per square foot).

•

Without significant changes in land use and development patterns in New York State, the level
of VMT reductions and mode share changes contemplated in the entire suite of TLU policies
will be difficult to achieve. However, land use changes are particularly difficult to prescribe in
New York State. New York State can offer incentives to municipalities and regional planning
organizations to incorporate priority growth centers, but the State ultimately does not have the
authority to create them itself, due to home rule. Incentives will have to be designed carefully
to attract local authorities to update and alter their land use plans. Land use patterns are
difficult to change once established, and changing incentives and local regulations could lead
to significant property value shifts, raising values in denser areas and reducing values in
sprawling neighborhoods. This could have significant economic and equity impacts.
TRANSIT- ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD)/ TRANSIT-SUPPORTIVE
DEVELOPMENT (TSD) (TLU-10)

Policy Summary
This policy is a suite of measures to encourage and incentivize transit-oriented development
(TOD). The State could provide favorable tax incentives, priority infrastructure funding, and
technical assistance/planning grants for the planning, zoning, and development/re-development of:
transit villages in close proximity (one-half mile, as a general rule) to transit stations (rail, bus,
ferry); targeted compact, mixed-use development within walking, biking and short-car-ride
distance of a transit station; and pedestrian-/bicycle-friendly access to transit. New York State
could also develop parking policies and alternative funding mechanisms for parking that support
TOD/transit-supportive development (TSD). New York State could offer:
•

Continued development and expansion of existing technical assistance and public education
around TOD;

•

Sales tax exemptions and/or income tax credits for retail within one-half mile of a transit hub
in an area appropriately planned and zoned for TOD;

•

Priority state and local assistance for projects within a TOD;

•

Additional location efficiency incentives if TODs reduce transportation and/or parking costs
due to location efficiency;

•

Assistance and incentives for Transfer of Development Rights initiatives that transfer
development away from open space that serves maximum carbon sink and sequestration
benefits and toward TOD;

7-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Agreements established by the state housing agencies to maintain the long-term affordability of
affordable housing within TOD/TSD as a condition of receiving state affordable housing
assistance;

•

Rewards/incentives for communities with adequate TOD/TSD ordinances.

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that the suite of programs
outlined above were successful in having 65 percent of all new development in the MTA service
area within close proximity and accessible to transit; and in establishing bus rapid transit lines
throughout all major metropolitan areas of the state, with TOD located on each route.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.5

5.7

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$5,000

-$870

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Implementation costs were estimated by applying assumptions similar to those used for the Moving
Cooler 7 study’s Land Use and Smart Growth Strategies under the Maximum Deployment scenario.
These include costs for policy, planning, and visioning. Since these planning costs are assumed to
include all measures in TLU-9, TLU-10, and TLU-11, the cost was distributed between the three
policy options, weighted by the emissions reduction.
Special Considerations
•

Population levels in New York are expected to increase and development and building is
expected to occur. This policy option aims to steer that development to locations accessible by
transit. This policy suite is closely linked with TLU-9 and TLU-11, which consist of related
land use policies, and TLU-6 and TLU-7, which consist of policies supporting transit and
transportation demand management that enable and thrive in partnership with compact, mixed
land use. It is also linked to TLU-12 through policies to promote these policies at a Regional
level

•

The scenario of 65 percent of development in Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA)
area occurring near transit is taken from the report of the Blue Ribbon Commission on
Sustainability and the MTA.

•

Compact, mixed use developments, which could be encouraged through TOD/TSD, offer
significant co-benefits from improved air quality and public health; better mobility through

7

“Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions,”
http://www.movingcooler.info/.
7-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

access to additional travel options such as public transportation, walking, or biking; reduction
in building energy use (compact land use is generally associated with lower building energy
use per square foot); and enhanced quality of life.
•

Without significant changes in land use patterns in New York State, the level of TOD and TSD
in this policy option and those related to transit, HSR, and freight will be difficult to achieve.
As mentioned in TLU-9, land use changes are difficult to prescribe in New York State.

•

Traffic congestion and heavy traffic areas are significant environmental burdens on EJ
communities across the state. Efforts to increase efficiencies and strategically promote the use
of mass transit can help to ameliorate these impacts.

•

As described in more detail in TLU-9, demographic changes will support the recommendations
and goals in this TLU. Population projections for New York foresee an increase in urban areas
downstate by 2030, but a decrease of almost 300,000 residents upstate. The increase in the
over-65 population will increase the demand for smaller dwelling units in walkable/bikeable,
transit-friendly, mixed-use communities. Demographic trends support projections of a strong
market for compact, vibrant, diverse, mixed-use, walkable/bikeable, transit-friendly
communities.
LOCATION-EFFICIENT LAND USE (TLU-11)

Policy Summary
The State of New York could incentivize and promote local planning, zoning and development/redevelopment that minimizes the distance between locations of daily destinations through targeted
density and mixed land uses; infill development/adaptive reuse (commercial, retail, residential);
retrofitting sprawl development to achieve greater density, mix of land uses, inter-connectivity and
walkability; affordable housing opportunities; close proximity between jobs and transit; and close
proximity between affordable housing and low-/moderate-income jobs. As distinguished from
TLU 9—Priority Growth Centers, this policy could occur by taking a micro-planning approach by
creating specific, people-friendly/oriented network/land use connections. New York State could
accomplish this through programs such as:
•

Recognizing and incentivizing projects that comport with location efficiency with state
economic development assistance;

•

Developing a Location-Efficient Mortgage program, modeled on the Housing Finance
Agency/State of New York Mortgage Agency Mortgage Insurance Fund agreement with the
MTA to provide additional incentive for affordable housing near transit;

•

Requiring that to the extent practicable and within the context of the setting, road and network
design would adhere to the Complete Streets approach, offering equal access and use to all
users including automobiles, transit vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclers, seniors, and children
regardless of age or ability;

•

Catalyzing university and college resources to create greater town land use synergies with
surrounding neighborhoods and municipal centers;
7-28

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Developing policies that promote local food production and distribution;

•

Building location efficiency into state housing program eligibility and policies to mitigate any
negative aspects of gentrification and increased housing prices resulting from revitalization and
redevelopment; and

•

Investing State funds in brownfields cleanup and redevelopment, including improving the
existing brownfields tax credit program for privately owned brownfields, and re-establishing
the grants and technical assistance to localities for municipally-owned brownfields.

Quantitative Analysis
The estimated GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value),
and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e reduced) for the policy scenario analyzed by the
Technical Work Group are presented below. The scenario assumed that the measures above would
measurably reduce the distance/VMT required to access work and other daily destinations, as well
as the household costs devoted to transportation.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

1.2

13

Net Present
Value Savings
($Million)

Net Savings per
Avoided Emissions
($/tCO2e)

-$11,000

-$870

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Implementation costs were estimated by applying assumptions similar to those used for the Moving
Cooler 8 study’s Land Use and Smart Growth Strategies under the Maximum Deployment scenario.
These include costs for policy, planning, and visioning. Since these planning costs are assumed to
include all measures in TLU-9, TLU-10, and TLU-11, the cost was distributed between the three
policy options, weighted by the emissions reduction.
Special Considerations
•

TLU-11 is closely linked with TLU-9 and TLU-10, which consist of related land use policies,
and TLU-6 and TLU-7, which consist of policies supporting transit and transportation demand
management that enable and thrive in partnership with compact, mixed land use. It is also
linked to the TLU-12 related to RGGI for land use.

•

Compact, mixed use developments, which could be encouraged through Location-Efficient
Land Use, offer significant co-benefits from improved air quality, better mobility through
access to additional travel options such as public transportation, walking, or biking, reduction
in building energy use (compact land use is generally associated with lower building energy
use per square foot), and enhanced quality of life.

8

Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions,
http://www.movingcooler.info/.
7-29

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

The significant changes in land use patterns in New York State required by this policy will be
complicated to achieve because land use changes are particularly difficult to prescribe in New
York State. There is, for example, no guarantee that the list of State-level incentives
enumerated above would result in a significant shift in land use patterns.

•

As described in more detail in TLU-9, demographic changes will support the recommendations
and goals in this TLU. Population projections for New York foresee an increase in urban areas
downstate by 2030, but a decrease of almost 300,000 residents upstate. The increase in the
over-65 population will increase the demand for smaller dwelling units in walkable/bikeable,
transit-friendly, mixed-use communities. Demographic trends support projections of a strong
market for compact, vibrant, diverse, mixed-use, walkable/bikeable, transit-friendly
communities.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL/REGIONAL PROPOSALS (TLU-12)

Policy Summary
New York could pursue a range of regional (i.e., multi-state) strategies to reduce GHG emissions
from the transportation sector. This policy description is separated into four parts, although they
are clearly interdependent: (1) a regional initiative for land use and GHG emissions, (2) a regional
initiative for transportation and GHG emissions, (3) a regional initiative for high speed rail lines
inside New York State (Empire Corridors) and on the Northeast Corridor, and (4) a federal
advocacy program. The regional transportation initiative would include a carbon pricing
mechanism that would generate revenue, and the regional land use initiative would reinvest that
revenue in economic development projects that lead to reduced per capita GHG emissions from
transportation.
Certain regional transportation initiatives have already begun. For example, on June 15, 2010, a
Northeast and Mid-Atlantic Regional Transportation and Climate Initiative summit brought
together transportation, energy, and environmental agency heads from 11 states plus Washington,
DC to work collaboratively to reduce GHG emissions from the transportation sector. In another
example, in December 2009 the governors of New York and 10 other states signed an MOU
affirming each state’s commitment to developing a low carbon fuel standard framework. The
programs described here also suggest policies that could be developed with existing entities, such
as the Coalition of Northeastern Governors, the Northeast Association of State Transportation
Officials, or the I-95 Corridor Coalition.
Regional initiative for Land Use and GHG Emissions
This program could encourage states to prioritize the provision of their own state funds to those
municipalities that take specific actions to encourage low GHG land use. Municipalities that
commit to certain land use planning actions (e.g. sustainable planning, zoning, transit-oriented
development) could get priority for a range of state and federal funding. Funds (potentially from a
GHG auction resulting from a regional initiative for transportation and GHG emissions, described
below) would be reinvested in smart growth economic development projects in communities, and
communities would be eligible for funding based on their commitments to climate change
7-30

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

mitigation and adaptation actions. In the short term, states could work together to identify and
publicize best practices; offer joint municipal training/information sessions; or share results.
Regional Initiative for Transportation and GHG Emissions
Under this policy, a price for carbon emissions from the transport sector would be established via
an auction of credits. Entities that provide fossil fuel for transportation would be required to hold
credits to cover their sales. Revenue from the auction would be reinvested in: (1) shared modes,
including high speed rail and intra-city transit; (2) smart growth land use actions that would reduce
VMT, e.g. transit oriented development; and (3) transportation system efficiency. Providers of
transportation fuels could, instead of purchasing credits, invest in projects to offset their emissions.
Instead of the cap-and-invest framework, states could implement other pricing strategies, including
VMT fees, PAYD auto insurance, and an increased fuel tax, which each should be further studied.
Also in this policy, the Technical Work Group suggests a range of potential joint research and
development (R&D) projects. Examples include developing a methodology for quantifying transit
projects for offsets, piloting a pay-as-you-go insurance project, piloting emission-based tolls in
interstate transportation corridors, and developing an electric-vehicle corridor through joint
planning and investment in electric fueling infrastructure.
The freight sector offers another opportunity for collaboration on GHG reduction strategies from
the transportation sector. A multi-regional approach to freight transportation creates the potential
for far greater GHG emission reductions than a New York-only approach. Regional cooperation
could include incentives to municipalities that commit to freight planning actions (e.g., intermodal
rail yards, distribution centers, freight villages, and consolidation centers). A price for freight
carbon emissions could also be established via credit auctions. Shippers, freight forwarders, and
retailers would be required to hold credits to cover shipping, based on total freight VMT. Auction
revenues would be reinvested in low-carbon freight system infrastructure and smart growth land
use actions reducing freight VMT. States could pursue R&D projects, for example, to develop low
and zero-emission short and long-haul freight rail systems or use advanced technology such as
linear induction or emission-based truck tolls in interstate transportation corridors.
Regional High-Speed Rail for the Empire Corridors and the Northeast Corridor
New York should continue to engage and collaborate with Northeast states to undertake a major
investment study on high speed rail in the Northeast Corridor and within New York State (Empire
Corridor lines) and the nearby provinces of Canada. By far America’s busiest rail corridor, the
Northeast Corridor moves more than 259 million passengers annually. Amtrak’s share of these
riders in 2009 was 13 million. Preliminary estimates are that intercity passenger rail ridership
along the Northeast Corridor is forecast to increase by 59 percent to a total of 412 million by 2030,
with 23 million of these riders using Amtrak. 9
Development of a high speed rail system that offers competitive trip times could shift travel
demand from single-occupant vehicles and air travel to rail. Short-haul air travel would not be
eliminated, as the need for connecting flights will likely persist but it could be dramatically
9

The NEC Master Plan Working Group. Northeast Corridor Infrastructure Master Plan. May 2010.
7-31

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

reduced, freeing up congested airspace in the region. World class high speed rail in the Northeast
could also create economic synergies between cities on the Eastern Seaboard. Linking cities that
enjoy strong economies with cities trying to develop stronger economies will transform the
economic geography and output of the Northeast. New York State should continue all efforts to
develop high speed rail along the Empire Corridor. Dedicated high speed rail tracks would also
reduce congestion on existing rail lines, leading to improved and more efficient freight movement.
The Northeast Mega-region is projected to grow from a population of 49.5 million in 2000 to 58
million by 2025 and 70 million by 2050. 10 The ability of the Northeast Mega-region to capture and
sustain this population growth will depend largely on the quality of its transportation
infrastructure. To continue its economic growth, the Northeast Mega-region will need to provide
expanded capacity for intercity travel. Highways and airports cannot provide this capacity in a
manner that meets the goals of the New York State Climate Action Plan. Dramatically increasing
intercity rail capacity in the Northeast Mega-region, and reducing trip times in the process, could
achieve increased mobility, economic growth, energy security, and GHG emissions reductions.
Preliminary data and analysis conducted by the Regional Plan Association suggests that a
“California-style high speed rail” in the Northeast and Empire Corridors could shift 24 percent and
17 percent of passengers from air travel to rail, respectively.
New York State should continue to aggressively work with other Northeast States to undertake a
major investment study of the impact of high speed rail on the Northeast and Empire Corridors.
This study would forecast the economic development benefits of high speed rail on city pairs
within the Northeast, changes in regional air space, GHG benefits, and mode shift toward rail.
A Federal Advocacy Program
Many actions to reduce emissions would best occur at the federal level. New York State advocacy
for these changes will be most effective in concert with other states. New York State should
advocate for a stronger federal program for LDV standards to significantly increase market
penetration of zero-GHG vehicles (see TLU-1). As enumerated in the 2009 New York State
Energy Plan, a new federal funding formula is needed within the next surface transportation
funding bill to provide the correct incentives to states. There also needs to be significant federal
investment in new low-GHG transportation modes, and an increase in federal funds for transit, rail
and other modes that reduce GHG emissions. New York State should advocate for a diversification
of the portfolio of revenue supporting the federal surface transportation program for a healthy
transition to a low-carbon system. A federal advocacy partnership with other states could also
address the need for streamlining the process to secure federal approval to expand transit systems,
and linking the award of federal funds for major transportation system expansion to land use plans
that support GHG emissions reduction.
Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative analysis of this suite of policy options was not undertaken.

10

Ibid, page 8.
7-32

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
•

These are policies believed to be best designed and implemented on a multi-state basis. In
some cases, the interconnected nature of the regional system (e.g., highways, trucking, and fuel
markets) is the main impetus for a regional approach. For other policies, implementation on a
regional basis could minimize any competitive disadvantages for New York. A regional
approach may be necessary to reduce leakage. Also, a policy may need more research and
analysis of likely outcomes, and this research would be most informative if it occurs for several
states.

•

Successful implementation of the policies described here would bring a range of co-benefits
including reduction of other pollutant emissions, the provision of additional transportation
choices, the reduction of traffic congestion, and more sustainable land use patterns.

•

The policy options presented here are linked to many of the other options presented, especially
TLU-7 (transit), TLU-8 (freight), and TLU-4 (fueling infrastructure).

7-33

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 8
Power Supply and Delivery Mitigation
Sector Vision for a Low-Carbon Future
New York will have a safe, reliable, diverse, and extremely low-emitting electric power system
that meets the needs of all its citizens and accommodates the widespread conversion of buildings
and transportation from fossil fuel to electricity. The state will meet its energy needs in a manner
that maximizes societal benefits, minimizes societal costs and avoids imposing an undue burden
on any community.
More specifically, New York’s electric power system will have the following characteristics:
•

Electric generation mix: New York’s electricity will be generated by an optimal mix of
renewable generation—both central station and distributed—complemented by safe nuclear
power and fossil fuel-fired power plants that safely and permanently capture and sequester
carbon dioxide (CO2). Fossil-fired units existing today will have been retired, replaced with
renewables or nuclear power, or repowered using carbon capture and sequestration (CCS)
technologies.

•

Power transmission and distribution: Transmission and distribution facilities will have
been upgraded to reduce line losses and expanded to move electricity from new clean
generation sources to the areas where demand exists.

•

Energy storage: Centrally located energy storage systems (such as pumped storage,
compressed air and flywheel), as well as batteries and other distributed storage technologies,
will make it possible for variable renewable energy resources to meet system needs around
the clock and will promote system reliability by helping to meet load-following, reserve
capacity and frequency response needs.

•

Demand management: Renewable distributed generation, energy storage, and smart grid
technologies will enable New York’s utilities to reduce or manage demand for grid-based
electricity. In particular, smart grid technology allows sophisticated management of energy
demand: it enables consumers to function as energy storage facilities and generators, helps
minimize the disparity between base load and peak demand on the grid, and facilitates use of
renewable resources whose energy output varies with weather conditions or by season.

•

Adapting to climate change: The electric power system will be reliable in part because
utilities have anticipated and counteracted the impacts of climate change on electric
generation, transmission, and consumption. (Examples of such impacts are higher peak
electricity loads and accelerated degradation of critical system components from warmer
temperatures, or changes in availability and predictability of renewable energy resources due
to changes in hydrology, wind patterns and solar incidence.)

8-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Overview of GHG Emissions
The Power Supply and Delivery (PSD) sector includes greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from
the combustion of fossil fuels for the generation of electricity, the transmission and distribution
of electricity, and the combustion of municipal waste at waste-to-energy facilities in New York.
This includes both imported and New York-based generation. Electricity generation accounts for
the vast majority of these emissions, representing 95 percent of New York’s total PSD sector
emissions in 2008. Total GHG emissions from the PSD sector are expected to represent 23
percent of New York’s total consumption-based emissions in 2008 (Figure 8-1).
Figure 8-1. New York State Power Supply and Delivery Emissions, 2008

2008 Power Supply & Delivery Greenhouse Gas Emissions
(Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent)

Net Imports
of Electricity
9 MMtCO2e
Electricity
Distribution
1 MMtCO2e

Electricity
Generation
47 MMtCO2e

Municipal Waste
Combustion
2 MMtCO2e

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Note: ‘Electricity Distribution’ refers to emissions of sulfur hexafluoride.

Electricity Generation Fuel Mix
Electricity is generated using a variety of fuels in New York. The relative generation by fuel
source in 2008 is shown in Figure 8-2. This mix of generation types has changed over time. In
1990, petroleum and coal represented 42 percent of the total generation by gigawatt-hours
(GWh). By 2008, this had dropped to 14 percent, with natural gas (up 10 percent), hydro (up 4
percent), nuclear (up 9 percent) and imports (up 11 percent) making up most of the difference.

8-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-2. New York State Electric Generation by Type of Fuel, 2008

1

GWh = gigawatt-hour; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

This shifting of the fuel mix away from high-GHG fossil fuels to low-GHG fuels has resulted in
an overall decline in emissions from this sector, even though total generation has increased. It is
illustrated in Figure 8-3, showing the carbon intensity of electricity generated and sold (including
imports) between 1990 and 2008, and expected using the reference case forecast through 2030.
Over the 18-year period between 1990 and 2008 generation increased 17.5 percent, while GHG
emissions associated with generation, including imports, declined by 16.2 percent.

1

In New York State, the accounting convention for pumped storage works as follows: Generation
required for pumping is included in the net energy for load total. More specifically, the electricity
required for pumping water to a higher elevation is not deducted from the net energy for load value for
hydroelectric plants, while the generation produced by pumped storage is reported separately as a positive
value. In terms of tracking total amount of generation for load, the approach is fully equivalent to the
approach where net generation for pumped storage is negative.

8-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-3. Historical and Forecasted Carbon Intensity for New York State Power
Supply and Delivery, 1990–2030

GWh = gigawatt-hour; CO2e = carbon dioxide equivalent.

Roles of Imports and Emissions Accounting
New York has historically been a net importer of electricity. Electricity imports have been
relatively small compared to total consumption but have increased from about 4,519 GWh in
1990 to about 23,900 GWh in 2008. Absent the implementation of new policies, imports are
expected to increase to about 11 percent of total consumption in 2022 and remain at that level
through 2030. In 2008, the emissions per GWh for imports were about 12 percent higher than the
emissions per GWh for in-state generation.
There are two generally accepted methods to account for emissions associated with electricity
generation from imports and exports. The consumption method includes emissions associated
with all electricity consumed within the state regardless of where it is generated. The production
method includes all emissions from electricity generated within the state regardless of where it is
consumed. The development of the inventory and forecast of historical and forecasted GHG
emissions in New York includes both methods but the consumption accounting method is used
for the purpose of attributing both emissions and emissions reductions to New Yorkers.
Another accounting question has to do with direct emissions versus full fuel cycle emissions. In
the case of electricity generation, direct emissions are those associated with the end use or
combustion of the fuel. Full fuel cycle emissions include the direct emissions but also include the
emissions associated with the extraction, processing, and transportation of the fuel. Both
methods have been used in this study and analysis in the Appendices compares the two results.

8-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recent Actions to Promote Energy Independence
New York’s innovation and leadership in the field of clean energy production and use goes back
decades and includes the renewable portfolio standard, programs funded by the systems benefit
charge, the net metering law, decoupled tariffs, a host of energy efficiency programs, and the
creation of the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, which remains a
model for other states. The precedent-setting Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), the
only GHG cap-and-trade program currently operating in North America, was the result of a New
York State initiative.
In his State of the State Address on January 7, 2009, Governor David A. Paterson announced his
proposal for a “45 by 15” plan to reduce electricity consumption by 15 percent and provide 30
percent of the remaining electricity demand through renewable energy resources by 2015. This
standard requires 30 percent of the state's electricity to be supplied from renewable energy
sources by 2015 and provides financial incentives to support development of renewable energy
sources. The renewable portfolio standard has supported 34 large-scale renewable projects
(mostly wind) and approximately 330 customer-sited projects. New York is one of 27 states to
use a renewable portfolio standard to drive a transition to renewable sources of electricity.
The state program to reduce energy consumption has a goal of reducing power demand 15
percent from forecasted levels by 2015 through energy efficiency. It includes eliminating a key
conservation disincentive by decoupling utility profits from the amount of energy being
consumed (this step is already underway), strengthening efficiency standards for appliances and
buildings, and addressing New York's largest energy consumer—State government. When fully
funded, this program is expected to provide more than $4 billion in benefits to customers, along
with thousands of jobs to support energy efficiency programs, such as retrofitting outdated and
inefficient residential, commercial, and industrial properties and installing new energy-efficient
equipment.
As described in detail in Chapter 3, Inventory and Forecast, New York’s long-standing
leadership has contributed to New Yorkers having a dramatically lower carbon “footprint” than
the average American. Figure 8-4 shows a comparison between the historical U.S. and New
York GHG emissions per capita.

8-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-4. U.S. and New York Emissions per Capita

GHG = greenhouse gas; tCO2e = metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

This progress is reflected in the reference case forecast of future emissions, which assumes past
efforts will remain in place but no further actions are taken to reduce emissions. The reference
case does not, however, assume that New York will achieve the full 15 percent reduction in
electricity use established in the 45 by 15 goal. To be conservative, the reference case adopts the
Reliability Needs Assessment 2008 forecast of a 27 percent achievement toward the 15 by 15
demand reduction portion of the goal. The policy scenarios developed by the technical work
group assumed that new policies would build from the full 45 by 15 goal, so that proposed new
policies initiatives do not take credit for the impacts of recent actions.

Power Supply and Delivery Emission Trends
In the absence of any additional mitigation efforts in the future, GHG emissions from New
York’s PSD sector are expected to decline and then return to roughly 2008 levels of 58 million
metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MMtCO2e) by 2030.
Figure 8-5 shows the historical and forecasted emissions from power supply and delivery in New
York from 1990 through 2030. Note that since this is direct emissions, nuclear, hydro, and
renewables are not included. The figure shows that although there has been a decline in electric
sector emissions since 1990, assuming no new GHG reduction measures are enacted in the future
it is expected that beginning around 2012 total emissions will rise, largely through the increased
use of natural gas.

8-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-5. New York, State Historical and Forecasted Electricity Supply Sector
Emissions by Source Type, 1990–2030 (2009–2030 forecasted)

Million Metric Tons CO2 Equivalent

70
60
50
Electricity Distribution (SF6)
40

Waste Combustion
Imports

30

Natural Gas Generation
Petroleum Generation

20

Coal Generation
10
0

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. SF6 = sulfur hexafluoride.

Relative to total forecasted emissions from all sectors, emissions from the PSD sector are
expected to remain about the same, going from 23 percent of total emissions in 2008 to 21
percent of total emissions forecasted in 2030.
Also of interest is the demand for electricity. Figure 8-6 translates Figure 8-5 into the demand
sectors in New York. All sectors in New York are assumed to generate emissions based upon the
GWh each consumes, so this graph assumes that the mix of sources of generation are identical
for each demand sector.

8-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-6. New York, State Historical and Forecasted Power Supply and Delivery
Sector Emissions by Demand Sector, 1990–2030 (2009–2030 forecasted)

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

The forecasts indicate that industrial sector emissions in the reference case are expected to
continue a slow decline while commercial sector emissions are expected to grow by 24 percent
between 2008 and 2030. Over the same period residential electricity consumption-related
emissions are expected to decline 17 percent. Demand sector contributions to total electricity
demand emissions would therefore shift between sectors as indicated in Figure 8-7.

8-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-7. Electricity Generation Emissions Demand by Sector, 2008 and 2030

Overview of Policy Options and Estimated Impacts

Building a near-zero carbon electricity sector is the foundation of New York’s transition to a
low-carbon economy. New York already obtains more than 50 percent of its electricity from
essentially carbon-free sources, including nuclear and hydroelectric and other renewable power.
But for New York to achieve its goal of reducing GHG emissions 80 percent by 2050, close to
100 percent of New York’s electricity will need to come from low-carbon sources—sources with
near zero-carbon emissions—by 2050. Furthermore, as the use of carbon-intensive fossil fuels in
the transportation and buildings sectors is phased out or reduced substantially, New York will
need an adequate supply of low-carbon electricity to power those sectors. Therefore, over the
next 40 years, New York will need to replace most of the existing fossil fuel-fired sources of
electricity—coal, gas and oil-fired power plants—with low-carbon sources of power, including
renewable, nuclear and possibly fossil fuel-fired plants equipped with CCS.
Fortunately, New York has a number of policies in place that begin this needed transformation.
The Public Service Commission (PSC) recently approved expanding the State’s renewable
portfolio standard (RPS) to 30 percent by 2015. If coupled with the 30 percent of power
currently provided by nuclear power plants, New York would have an electricity grid that is
powered 60 percent by renewable or other low-carbon sources of electricity by 2015. New York
is also a member of RGGI, a regional program to cap and reduce power plant emissions 10
percent below historic levels by 2018. While these existing programs provide a good start on
building the low-carbon power sector, they are insufficient by themselves.
Therefore, a number of policy options should be considered to achieve this transition to a lowcarbon electricity sector while maintaining the reliability of the electricity supply. In general,
these policies fit into three categories: (1) policies that promote renewable energy and other low
carbon energy sources, (2) policies to reduce carbon emissions from new and existing fossil fuelfired power facilities, and (3) complementary policies that maintain the viability of an electric

8-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

grid that relies increasingly on renewable sources of energy and supports electrification of the
transportation system. These options will be evaluated further through integrated analysis.
Three policies will be responsible for most of the emission reductions from the electricity sector:
•

The primary policy for achieving emission reductions in the relatively short term is the
extension and expansion of the State’s existing RPS. One option would be to substantially
expand (more than double) the amount of electricity that is provided by new renewable
energy by 2030, including deploying off-shore wind energy and solar energy. In addition to
an expanded RPS, this policy would include complementary measures providing the early
support needed to bring low-carbon renewable sources on line. (PSD-2)

•

Another policy to consider is the implementation of a low-carbon portfolio standard (LCPS)
that will build on the RPS, requiring regulated utilities and other load-serving entities to
procure an increasing amount of low-carbon energy—renewables, appropriately sited
nuclear, and fossil energy with CCS. This policy will initially supplement the RPS, requiring
load-serving entities (LSEs) to provide an increment of low-carbon power beyond the
renewable power attributable to the RPS. Eventually, after 2030, when CCS and new nuclear
power may be more commercially viable, the LCPS can potentially supplant the RPS. (PSD6a)

•

National and regional action is needed to fully address climate change. Therefore, the State
should work with its regional partners to build upon and strengthen the RGGI program.
These joint efforts may result in expanding RGGI into a multi-sector cap-and-invest program
that caps and reduces carbon emissions region wide, sets a price on carbon emissions, and
invests proceeds from allowance auctions in building the clean energy economy in New
York. Ultimately, New York would benefit by a national cap on GHG emissions but, until
Congress acts, a stronger RGGI can serve as the model or foundation for a strong national
carbon reduction program in addition to helping to achieve New York’s climate goals. (PSD6b)

It is worth noting that there is considerable interaction and policy overlap among the policy
options identified. State policymakers would need to design and implement the policies that are
selected in an efficient manner that takes account of the potential interactions between the
policies.
In addition to the policies described above, other policies intended to reduce emissions from all
new and existing power plants are proposed for further consideration. PSD-1 and PSD-10 work
in unison to facilitate the siting of new lower-carbon power-generating facilities in New York.
PSD-1 would require the enactment of a new, fuel neutral siting process for new plants, while
PSD-10 includes a provision that all new plants sited in New York meet a GHG emission
standard that is based on the emissions level of modern, efficient natural gas-fired plants.
Together, these two policies would provide for siting new generating facilities in New York in a
manner that is consistent with achieving the State’s GHG reduction goals. Regarding existing
plants, PSD-8 seeks to reduce emissions by requiring all existing plants to meet comparable
emission standards after 2030 and providing incentives to encourage the repowering or
replacement of such plants with more efficient, lower-emitting technology earlier than 2030.

8-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Collectively, these policies would ensure that all fossil-fired plants—existing now or built in the
future—would have relatively low emissions by 2030.
Other policies are necessary to ensure that an electricity grid that relies increasingly on
renewable and other low-carbon power sources continues to provide electricity in a reliable
manner. PSD-4 recommends upgrades to the electricity distribution system to enable more
reliance on distributed renewable energy sources and increased use of electric vehicles; a key
recommendation of this policy is the continued development and deployment of smart grid
technologies. PSD-5 recommends modernization of the electricity transmission network to
enable the efficient transmission of renewable and other low-carbon energy from the point of
generation to where the demand for electricity exists. PSD-3 recognizes the importance of energy
storage in maintaining the reliability of an electricity grid that relies increasingly on variable,
renewable sources of electricity.
Finally, PSD-9 recommends that continued investment in research, development, demonstration
and deployment is needed to achieve the transition to a low-carbon power sector. Although many
of the technologies needed to achieve the transition to a low-carbon electricity sector have been
identified, continued research and development—at the federal, tate and commercial levels—will
lead to technological advances that will enhance New York’s ability to meet the challenge of
building a clean energy economy in a cost-effective manner.
These policy options will help to achieve the transformation of New York’s electricity sector in a
manner that is consistent with the vision of a low carbon New York, in which electricity will be
supplied by low carbon renewables, appropriately-sited nuclear power, and fossil-fired plants
with CCS. In the near term, the deployment of renewables will be facilitated by the RPS and
other renewables policies described in PSD-2, as well as the LCPS and cap-and-invest policies.
In the longer run, as existing baseload fossil-fired plants are retired, new nuclear plants are
expected to play an important role in New York’s electricity sector, in addition to fossil-fired
plants equipped with CCS. Figure 8-8 presents the proposed sequencing of policies in time,
showing that a number of policies could be implemented immediately and that some could be
phased-out based on successful implementation of new policy mechanisms.

8-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 8-8. Power Supply and Delivery Policy Options Timeline

LCPS = low-carbon portfolio standard; PSD = power supply and delivery; RPS = renewable portfolio standard.

Although New York will rely on the federal government to provide most of the substantial
financial support and loan guaranties that new nuclear plants currently require, it should be
prepared to facilitate the siting of nuclear plants that receive such financial support. Likewise,
when substantial federal investment in CCS research and development yields commercial-scale
CCS projects, New York should be prepared to site such projects in New York. A number of
policies support these goals, including the siting processes of PSD-1 and the emission standards
of PSD-10. Most importantly, the LCPS will create a fertile market for nuclear power and CCS
(as well as renewables) and will lead utilities and other LSEs to enter into long term contracts for
low carbon power.
In further developing, designing, and implementing the policies that are selected, the State will
need to continue to preserve the reliability of the electricity system and strive to minimize costs
while maximizing benefits. In the context of planning for a New York energy future with greatly
constrained emissions of GHGs, it is important that the State review carefully the current design
of the structure of the electricity markets (energy, capacity, and ancillary service markets) to see
if there are ways to improve their overall efficiency and effectiveness. In addition, the State
should continue to assess the reliability of the electricity system as it designs and implements the
policies selected, many of which will constitute transformative changes in the way in which
electricity is generated and used. To support that process, the State should urge the New York
Independent System Operator to include 20-year sensitivity analyses in its Comprehensive
Reliability Planning Process/Reliability Needs Assessment that incorporate supply strategies

8-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

recommended herein as well as load-altering policies in the transportation and land use (TLU)
and residential, commercial/institutional, and industrial (RCI) sectors.
Figure 8.9 Power Supply and Delivery Policy Options

8-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy Scenario Quantification Summary Table

GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Policy
No.

Policy Option
2020

2030

Total
2011–2030

Net Present
Value:
Cost/Savings
(Million
2005$)

Net
Cost/Savings
per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

PSD-2

Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)
and Incentives for Grid-Based
Renewable Generation

2.8

7.9

65

$2,200

$34

PSD-4

Distribution System Upgrades

0.3

0.8

6.3

-$420

-$66

PSD-6

Low-Carbon Portfolio Standard
(LCPS): High Penetration of
Renewables

7.3

29

220

$2,100

$10

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; EV = electric vehicle; GHG = greenhouse gas;
MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; N/A = not applicable.
Negative values represent savings.
The numbering used to denote the above policy recommendations is for reference purposes only; it does not reflect
prioritization among these important policy recommendations. The policy numbers that appear in this table are not
consecutive because they reflect only those policies for which quantification has been completed, and not all policies
are amenable to quantification.

Figure 8-10. Estimates of Cost and GHG Emissions Reductions for PSD Policy
Options.

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO2e / Year)

40

30

LCPS: High Renewables Penetration

20

10

RPS & Grid‐Based Renewable
Generation
Distribution System Upgrades

0

‐100

‐80

‐60

‐40

‐20

0

20

40

60

Net Savings

Net Cost
Dollar Per Metric Ton CO 2e Avoided

NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

8-14

80

100

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

INCENTIVES for GRID-BASED RENEWABLE GENERATION (PSD-2)

Policy Summary
This policy promotes the development of low-carbon renewable energy resources in New York
over the period from 2015–2030 by increasing incentives and removing existing barriers for
grid-connected renewable energy resources. This policy is intended particularly to increase
investment in and development of in-state renewable energy resources such as wind (both
onshore and offshore), solar photovoltaic (PV), low-carbon sustainable biomass/biofuels, and
others.
This policy option would increase the amount of new renewable power from approximately 10
million MWh in 2015 (when the current RPS of 30 percent by 2015 is fully implemented) to 23–
24 million MWh by 2030. Assuming that the energy efficiency policies developed by the RCI
Technical Work Group keep electricity demand from growing in New York, this policy could
increase the renewable portion of New York’s electricity supply to approximately 40 percent by
2030. Specified targets would be identified for both offshore wind and grid-based solar power.
The State could achieve these goals through a variety of policy mechanisms, starting with the
continuation and expansion of an RPS program using funds raised through charges on utility
bills. Achieving the goals outlined above, including the diversity in renewable resources, may
benefit from supplementing existing funding mechanisms with other incentives, such as power
purchase agreements, whereby the New York Power Authority and Long Island Power Authority
purchase power or renewable attributes from renewable energy providers, and renewable energy
payments (also known as feed-in tariffs) for specific categories of smaller renewable energy
projects. These incentives can be designed to assist in the implementation of developing and
emerging technologies. The State should continue to monitor changes in the price differential
between grid-based solar power, offshore wind, and other renewable sources so that incentives
can be adjusted in accordance with their economic and technical viability.
Additionally, in order to further encourage these clean energy resources, New York State should
examine any remaining barriers that prevent market-based development of utility-scale
renewable energy generation projects. Possible policy approaches include: (1) specific standards
and fees for interconnecting renewable energy resources into the grid, (2) establishment of
renewable energy development zones that allow for concentration of transmission grid upgrades
to efficiently deliver renewable power to end-user consumers, and (3) specific regional siting
policies for technologies such as offshore wind. Coordinated studies could identify additional
barriers to development and design strategies to alleviate them.

Quantification
The Technical Work Group explored two scenarios 2 with different renewable penetration levels
(13,000 GWh and 14,000 GWh), above and beyond the approximately 10,000 GWh goal

2

Additional scenarios were studied. These results are in the summary table on page 8-14.

8-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

established under the current 30 percent RPS program to be achieved by 2015. To promote
diversity, the 13,000–14,000 GWh of new grid-based renewable resources could be required to
include at least 3,000 GWh of offshore wind projects and at least 1,000–2,000 GWh of gridbased solar power.
The order of magnitude impacts of the Net Present Value and Cost-Effectiveness metrics for
both scenarios were essentially the same. Therefore, the higher renewable penetration scenario is
included here, which assumes the addition of the following renewable generation by 2030: 2,000
GWh of biomass co-firing, 2,000 GWh of solar PV, 7,000 GWh of onshore wind, and 3,000
GWh of offshore wind. The other scenario may be found in the full Technical Work Group
policy option document.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by net cost per avoided emissions – 2005$/tCO2e) for the policy
scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

7.9

65

Net Present
Value Cost
(Million 2005$)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

$2,200

$34

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Special Considerations
•

In the next two decades, this renewables incentive policy will be the primary mechanism to
facilitate the development of the renewable resources needed to move New York to a lower
carbon power sector. Over time, this policy could be phased out in favor of programs such as
the low-carbon portfolio standard and an expanded regional cap-and-invest program.

•

The implementation of some GHG reduction programs at the federal level (e.g., RPS, capand-invest) may require that New York modify its RPS implementation and administration
strategies.

•

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has exclusive jurisdiction under the
Federal Power Act to regulate rates and conditions of sales for resale of electric energy in
interstate commerce. The States are pre-empted from setting wholesale power rates that
exceed utility avoided costs. New York’s utility-based incentive programs for supply from
renewable sources will need to be developed in compliance with this federal requirement.
(Source: FERC, Order on Petitions for Declaratory Order, issued July 15, 2010).

•

A substantial amount of pre-development work (e.g., engineering studies and surveys) is
necessary to foster market introduction of a broad range of promising renewable energy
technologies in New York, including advanced biomass, tidal, and off-shore wind
technologies. Meeting electric demand in a manner that satisfies climate protection goals will
also require continued advances in the performance of current and emerging renewable

8-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

generation technologies. PSD-9 (Research and Development) includes policy initiatives
focused on ways in which New York can help address these needs.
•

Consistent with other PSD policies, a thorough assessment should be conducted to evaluate
the energy storage, transmission, and distribution requirements that will support the
expanded use of renewable power generation technologies in a reliable manner.

•

The investment of funds in support of this goal is likely to create large numbers of jobs
installing and maintaining renewable energy systems. Early investment in emerging
technologies will contribute to lowering the price of such technologies so that they can be
more competitive in the future.

•

Additional analyses will be conducted in the next phase of the Climate Action Plan process
to separately quantify the potential benefits and costs of utilization of biomass for application
in the PSD sector.

GHG REDUCTION MARKET MECHANISMS: CAP-AND-INVEST AND
LOW-CARBON PORTFOLIO STANDARD (PSD-6)

Policy Summary
This policy option identifies two market-based policy mechanisms that could provide strong
economic incentives for private sector investment in low-carbon emitting sources of energy and
other low-carbon technologies: (1) a low-carbon portfolio standard, which would require all
providers of electricity to obtain a portion of the electricity they sell from low-carbon energy
sources; and (2) a cap-and-invest program, which would be implemented on a regional basis and
could include the power sector and other sectors within its coverage.
Low-Carbon Portfolio Standard (PSD-6a)
Under this policy, utilities and other LSEs would be required to provide a specified portion of
their electricity sold from low-carbon sources (renewable, nuclear, fossil with carbon capture and
sequestration). Currently, approximately 50 percent of the electricity generated in New York
would qualify as low-carbon. That portion would have to grow to close to 100 percent by 2050.
The policy would likely be implemented through low-carbon electricity credits that would be
sold to LSEs by developers of low-carbon electricity. Imports could be treated the same as power
generated within New York. Implementation of this policy would provide strong market signals
for the development of renewable energy and other low-carbon sources of electricity.
Cap-and–Invest (PSD-6b)
New York should support the establishment of a strong federal cap-and-trade program that
places a national price on carbon emissions. In the absence of a federal policy, New York should
build on the successful RGGI effort and work with its regional partners in RGGI to construct a
cap-and-trade, or cap-and-invest, program that would cover large stationary emission sources in
addition to the electricity-generating sources included in RGGI. The program would be designed

8-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

to reduce emissions from the covered sectors by approximately 2.2 percent per year so that the
2050 cap is 80 percent below today’s levels. It would also provide a source of revenues for clean
energy investments that contribute to economic development and job growth in New York by
providing that all proceeds from the auction of allowances are reinvested in complementary
programs to deploy energy efficiency, renewable energy and other low-carbon technologies or
policies. Steps would have to be taken to address leakage/imports of electricity from sources in
uncapped jurisdictions.
At this time, RGGI covers only the power sector but this policy recommends that consideration
be given to including industrial sources in the program as well as fuels used in the transportation
and building sectors. The program would be designed to mitigate impacts on energy-intensive
industries that are subject to interstate or international competition.3 As an alternative to
including the emissions associated with transportation and building fuels in the cap, a carbon fee
could be applied to the use of those fuels at a per ton carbon level that is comparable to, or based
on, the clearing price for allowances used in the cap-and-invest program. Placing a carbon price
on building and transportation fuels would provide an incentive for energy efficiency and lowcarbon renewable sources of energy and a source of revenues to fund some of the policy
initiatives discussed in the RCI and TLU sections of this report. In addition, if the scope of the
cap-and-invest program is expanded beyond RGGI, offsets should be expanded beyond those
available under the current RGGI program if the offsets meet the fundamental requirements of
RGGI and other credible emission reduction programs (the offsets must be real, additional,
verifiable, enforceable, and permanent).

Quantification
Cap and Invest
The cap-and-invest policy will be quantified after integrated cost curves are completed in the
next stage of the planning process.
Low-Carbon Portfolio Standard
The Technical Work Group explored several scenarios for achieving a possible LCPS goal where
75% of the electricity generated in New York would come from low-carbon sources in 2030.
Three scenarios that bound the analysis are described below. The other scenarios may be found
in the full Technical Work Group policy options document. 4
The first scenario focused on achieving the goal with a high penetration of new renewable
generation. It assumed the addition of 9,000 GWh of lower-carbon sustainable wood and other
biomass, 10,000 GWh of solar PV, 16,287 GWh of onshore wind, and 9,198 GWh of offshore
wind generation by 2030. The GHG reduction potential, total cost, or savings (as measured by

3

The recommendation to include industry sources in the cap-and-invest program would not conflict with
the RCI Technical Work Group’s recommendation of voluntary efforts only if measures are included in
the cap-and-invest program to protect energy-intensive industries, such as free allocation of allowances.
4

Additional scenarios were studied. These results are in the summary table on page 8-14.

8-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

net present value), and cost-effectiveness (as measured by 2005$/tCO2e) for the first policy
scenario quantified by the Technical Work Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

29

220

Net Present
Value Cost
(Million 2005$)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

$2,100

$10

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

A variation of this scenario, which supplements renewables with energy efficiency as a lowcarbon supply-side resource, results in similar reductions at a lower cost per ton avoided of $4.
The second scenario assumed that the 2030 goal would be met with a mix of renewable
generation and new coal with CCS. It assumed the addition of 7,274 GWh of coal integrated
gasification combined-cycle technology with CCS, 9,000 GWh of wood and other biomass,
3,333 GWh of solar PV, 16,287 GWh of onshore wind, and 8,590 GWh of offshore wind
generation by 2030. The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net
present value), and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the third policy scenario
quantified by the Technical Work Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

28

200

Net Present
Value Cost
(Million 2005$)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

$2,200

$11

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

A third scenario assumed that the 2030 goal would be met with renewable generation and a
greater use of new nuclear energy. It assumed the addition of 30,748 GWh of nuclear (i.e.,
generation associated with 3 units of 1,300 MW each), 3,442 GWh of wood and other biomass,
3,333 GWh of solar PV, 5,429 GWh of onshore wind, and 1,533 GWh of offshore wind
generation by 2030. The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net
present value), and cost effectiveness (as measured by 2005$/tCO2e) for this policy scenario are
presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

27

120

Net Present
Value Cost
(Million 2005$)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

$3,000

$24

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

8-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
•

The LCPS would build upon and could eventually supplant the RPS by 2030. The LCPS
would require LSEs to procure only the additional low-carbon power that is needed to
achieve the specified targets after consideration of existing renewable and other low-carbon
(nuclear) resources as well as renewables being developed by the RPS. After 2030, State
support in the form of the Main Tier RPS for central power could be discontinued, allowing
additional low-carbon power procurements by LSEs under the LCPS to drive the continued
development of the low-carbon electricity sector in New York.

•

The proposal for the State’s LSEs to provide a percentage of electricity to consumers from
low-carbon sources of generation will require further analyses, including impacts on the
State’s deregulated wholesale generation market and dispatch, potential increases in retail
electric prices for consumers, forecasts of available low-carbon electric supply sources
(including imports), and costs and requirements to maintain the reliability of the state’s
electric transmission and distribution system.

•

Design of the cap-and-invest program will need to address leakage of emissions. Among the
mechanisms to be used would be implementation of complementary measures to reduce
electricity demand and deploy renewable energy (including the RPS and LCPS), allocating a
portion of the allowances for free to sources in energy-intensive, competitive industries, and
including imported energy within the scope of the program. Regulating the carbon intensity
of electricity imported into the state would have to be implemented in a manner that complies
with the constitutional principles governing state regulation of interstate commerce.

•

In designing these programs, State policymakers will need to be mindful of the interactions
between the programs and their applicability to state power programs and customer classes.
Although further evaluation of the interactions will be needed, some preliminary conclusions
can be drawn. For example, implementing strong complementary measures directed at the
power sector, such as the LCPS and RPS, will have a tendency to reduce the cost of emission
allowances under the cap-and-invest program, thereby reducing the cost to New York
ratepayers. However, if other states participating in a regional cap-and-invest program do not
make similar investments, this benefit will be diluted, thereby raising the cost of the cap-andinvest program to New York. Therefore, New York would need to work with its partners in
the RGGI to seek deployment of similar programs in the other RGGI states and explore the
possibility of regional implementation of an LCPS. Another possible way of ensuring that
New York reaps the benefits of its other policies is to base the percentage allocation of
allowances that New York receives in a regional program on state emissions baselines that do
not consider the emission reductions that will result from other policies, such as
implementation of the LCPS, expanded RPS and other complementary measures.

•

Ideally, in the long term, the regional cap-and-invest program would transition into, or form a
part of, a national program that is enacted through legislation or regulation. In deliberations
over the design of a federal cap-and-trade program, New York should advocate for measures
to ensure that emission reductions achieved under an LCPS or other similar measures have
value when a federal cap is in place.

•

Achieving the goals of these two policies will require the implementation of other measures
recommended in the PSD chapter of this report, including energy storage (to enhance

8-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

reliability of a grid that relies increasingly on renewables), a siting process for new lowcarbon energy facilities and upgrade of electricity transmission and distribution systems. The
cap-and-invest program could provide a revenue stream to enable the funding of many of the
other policies recommended in this report.
•

Additional analyses will be conducted in the next phase of the Climate Action Plan process
to separately quantify the potential benefits and costs of utilization of biomass for application
in the PSD sector.

GENERATION INFRASTRUCTURE PERMITTING and SITING (PSD-1)

Policy Summary
The current siting process for power plant facilities is left to a patchwork of local and State
regulatory processes. An opportunity exists to re-create a more streamlined process for the siting
of power plants.
There are many components to consider in an authorization statute for power plant siting,
including:
•

A siting process that combines and coordinates numerous regulatory authorizations and
procedures into a single fuel- and technology-neutral approval process that provides greater
market certainty to developers and investors;

•

A time-certain framework for rendering a decision on an application;

•

A provision for the override of the application of local substantive legal requirements that are
unreasonably restrictive in view of factors specified in the statute;

•

An analysis of alternative sites similar to that required by State Environmental Quality
Review Act;

•

A finding and determination that the authorized generating facility minimizes and mitigates
predictable, significant, and adverse disproportionate environmental impacts, considering the
cumulative effect of emissions from other major facilities and the goal of reducing net
emissions or, at a minimum, avoiding increased pollution in communities that bear a
disproportionate burden of emissions;

•

Opportunities for extensive public involvement, including improved notice provisions, so as
to address environmental justice and other public concerns associated with the construction
and operation of the proposed electric generating facility;

•

Availability of intervenor funding, starting at the pre-application phase, for technical and
legal services.

Regarding carbon capture and sequestration, a regulatory and statutory framework should be
considered for the development and use of CCS technology. One aspect of such framework is to
amend the existing major transmission facility siting process (reflected in Article VII of the
8-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Public Service Law) to establish a mechanism for the review and siting of a captured carbon
transmission pipeline. In addition to this PSC-led activity, legislation could provide the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation with responsibility for CCS oversight,
including a review process for obtaining a carbon sequestration permit, the injection of captured
carbon into a reservoir, and the observation and monitoring of the carbon sequestration reservoir
and its buffer zone boundaries.

Quantification
This policy option has not been quantified.

Special Considerations
•

It will be challenging to balance the need for efficient and predictable permitting with
expanded opportunities for extensive public involvement, including improved notice
provisions, to address environmental justice and other public concerns associated with the
construction and operation of proposed electric generating facilities. This policy proposes a
revised process that serves both goals because unless progress is made in both areas it is
doubtful that sufficient support can be mustered to accomplish either.

•

A coordinated project review under the power plant siting law could result in greater
efficiency and lower costs for state agencies and municipalities from not having to conduct
individual and possibly duplicative review processes. Also, permitting costs should be
reduced with the use of a shorter and more certain regulatory process. This should result in
lower costs to the developer. In addition, a more predictable permitting process might
encourage a larger number of projects to be proposed, affording the state a wider range of
future generation options.

•

The concern expressed by certain stakeholders that a siting bill could be used to site highemitting facilities contrary to the 80 by 50 goal will be addressed by the implementation of
PSD-10, which will require that all new or rebuilt power plants meet stringent emission
standards for GHG emissions. Consideration could also be given to providing expedited
treatment in the siting process to low-carbon and environmentally beneficial repowering
proposals.

NEW FACILITY EMISSIONS STANDARDS and NUCLEAR POWER (PSD-10)

Policy Summary
In the next 20 years, New York should integrate new baseload fossil fuel-fired generation into
the generation mix in a manner that is consistent with maintaining reliability and reducing
system-wide GHG emissions. To reach the goal, this policy option supports the development of a
low-carbon emission standard aimed at ensuring that the development of new power generating
units contributes to the reduction of the State’s GHG emissions. This standard would require that
new or reconstructed fossil fuel-fired electric generating units that produce power for sale in
New York and new power purchase agreements for delivery of electricity into the New York
8-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Independent System Operator (NYISO) control area would achieve CO2 emission rates (pounds
of CO2/MWh gross) that are based on the best available operating technology. For baseload
units, the standard would be set at a level that can be achieved by combined cycle natural gasfired technology. Gas turbines that are used for peaking purposes would be subject to a higher
rate. In either case, the rates would allow for use of oil as a back-up fuel, consistent with
reliability guidelines. In accordance with this proposed standard, new coal-fired power plants
should not be built until CCS is available. For future decades, the emission standards could be
revised based on the best available operating technology that arises in those periods.
Nuclear power plants currently play an important role of providing necessary baseload power in New
York’s electricity system. New York could strive to maintain the net installed capacity of power
from nuclear plants that can continue to operate in an appropriate location and safe manner
consistent with all environmental requirements and eventually replace the capacity of the units
that are not relicensed with new nuclear or other low-carbon baseload plants. In all cases, the
relicensing, replacement with new units at the same facilities, or the development of new nuclear
energy (or other zero GHG emitting base-load generation) facilities needs to be done in a safe
and environmentally sound manner. In addition to the traditional large-scale reactors,
opportunities may arise to site newer smaller scale units.

Quantification
This policy option has not been quantified.

Special Considerations
•

The goal of promoting the development and operation of power generation facilities that will
have zero- or very-low-carbon emissions is also promoted by the policy of developing an
LCPS for power plant emissions (PSD-6). In addition to promoting statewide emission
reductions, the instant policy—along with the siting policy (PSD-1)—will reduce the adverse
environmental impact of new facilities on particular communities.

•

The evolving role of the federal government is critical in the expansion of the nuclear
industry and creating the policies and mechanism(s) for long-term storage, reprocessing, or
neutralization of used nuclear fuel.

•

Currently, the two units at Indian Point are in the re-licensing process as their licenses expire
in 2013 and 2015. If these (or other) facilities are not relicensed, then plans for the siting or
expansion of new nuclear units (or other zero-GHG-emitting baseload generation) at new or
existing facilities would be needed eventually to attain the same level of power currently
provided by nuclear energy in the state.

8-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

EXISTING FOSSIL PLANTS (PSD-8)

Policy Summary
New York’s current fleet of fossil-fired plants includes plants—fired by coal or other fuels—
with relatively high rates of carbon emissions. The purpose of this policy is to reduce emissions
from these facilities by repowering and replacing existing fossil-fired facilities with more
efficient, lower-emitting and less carbon intense generators. This goal would be achieved
through a combination of incentives and emission standards.
Initially, the State would rely on market-based solutions to promote repowering, including: (1)
Request for Proposals open to repowered resources, regardless of technology; (2) market-based
credits (similar to the REC market); or (3) long-term contracts. The PSC could work with the
NYISO, the New York State Reliability Council, and market participants to identify fair and
cost-effective incentives for the repowering of facilities to modern, state-of-the-art generation.
Repowering would also be supported by the cap-and-invest program, as well as other marketbased and regulatory efforts.
Eventually, however, existing sources would have to meet emission standards that would be
applicable in 2030 after the above policies have been given a chance to work. These standards
could be based on the standards applicable to new sources in PSD-10 (based on the emissions of
natural gas-fired plants). Depending on the level of their emissions, existing sources would have
a number of options available to meet specified emission standards, including efficiency
upgrades, repowering with lower carbon fuels, co-firing of lower-carbon, sustainable biofuels,
and the use of CCS (when it becomes commercially available). Flexibility may be provided by
allowing the grouping or system-averaging of unit emissions to demonstrate compliance with
applicable emission limits.

Quantification
This policy option has not been fully quantified.

Special Considerations
•

The State should consider postponing the applicability of any performance standard to any
source that is, at the time of rule or regulation effectiveness, in contract for power sale until
the expiration of that existing contract.

•

Consideration could be given to incorporating incentives for repowering proposals that
reduce emissions of all relevant pollutants in the new facility siting process recommended by
PSD-1.

•

In developing and implementing the policy, the State should ensure that any incentives are
cost-effective and it should avoid providing incentives to plants that are not expected to
operate many years into the future.

•

Implementation of this policy is important to environmental justice communities that are
burdened inequitably by existing fossil fuel-fired plants.
8-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

DISTRIBUTION NETWORK UPGRADING INCLUDING EV and SMART GRID
INFRASTRUCTURE (PSD-4)

Policy Summary
The electric power distribution system represents the critical linkage between the high-voltage
transmission system and a wide variety of end-use consumer loads and functions as the injection
point for distributed generation. An effective and reliable interface must be maintained between
both systems as New York transitions to a low-carbon economy. The distribution system serves
as an enabling technology to allow for greater market penetration of customer-sited low-carbon
technologies (rooftop PV, electric vehicles [EVs]). Improved distribution monitoring,
diagnostics, and interactive communication systems would be necessary to realize carbon
reduction targets and concurrently maintain system integrity. Accurate monitoring of upstream
transmission system status and downstream end-use conditions in real-time represents an
essential component of the smart distribution network, and secure data exchange protocols would
need to be simultaneously implemented at both ends of the system. Smart distribution also
improves system reliability and can improve the efficient operation of distribution circuits with
voltage conservation and improved reactive power control. To accommodate high-penetration
EV charging, some upgrades to the distribution system at the local level involving distribution
transformers and customer service will be required. Stationary electrical storage may be
necessary to deploy fast charging of EVs without negative grid impacts.
The PSC has instituted a proceeding aimed at establishing a strategic vision and plan for
investing in smart grid technology for New York that will guide future research, development,
and demonstration in New York in support of the policy objectives stated herein. In addition, the
following initiatives should be pursued to support these policy goals:
•

Pilot projects should be undertaken to both quantify energy efficiencies from various
approaches to smart distribution and to establish best practices.

•

PSC rate cases could require regulated utilities to consider the use of smart grid distribution
technologies that would support the achievement of lower GHG emissions.

•

The New York State Smart Grid Consortium’s strategic roadmap should be used to guide
smart grid roll out.

•

Utilities regulated by the PSC could have load factor targets and incentives to implement
appropriate technologies to achieve them.

•

Develop and implement improved distribution circuit performance indices that better
incorporate distribution automation and/or smart grid operations.

•

New rate tariffs could be established that provide incentives to customers to improve their
power factor.

•

A workshop could be held annually with industry experts and stakeholders to conduct a smart
grid technology assessment.

8-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Quantification
Three policy areas were identified for quantification: (1) expanded use of smart meters, (2)
reduction of distribution system losses, and (3) smart charging of electric vehicles. The benefits
related to smart charging are being evaluated under TLU-4, Alternative Fuel Related Measures
and Infrastructure.
The literature suggests that smart grid deployment can result in very cost-effective emission
reductions under some circumstances. However, because costs and savings are both highly sitespecific, a reliable quantification of emission reductions and costs associated with extensive
deployment of smart grid technology in New York cannot be made at this time. The costeffectiveness of smart grid technology is being evaluated in an ongoing PSC proceeding that may
provide the basis for more precise quantification in the future.
The Technical Work Group also investigated the potential for distribution loss savings. These
savings can be accomplished in a number of ways, for instance, by upgrading transformers and
by reducing reactive power losses (installation of capacitors). The table below contains the
results of a quantification built upon a study conducted by the NYISO that estimates that it is
possible to improve distribution system losses by up to 30% (this would reduce current losses
from approximately 6 percent to 4 percent). 5 The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings
(as measured by net present value), and cost effectiveness (as measured by 2005$/tCO2e) for this
policy scenario are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.8

6.3

Net Present
Value Cost
(Million 2005$)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions
(2005$/tCO2e)

-$420

-$66

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
•

Substantial additions of electric vehicles and other technologies will require upgrades to the
distribution network. The geographical distribution of these technologies will have a large
influence on this matter. For instance, local concentrations of EVs may seriously strain the
distribution system, especially if they require fast charging. Many of these issues and
potential solutions were summarized by a cross-sector task force. 6

•

The policy will consider any/all unique circumstances associated with individual electric
service territories throughout New York including, but not limited to, geographic topology

5

Chao, H. and J. Adams (NYISO), Benefits of Reducing Electric System Losses, April 9, 2009, p. 17.

6

Report of the Cross-Sector Electric-Grid-Powered Vehicle Sub-group.

8-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

that may impact communications infrastructure, expected market adoption rates for electric
vehicles and market penetration of demand side resources.
•

The use of smart grid technologies provides customers with greater flexibility and resources
to manage energy demand and costs. Electricity system reliability is also enhanced with
smart grid technologies.

TRANSMISSION NETWORK UPGRADES (PSD-5)

Policy Summary
This policy option encourages and supports cost-effective transmission system improvements
that reduce GHG emissions while improving efficiency, satisfying electricity demand, and
maintaining reliable and secure system operations. It is expected that this policy would facilitate
the development of generation that would be influenced by other policies (PSD-2, PSD-6, PSD10, RCI policies, etc.)
The Technical Work Group focused on ways to encourage cost-effective transmission system
upgrades, expand transmission capacity, and reduce sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) emissions from
transmission-related equipment. It recommended that renewable energy and GHG emissions
policy goals be incorporated into existing and ongoing centralized system planning studies.
Through this, system planners may identify cost-effective upgrades to existing infrastructure
(including opportunities to incorporate smart grid technology) that reduce system losses and new
transmission that interconnects remotely-located clean energy resources to the power grid.
Utilizing existing rights-of-way should be encouraged to the extent practicable. The policy also
recommends that system planning studies identify areas or zones within the New York Control
Area that have high potential to provide clean energy, and then target these zones for
transmission expansion to accommodate clean resources.
The NYISO and PSC will need to develop regulatory mechanisms, market signals, and/or
incentives to encourage upgrades and interconnections that facilitate the State’s climate and
energy goals. This includes regulatory mechanisms that expedite decisions on cost recovery and
cost allocation for New York Transmission Owners (NYTO) that invest in loss-reducing
equipment and upgrades. In the Article VII process, PSC could give greater weight to a proposed
project’s contribution to state climate and energy policy goals in the determination of project
need.
To reduce the emissions of SF6 from transmission operations, the policy calls for all NYTOs to
sign on to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s SF6 Emission Reduction Partnership for
Electric Power Systems and set goals for reducing SF6 emissions, and to establish a New York
State working group including the NYTO and other stakeholders, to share best practices and
develop strategies to meet the Partnership’s goals. The State could also support the development
of environmental regulations, manufacturer incentives, and federal SF6 emissions performance
standards to encourage the use of environmentally-friendly equipment that limits emissions of

8-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

SF6, and encourage research and development programs to find ways to limit and/or replace SF6
technologies.

Quantification
This policy option has not been quantified.

Special Considerations
•

Siting of transmission projects can be complex and contentious due to regulatory issues at the
State and federal level, differing perspectives on the benefits and cost burdens, opposition at
the local level, and potential environmental and visual impacts.

•

There are transmission technologies—forecasting software for solar and wind resources,
energy storage technologies, etc.—that are in early stages of development. These
technologies, when technically and commercially viable, will be needed to facilitate largescale integration of variable renewable resources while maintaining high levels of reliability.
Technological developments will happen, but may not break through at the pace and/or scale
needed to meet the renewable energy goals of the Climate Action Plan. PSD-9, Research and
Development for Electric Energy Supply and Delivery, focuses on developing new sources
of renewable generation and developing mechanisms to enable the efficient and cost effective
delivery of electric energy.

•

Transmission expansion and interconnection intended to satisfy energy and climate policy
goals will be evaluated by developers and regulators on an economic basis before getting
approval. For example, the NYISO Congestion Assessment and Resource Integration Study
process requires a benefit-cost ratio higher than 1.0 before considering a project for cost
recovery through the tariff. Incorporating the benefits of meeting climate goals into a tariff,
like other changes to the NYISO tariff, will require stakeholder acceptance and FERC
approval. New projects must also be evaluated and approved by the PSC through the Article
VII process.

ENERGY STORAGE (PSD-3)

Policy Summary
To achieve the 80 by 50 goal and the benchmark interim goal of 40 by 30, while maintaining
electric system reliability, the State will need to move toward an extremely low-carbon
electricity sector. Achieving an extremely low-carbon electricity sector will, at a minimum,
require the successful implementation of two distinct sets of strategies: (1) a very substantial
increase in the use of mostly intermittent renewable sources of generation, as proposed in PSD-2,
Renewable Portfolio Standard and Incentives for Grid-Based Renewable Generation, and in RCI3, Renewable Energy Incentives; coupled with (2) a steady reduction in the use of fossil fuel
generation, as proposed in PSD-6, GHG Reduction Market Mechanisms, PSD-8, Existing Fossil
Plants Policies, and PSD-10, New Facility Emissions Standards and Nuclear Power.

8-28

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

One of the most important challenges that the state’s electric system faces is the need to assure
that system reliability is maintained. At present, balancing system load and supply conditions,
and addressing short and long term system disruptions, are addressed by calling on various loadfollowing fossil fuel generation plants and/or demand response for reduced load. One challenge
the State will face in meeting the 80 by 50 GHG reduction goal will be the need to find clean
energy substitutes for the set of fossil fuel generation facilities that are called upon to address
those circumstances. For example, the prospect of minute-to-minute rapid changes in the output
of the state’s generation mix remains likely while, at the same time, the types of fossil fuel
generation historically relied on to address fluctuations in demand may no longer be operating.
Energy storage—in its many forms—can be used to help ensure that the State will be in a
position to implement these strategies in ways that maximize the potential contribution of
intermittent renewable generation, maintain reliability at every level of the electric system, and
make full use of market efficiencies.7 Energy storage facilities of sufficient capacity as measured
in megawatts and total energy as measured in MWh, whose output may need to be called upon
for hours, days, weeks, or even months, as well as facilities that could respond to system changes
almost instantaneously but only briefly (labeled Limited Energy Storage Resources by the
NYISO), will likely be critical to support routinely reliable operation of the electric system and
to respond to system contingencies when and where they occur.
A thorough assessment should be conducted to evaluate the energy storage, transmission, and
distribution requirements that will support the expanded use of renewable power generation and
electric vehicle technologies in a reliable manner, for the 40 by 30 benchmark and the 80 by 50
goal. This should include an engineering and economic analysis, identification of institutional
barriers and financing strategies, and identification of New York-specific needs for technology
improvements. The expertise resident in both the New York Smart Grid Consortium and the
New York Battery and Energy Smart Technology Consortium will be valuable in this
assessment. In addition, given the significant need for fundamental improvement in Energy
Smart cost and performance, New York State should advocate for substantial and increased
federal investment in research and technology development.

Quantification
This policy option has not been quantified.

Special Considerations
•

At the transmission system level, increased use of pumped-storage hydro and the
introduction of compressed-air energy storage facilities (CAES), flywheels, and batteries
could be developed as an alternative to curtailing renewable generation for system stability
and to avoid choosing among renewable generation sources that would otherwise face

7

Energy storage will not be the only tool available. Shifting electricity usage to hours where excess
generation supply is available and demand curtailment, for example, are more efficient and cost effective
than any currently available means to store and later retrieve such energy and helps avoid the use of
inefficient peaking generation sources. Transmission and distribution system enhancements, as proposed
in PSD-4 and PSD-5, will also support this effort.

8-29

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

transmission constraints. As renewable energy supplants larger quantities of fossil energy,
the role of storage may transition to providing capacity and energy to compensate for sudden
changes in the output of wind and solar generation caused by short term weather changes.
While the state already has two large pumped storage facilities, studies will need to be
undertaken to identify other potentially feasible sites for additional large pumped-storage
facilities including options outside of New York’s borders. CAES facilities are an option, but
also require appropriate underground geologic structures (e.g., salt domes) and proximity to
both natural gas supply and transmission capacity. 8
•

At the distribution system level, storage facilities—primarily batteries—could provide
ancillary services and provide clean energy alternatives to generation facilities in load
pockets. Installation of local storage systems could also avoid the need to make potentially
more costly distribution system enhancements. Storage of delivered electricity in the forms
of ice systems for cooling and thermal storage for heating may also be effective technologies
to reduce peak demand while accommodating the cross-sector migration of building heating
and cooling loads.

•

There are institutional, regulatory, and financial barriers that must be overcome to facilitate
the expanded use of energy storage. For instance, an efficient regulatory mechanism needs to
be created to support the siting of facilities that use energy storage.

•

Although a number of energy storage technologies are currently available, additional
advanced energy storage systems will need to be developed to support the achievement of the
State’s GHG reduction goals. PSD-9 elaborates further on the research and development
activities that should be pursued to support these objectives.

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION NEEDS FOR THE POWER
SUPPLY AND DELIVERY SECTOR (PSD-9)

See Chapter 10 for a complete presentation of Research, Development, and Demonstration needs
for this sector.

8

As currently conceived, CAES facilities would utilize nighttime generation to inject air into an
appropriate storage structure and then during the day release the heated compressed air into a combustion
turbine, burning natural gas, to dramatically increase the combustion efficiency of the turbine. Thus, use
of natural gas in CAES facilities would need to be accounted for in the future emissions of the electricity
sector. As a future possible alternative, it would be appropriate to also consider the use of compressed air
energy storage without the use of fossil fuels.

8-30

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 9
Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management
Mitigation
Sector Vision for a Low-Carbon Future

The Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW) Technical Work Group, comprised of
stakeholders from government agencies, industry, academia, and nonprofit organizations,
developed visioning statements for the agriculture, forestry, and waste management sectors.

A Vision for New York State’s Agriculture Sector in 2050
A carbon-negative New York agricultural sector will help to meet the state’s food and fiber
needs, while also making a significant contribution to the energy supply mix. Farms will be
profitable, valued by society, and highly adapted to a changing climate. Farmers will be unable
to recall the time when managing single-resource concerns was the norm, or when the number
and the area of farms declined each year because single-product farms could not compete in a
fossil-fuel dependent world undergoing major climate shifts.
More specifically, New York’s agriculture sector will have the following characteristics:
Energy: New York farms will be net exporters of energy, including market-ready electricity and
biogas; farms will serve as a direct source of heat and electricity for surrounding communities,
providing consistent, baseload power to the grid from on-farm anaerobic digestion of organic
wastes and waste heat for onsite and offsite use. Farms will supply feedstocks for transportation
fuels, as advances in bio-technology will have dramatically increased yields of dedicated bioenergy crops.
Agricultural practices and technology: Farming practices and technology will capitalize on the
inherent strengths of natural systems, will effectively re-couple animal and crop production, and
will manage carbon flows using system-oriented approaches like those developed for nutrient
management, soil conservation, and water quality protection. The public will recognize working
landscapes, including farms, as ecosystem service providers.
Land use: Smart growth policies have arrested and reversed the erosion of the agricultural land
base. Farms will make selective use of land suited for intensive cultivation for crop production
and for carbon storage, incorporating into the soil millions of tons of compost and biochar each
year. Production of closed-loop energy crops, soil carbon capture, and low-carbon food
production methods will be fulfilling their promise as the largest available land-based
greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction opportunity. An improving market will have encouraged the
return of as many as two million acres of high quality, well-drained, formerly agricultural land
into the farm economy.

9-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Adaptation: The agricultural sector will have adopted management strategies and technologies
that support adaptation to unavoidable changes in climate and enable agricultural and economic
success in a carbon-constrained environment. Farm management practices will deal successfully
with the greater intensity of rain events and longer dry periods.
Production of food, fiber, and feedstocks: New York farms will supply food and fiber for instate consumption, along with feedstocks for chemicals and bioplastics. Advanced biotechnology will have made it possible to breed crops for specific end uses (e.g., fiber crops
destined for the green-building industry).
Economy and quality of life: Reshaping of the agricultural industry will have substantially
increased rural employment in job categories that cannot be readily outsourced, resulting in a
sustained resurgence of the rural economy. The abundance of local food, energy, jobs, and scenic
landscapes will make New York a vibrant, sought-after place to live and a global model for a
sustainable society.

A Vision for New York State’s Forestry Sector in 2050
Rural forest land conversion will be rare and long-term storage of carbon at its maximum. Urban
green space and trees will reduce building heating and cooling loads. Working together, land
owners, government officials, and the public will maximize the long-term carbon sequestration
and bio-energy potential of the state’s forests. Forests will deliver co-benefits that are vital to the
economy and to New Yorkers’ quality of life, maximizing the value of forest lands to private
forest owners and to the public.
More specifically, New York’s forests will have the following characteristics:
Management in accordance with a stewardship ethic: New York’s forest lands will be
managed for sustainable biomass production and carbon sequestration or will be conserved in
perpetuity under state law. With support by landowners and the public, policies and regulations
will motivate retention, expansion, and beneficial management of forest lands, while
discouraging deforestation. Land-use policies will maximize ecosystem services, especially
carbon benefits.
Carbon sequestration: Forest carbon sequestration will be promoted and monitored, with the
aim of achieving optimal carbon storage on all forest lands. Wood will be used sustainably and
efficiently for durable wood products. An effective monitoring system will track forest carbon
pools.
Fuel substitution: New York’s million-plus acres of formerly idle agricultural land will have
been brought back into tillage or are producing woody biomass crops for energy. Woody
biomass species substitute as needed for fossil fuels in high-performance, low-emission bioenergy systems and other industrial applications. State-of-the-art biofuel production and
combustion technologies achieve net neutral (or even net negative) GHG emissions and play an
important role in producing low-carbon liquid fuels for the aviation and shipping industries. Lifecycle costs and benefits are taken into account in decisions to derive energy from woody
biomass.

9-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Climate change adaptation: The capacity of the state’s forest lands to both mitigate and adapt
to climate change will be fully developed. Forest pest invasions will be anticipated and
controlled.

A Vision for New York State’s Waste Management Sector in 2050
New York will have a sustainable and energy-efficient materials economy in which
environmental stewardship is pursued as a common societal value and environmental
considerations inform purchasing, production, and materials management, minimizing waste and
reducing risks to human health and the environment. Materials management systems and
infrastructure will maximize the recovery and re-use of water, wastewater, and other materials in
ways that capture their economic value, conserve embedded energy, and minimize net life-cycle
emissions of GHGs and other pollutants.
More specifically, New York will have a materials management system with the following
characteristics:
GHG reduction: Waste disposal technologies will efficiently capture the material and energy
value of different types of waste and incorporate carbon-neutral or carbon-negative methods for
disposing of residual wastes. Any landfills still in use will employ every available technology
and method to reduce emissions of methane and other GHGs, and the GHG footprint of
wastewater treatment plants will have been reduced as far as possible.
Co-benefits: Residual materials will be composted or otherwise beneficially used. Water
treatment systems will yield waste heat and waste gas for productive uses. Wastewater treatment
plants and similar facilities will host solar, wind, and hydraulic turbine power generation.
Materials management: Products and packages will be designed for maximum incorporation of
recycled materials, and for full recycling or reuse after useful life. Infrastructure will be in place to
distribute, recover, and reverse-distribute goods.
Response to an evolving market: Comprehensive planning for materials management,
stormwater and wastewater management will ensure that GHGs, energy use, and other harmful
by-products of waste management are minimized as the marketplace for both materials and
energy evolves. Comprehensive planning for materials management will ensure that energy and
natural resources are conserved and GHG emissions are minimized as the marketplace for both
materials and energy evolves.
Overview of GHG Emissions

The AFW sectors are responsible for a relatively small portion of New York’s current GHG
emissions. The total AFW contribution to carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) gross emissions in
2008 was 12 million metric tons (MMt), or about 5 percent of the state’s total. The reader should
understand three important concepts related to the AFW inventory and forecast (I&F) and the
forecasted GHG reductions from AFW mitigation options:
•

The AFW I&F only covers non-combustion-related GHG emissions.
9-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

The embedded emissions within the AFW sectors are significant, especially within waste
disposed at landfills, but are not counted in the I&F.

•

The AFW policy recommendations will impact GHG emissions within and outside the AFW
sector and both in-state and out-of-state.

It is important to note that the AFW sector I&F emissions exclude fossil fuel combustion-related
GHGs, such as diesel fuel consumption in the agriculture sector and waste management sector
fuel use. These fuel combustion emissions are included as part of the industrial fuel combustion
sector (and covered in the Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial [RCI] Mitigation
chapter). The emissions that result from the generation of electricity consumed within the AFW
sectors are included in the Power Supply and Delivery (PSD) sector I&F.
Agricultural emissions include methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from enteric
fermentation (referred to as Agricultural Animals in Chapter 3), manure management, and
agriculture soils. As shown in Figure 9-1, emissions from livestock (primarily dairy cows) make
significant contributions to the sector totals in both manure management and enteric
fermentation. Sector emissions also include N2O emissions resulting from activities that increase
nitrogen in the soil, including fertilizer (synthetic and livestock manure) application and
production of nitrogen-fixing crops (legumes).
Overall, the agriculture sector accounted for about 2 percent of New York’s total gross emissions
in 2008, with the same approximate contribution estimated in 2030. The CH4 emissions
occurring from enteric fermentation are a large contributor to the state’s total agricultural GHG
emissions by 2030, the contribution from this source is estimated to be about 48 percent of the
total agriculture emissions. The next-highest contributor in 2030 is forecasted to be agricultural
soil management, at about 39 percent. Methane emissions from manure management are
declining slightly due to lower animal populations; however, they are forecasted to contribute
around 13 percent in 2030.

9-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 9-1. Historical and Forecasted Gross GHG Emissions from the Agriculture Sector,
New York, 1990–2030
6

MMtCO2e

5

4

Manure Management

3

Agricultural Soil
Management
Agricultural Animals

2

1

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2020

2025

2030

Notes: The Agricultural Soil Management category includes incorporation of crop residues and nitrogen fixing crops
(no cultivation of histosols estimated in New York). Soil carbon sequestration is not shown.
GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Note that, in keeping with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) methods and
international reporting conventions, the New York inventory and forecast covers sources of
GHGs from human activities. There could be some natural sources of GHGs that are not
represented in the inventory and forecast; however, these are not addressed in the New York
Climate Action Plan process.
The forestry and land-use sector can include both emissions sources and carbon sinks, which are
calculated from estimates of the net CO2 flux 1 from forested lands, urban trees, and landfilled
yard trimmings in New York .The inventory is divided into two primary subsectors: the forested
landscape and urban trees/land use. Both subsectors capture net carbon sequestered in forest
biomass, urban trees, landfills, and harvested wood products.
As shown in Table 9-1, USFS data suggest that New York’s forests sequestered about 19.5
MMtCO2e per year in 2005 (this excludes estimates of carbon flux from forest soils based on
recommendations from the USFS). The negative numbers in Table 9-1 indicate a CO2 sink rather
than a source. Hence, throughout the policy option period, forest carbon losses due to forest
conversion, wildfire, and disease were estimated to be smaller than the CO2 sequestered in forest
1

Flux refers to both emissions of CO2 to the atmosphere and removal (sinks) of CO2 from the atmosphere stored in
plant tissue or soils.

9-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

carbon pools, such as live trees, debris on the forest floor, and forest soils, as well as in harvested
wood products (e.g., furniture and lumber) and the disposal into landfills of forest products.
Emissions of CH4 and N2O during forest wildfires and prescribed burns were not estimated due
to a lack of data; however, it is not expected that these emissions will contribute substantially to
Forestry sector totals. This expectation is based on work in other states, as well as wildfire
activity in New York. The forecast for the sector to 2030 remains a net sequestration of 19.5
MMtCO2e.
Table 9-1. Forestry and Land-use Flux and Reference Case Forecasts (MMtCO2e)
Subsector

1990

1995

2000

2005

2015

2025

2030

Forested Landscape (excluding soil carbon)

–23.9

–22.6

–22.6

–22.6

–22.6

–22.6

–22.6

Urban Forestry and Land Use

–3.6

–3.0

–2.9

–2.9

–2.9

–2.9

–2.9

Sector Total

–27.5

–25.6

–25.5

–25.5

–25.5

–25.5

–25.5

CH4 = methane; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; N/A = not available; N2O = nitrous
oxide. Note: Positive numbers indicate net emission. Based on USFS input, emissions from soil organic carbon are
left out of the forestry sector summary due to a high level of uncertainty.

Figure 9-2 shows estimated historical and forecasted emissions from the management and
treatment of solid waste and wastewater. Emissions from waste management consist largely of
CH4 emitted from municipal solid waste (MSW) and industrial landfills, while emissions from
wastewater treatment include both CH4 and N2O. Emissions are not included for MSW
combustion, as all waste combustion facilities in New York recover the energy. Therefore, waste
combustion emissions are counted in the PSD sector I&F. Available data were insufficient to
include emissions from industrial wastewater treatment. Composting in New York results in a
sink (not included in Figure 9-2) of 0.11 MMtCO2e per year. This is the result of accumulated
stable carbon in compost, which is eventually applied as a soil amendment. CH4 and N2O
emissions at composting facilities are not included but are expected to be minimal.
MSW landfill sites were grouped into four categories according to available control equipment
and operational status at the site: (1) controlled active, (2) controlled inactive, (3) uncontrolled
active, and (4) uncontrolled inactive. As seen in Figure 9-2, between 2000 and 2010, emissions
from active controlled landfills increased, while emissions from controlled inactive sites
decreased. This is likely a result of three changes: disposal of more MSW at landfills with
landfill gas controls in place, implementation of landfill gas control at more landfills, and
decrease of landfill gas emissions from inactive landfills as MSW is no longer disposed at these
landfills. Industrial landfill emissions are estimated to be 7 percent of the potential emissions
(before methane destruction at controlled landfills) at MSW landfills, per EPA default
methodology.
Municipal wastewater emissions estimates are estimated based on population and are relatively
stable through the inventory and forecast period. The level of composting has also remained

9-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

relatively stable since 1990, and estimates of emissions from composting are based on 2006
composting data. 2
Overall, the waste management sector accounted for about 3 percent of New York’s total gross
emissions in 2008. Emissions from this sector are expected to decline slightly to only 2 percent
of the state’s total by 2030. As mentioned above, the estimates for solid waste management do
not include the embedded emissions in generated waste, which could increase the total fuel-cycle
emissions of waste disposal by an order of magnitude, nor do the emissions include those from
waste exported from the state. 3 Inclusion of these emissions would make the waste sector a much
larger contributor to New York’s totals.
Figure 9-2. Estimated Historical and Forecasted Gross GHG Emissions from Solid Waste
and Wastewater Management in New York, 1990–2030 4
Municipal WW

9

Industrial LFs

8

MMtCO2e

7

MSW Uncontrolled
Inactive Site

6
5

MSW Uncontrolled Active
Site

4
3
2

MSW Controlled Inactive
Site

1
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

MSW Controlled Active
Site

MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; MSW = municipal solid waste; LFs = landfills; WW =
wastewater.

The embedded GHG emissions of waste generated in New York are significant. These embedded
emissions occur during the extraction of raw material, manufacturing of material into goods and
packaging, and transportation of the material. Climate action plans developed in other states,
such as Michigan, show that embedded emissions can exceed direct landfill emissions by a factor

2

L. Lim. 2009. New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, personal communication with
R. Anderson.

3

According to 2008 data submitted by DEC, more than 50 percent of MSW disposed at landfills (about 6 million
tons) is exported for disposal outside New York State.

4

Composting is not included in the graph, as composting is a net carbon sink.

9-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

of 10. 5 These emissions largely take place outside New York State, except for the emissions that
are counted within the PSD, RCI, and Transportation and Land Use (TLU) sectors. In addition, a
sizable fraction of solid waste is exported from New York for disposal in other states. The
emissions associated with the management of exported waste are not included within the direct
emission estimates shown in Figure 9-2. If the emissions associated with waste exports and the
full fuel cycle were to be included in the state’s inventory and forecast, contributions to total
statewide AFW emissions would likely exceed 25 percent, instead of the 5 percent cited above.
Overview of Policy Options and Estimated Impacts

The combined agriculture, forestry, and waste sectors contribute a small portion of total state
GHG emissions (4.8 percent), but many of the mitigation and sequestration options offered by
these sectors are relatively low-cost and low-tech approaches, making these viable options.
The proposed policies are fundamentally resource management options ranging from energy
production and use to natural resources and materials management and waste. The suite of
proposed policies adds reduction of CO2 and other GHGs as a resource management objective. If
implemented properly, these approaches offer significant environmental, economic, and social
benefits beyond GHG reductions, including the provision of improved water and air quality,
increased agricultural and forest products, and green job creation.
The proposed policy options seek to accomplish the following:
•

Reduce energy-related emissions through the deployment of renewable energy technologies,
including bio-based energy solutions, and energy efficiency policies and measures that
address direct and embedded energy usage;

•

Conserve the embedded energy in materials through maximized reuse and recycling;

•

Reduce methane (global warming potential (GWP) =21-25) and nitrous oxide (GWP=296310), the predominant agriculturally generated and waste-related GHGs, through the
deployment of a combination of systems;

•

Capitalize on agriculture and forestry’s ability to store carbon in natural systems;

•

Incorporate adaptation strategies wherever possible.

Energy from biomass represents an opportunity to reduce GHGs through the displacement of
higher-carbon fossil-based energy sources while at the same time increasing in-state circulation
of energy dollars and providing significant economic opportunities. However, the use of biomass
for energy carries inherent risks. Each step of the process from field or forest to conversion to
end-use has environmental, economic, and social benefits and costs. Properly managed biomass

5

Michigan Climate Action Council. 2009. MCAC Final Report. Appendix J: Agriculture, Forestry and Waste
Management Sectors – Policy Options. Available at
Hhttp://www.miclimatechange.us/ewebeditpro/items/O46F21205.pdfH

9-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

production systems offer an opportunity to realize net carbon benefits. The proposed policies
seek to capitalize on the state’s ability to achieve GHG reductions through sustainable
production and wise use of this renewable resource.
Waste disposal currently makes up a significant portion of GHG emissions in the AFW sectors.
In the coming decades the current method of waste disposal—relying primarily on landfills—
will become increasingly unsustainable. The solution to achieving long-term meaningful
reductions from this sector is through a dramatic reduction in the amount of waste destined for
disposal. Redirecting the materials currently in the waste stream to higher-value uses not only
reduces methane generation at landfills but also captures the embedded energy in the products
and materials currently going to waste and reduces energy and emissions related to their
extraction, processing, and manufacturing. Therefore, from a lifecycle perspective, increasing
reuse and recycling will have significant energy conservation and GHG benefits. The proposed
policy is aggressive and uses a combination of tools to achieve the necessary reductions.
While energy is a focus of many of the policies, it is not the exclusive focus. Since carbon
dioxide is not the primary GHG emitted by the agricultural sector, the policy options take an
integrated, site-specific approach to managing farm emissions.
Our existing landscape is a critical component of the carbon cycle. Several of the policy options
seek to enhance the state’s existing carbon sinks through a combination of improved land
management and land-use protection measures.
All of the policy options presented rely on management system changes at the most basic level
on the farm, in the forest, at businesses, and at home. Incorporating GHG reduction and
sequestration strategies into existing management systems and stewardship principles will
require a high degree of behavioral change. Developing the education, outreach, job training and
decision-making tools necessary to engender this level of behavioral change is an immediate
challenge.

9-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 9-3. Agriculture, Forestry and Waste Policy Options

AGRICULTURE
• AFW‐4 Integrated Farm Management
Planning & Application
• AFW‐6 On‐Farm Energy Efficiency &
Production of Renewable Energy
• AFW‐8 Local Food

FORESTRY
• AFW‐1 Production of
Sustainable Feedstocks
• AFW‐5 Conserve Open Space,
Agricultural Land & Wetlands

• AFW‐7 Improved Forest
Management for Carbon
Benefits

• AFW‐2 Conversion of
Sustainable Feedstocks to
Electricity, Heat, Steam &
Liquid/Gaseous Biofuels
• AFW‐9 Research,
Development &
Demonstration

WASTE
• AFW‐3 Maximize Waste Reduction, Recycling & Composting

9-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Policy Scenario Quantification Summary Table

In-State GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)

Net Present Value:
Cost/Savings
2011–2030
Total
2030
(Million 2008$)
2011–2030

Net Cost/Savings
per Avoided
Emissions
($/tCO2e)

Policy
No.

Policy Option

AFW-1

Production of Sustainable
Feedstock for Electricity,
Heat, Steam Production, and
Liquid/Gaseous Biofuels

GHG reductions and costs included in fuel-cycle analysis of PSD-2,
PSD-6, RCI-3, and TLU-4.

AFW-2

Conversion of Sustainable
Feedstock to Electricity, Heat,
Steam Production, and
Liquid/Gaseous Biofuels

GHG reductions and costs quantified under PSD-2, PSD-6, RCI-3, and
TLU-4.

AFW-3

Maximize Waste Reduction,
Recycling, and Composting—
In-State Only

0.5

0.7

8.0

$280

$35

AFW-4

Integrated Farm Management
Planning and Application

0.3

0.6

6.5

-$201

-$31

AFW-5

Conserve Open Space,
Agricultural Land and
Wetlands

4.5

5.5

95

$1,500

$16

AFW-6

Increase On-Farm Energy
Efficiency and Production of
Renewable Energy

0.2

0.4

3.8

$3.0

$1

Forest Restoration

2.3

4.7

49

$290

$6

Urban Forestry

1.0

2.0

22

$3,200

$140

Reforestation

1.8

2.4

34

$1,200

$36

AFW-7

2020

GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent; $/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.
The numbering used to denote the above policy recommendations is for reference purposes only; it does not reflect
prioritization among these important policy recommendations. The policy numbers that appear in this table are not
consecutive because they reflect only those policies for which quantification has been completed and not all policies
are amenable for quantification.

9-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 9-4. Estimates of Cost and GHG Emissions Reductions for AFW Policy Options
6

Emission Reductions in 2030
(Million Metric Tons CO 2e / Year)

Conserve Open Space, Agricultural Land &
Wetlands

5
Forest Restoration

4

3
Reforestation

Urban Forestry

2
Increase On‐Farm Energy
Efficiency & Renewable Energy
Production

1

Reduction, Recycling &
Composting

Integrated Farm Management
Planning & Application

0

‐200

3.1

‐150

‐100

‐50

0

Net Savings

50

100

150

200

Net Cost

Dollar Per Metric Ton CO 2e Avoided
NOTE: Scenario results are not additive as synergies and overlap have not been estimated.
Additional economic analyses need to be conducted to assess macroeconomic impacts and co‐benefits.

PRODUCTION of SUSTAINABLE FEEDSTOCKS for ELECTRICITY, HEAT, STEAM
PRODUCTION, and LIQUID/GASEOUS BIOFUELS (AFW-1)

Policy Summary
This policy option seeks to increase the amount of agricultural and forest biomass available on a
sustainable basis to support low-carbon energy development while accounting for the
environmental, economic, and social impacts of expanded biomass feedstock production.
Objectives include the following: (1) Defining sustainability criteria that address the social,
economic, and environmental dimensions of biomass-derived energy, including the ability for a
production system or technology to survive without public subsidies, and the development of full
life-cycle carbon analysis that can support objective comparisons with other renewable and nonrenewable energy sources; and (2) Developing and encouraging the use of best management
systems for the establishment and harvest of feedstocks. These systems should be designed to
ameliorate local impacts of storage, pre-processing, and distribution of feedstocks at conversion
facilities.
The primary implementation mechanism is the creation of a state-level Biomass Energy
Program. The program would provide overall coordination to encourage regional consistency in

9-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

sustainability criteria, track and maintain a biomass inventory employing appropriate
sustainability indicators to monitor changes in the flow of biomass, provide for the coordination
of research to ensure that the development of a sustainable bio-based economy proceeds in an
orderly fashion, and facilitate the development and leveraging of public/private partnerships.
Quantification
The GHG reductions and costs for this policy are quantified in the fuel-cycle analyses of PSD-2,
PSD-6, RCI-3, and TLU-4. The baseline assumptions for AFW-1 and AFW-2 state that all GHG
reductions from the AFW-1 and AFW-2 targets are accounted for in the analyses of the policies
from the other Technical Work Groups (PSD-2, PSD-6, RCI-3, and TLU-4). Each of the other
Technical Work Groups (PSD, RCI, and TLU) have been allocated one-third of the total
potential sustainable biomass supply as provided by the Biomass Resource Assessment.
Although the in-state biomass feedstock scenarios included in the New York State Renewable
Fuels Roadmap analyses were selected to minimize the likelihood of significant indirect land use
change (iLUC) impacts, the quantification described for PSD-2, PSD-6, RCI-3, and TLU-4
related to biomass feedstocks does not include iLUC factors and effects on GHG reductions. The
science behind assessing GHG emissions from iLUC is evolving, and both EPA and the
California Air Resources Board are refining models and improving key input variables to reduce
the uncertainty associated with quantifying land-use change and indirect effects analyses. The
Roadmap will continue to follow iLUC issues and update its findings as appropriate during its
annual updates. Furthermore, New York State along with the 10 other states in the Northeast and
Mid-Atlantic regions have committed to including non-de minimis direct and indirect emissions,
such as those attributed to land-use changes from fuel production, as part of their Low-Carbon
Fuel Standard Memorandum of Understanding and framework development.
Special Considerations
•

GHG reductions will be realized through the end use of biomass feedstock to displace higher
carbon forms of energy and reductions will vary accordingly.

•

The availability of in-state produced sustainable biomass feedstock must parallel, and often
times precede, the development and growth of biomass conversion facilities if New York
State is to maximize GHG reductions and economic benefits.

•

Development of sustainability criteria related to the production and harvest of biomass
should be pursued on a regional basis.

•

Continued research focused on improving cradle-to-grave efficiencies (increasing yields,
improving conversion technologies, understanding and improving sustainability criteria) will
impact the rate at which biomass production occurs.

•

This policy option provides significant rural revitalization potential. The Renewable Fuels
Roadmap estimates feedstock supply jobs account for over 80 percent of the job growth
potential associated with the increased production of sustainable feedstocks.

•

State and federal policies related to renewable portfolio standard (RPS) and renewable fuel
standard (RFS) will impact the rate at which biomass production occurs.

9-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

The on-farm production of biomass feedstocks on idle and marginal land represents a crop
diversification strategy for the purposes of adapting to climate change.

•

While biomass production potential will increase with longer, warmer growing seasons, this
could be limited by nutrients and drier, midsummer and fall soils.

•

This is a cross-cutting policy with overlap in AFW-2, AFW-5, AFW-6, AFW-7, Adaptation,
TLU, PSD, and RCI.
CONVERSION of SUSTAINABLE FEEDSTOCKS to ELECTRICITY, HEAT, STEAM
PRODUCTION, and LIQUID/GASEOUS BIOFUELS (AFW-2)

Policy Summary
Sustainable feedstocks can be converted to liquid, gaseous, and solid fuels. These biofuels can
offer important solutions to carbon management needs. This policy option would advance the
development and commercialization of low-carbon biomass conversion processes, which for
some pathways can be an area with considerable technical and financial risk. Feedstock supply
and the consumption of the fuels are addressed elsewhere in this Interim Report.
The policy option acknowledges the need to support the biomass conversion industry along the
development and commercialization continuum. The nature of the public support can transform
from grant support at the research stage to market or production-based tax incentive programs to
encourage market transformation following commercial introduction. From a GHG perspective,
it is critical that production-based incentives focus on low-carbon pathways, and not all biomass
conversion process are low-carbon pathways (e.g., corn to ethanol is not necessarily a lowcarbon pathway).
A long-term commitment of public (primarily federal) sector funding will be necessary to partner
with industrial funding to support the development of new biomass conversion technologies and
the realization of the lessons learned from market experience. Research will be needed in both
academic and private laboratories. Publicly funded programs should be implemented in a manner
that promotes the commercial use of new intellectual property.
After the initial research stage, new products must move through a demonstration and market
assessment stage of development. The relative level of investment to move a new product or
process toward commercialization will increase substantially at this stage. Public funding is
critical to help demonstrate the market potential and value of new technology. If New York
wants to stimulate creation of this industry in the state, support for demonstration should be
considered.
When the technology is ready to be developed at a commercial scale, public support could be in
the form of low-cost financing or other innovative mechanisms to reduce the technical
uncertainty of the new technology to the private investment community. Innovative risk-sharing
programs can be implemented to share the technical and market uncertainty and promote private
investment. The U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. Department of Agriculture have

9-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

advanced several types of loan guarantees that play a very important role in these markets; these
federal efforts should be continued.
Beyond the point of commercial-scale manufacturing, public support is critical to ensure that all
actors along the supply chain are positioned to move the product to the consumer. Public
incentives, either grants or tax incentives, can be critical at this stage. While federal incentives
can be important, at this stage of market transformation state initiatives could be significant in
helping to develop the industry base in New York State.
Quantification
This policy option was not quantified. Quantification was captured in the end-use application,
assuming that the feedstock supply will be allocated equally to the three primary end uses for
power (PSD-2), transportation fuel (TLU-4), and buildings and industry (RCI-3).
Special Considerations
•

Additional analyses will be conducted in the next phase of the Climate Action Plan process
to separately quantify the potential benefits and costs of utilization of biomass for application
in the AFW sector.

•

There will be competition among the liquid, bioheat, and gaseous fuels markets for the
limited sustainable feedstock resource. It is likely that the feedstocks will move where the
highest profit can be realized. Realizing the carbon reduction benefits from the conversion to
fuels will require a consistent and major commitment to developing the sustainable resource
base (AFW-1).

•

Sustainable feedstocks can also serve as the building block for more than biofuels.
Conversion processes already on the verge of being commercially viable and technologies
that will be developed in the future will allow for the development of bio-based products that
may also have an impact on carbon reduction. These products may serve as substitutes or
alternatives to products that are inherently carbon-intensive.

•

Federal policies (e.g., the RFS) will drive the majority of market activity in this sector. The
ability of New York to capitalize on advanced conversion technologies will be, in large part,
determined by regional policies and programs. New York markets do not operate in a
vacuum.

•

Indirect land-use change was a topic of discussion in the Technical Work Group. Since the
feedstock estimates used in AFW1 and AFW2 were based on the assessments found in the
Roadmap and would not impact current agricultural or forestry production, the discussion
focused on the need for additional global-scale research as a short-term need.

•

Co-benefits include economic revitalization, primarily in rural areas but also statewide, by
keeping energy dollars in-state, and improved ecosystem benefits, if done properly.

9-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

MAXIMIZE WASTE REDUCTION, RECYCLING, and COMPOSTING (AFW-3)

Policy Summary
This policy option includes a combination of programmatic, regulatory, and legislative actions
that aim to reduce or eliminate waste, including diversion of materials for reuse, recycling
(including organics recycling), and composting. The actions include updating, strengthening, and
expanding the state’s regulatory and statutory authority; dedicating resources to build the
infrastructure for reuse, recycling (including organics recycling), and composting; expanding
existing, and launching new programs at the state and local levels; and coordinating cooperation
from all levels of government, the private sector, and individual New Yorkers.
This policy is related to the new draft statewide solid waste management plan, Beyond Waste: A
Sustainable Materials Management Strategy for New York State. 6 This policy also works in
concert with two other AFW policies. AFW-2 includes the conversion of municipal solid waste
to electricity, heat, steam or liquid fuels; and AFW-4 aims to develop on-farm sources of
renewable energy that will likely involve the recycling of organic materials from other, off-farm
sources through anaerobic digestion.
Quantification
Two scenarios were quantified for this policy. Each scenario assumed that the amount of MSW
going to disposal (landfills and waste to energy) is reduced from 4.1 lb/person/day to 0.6
lb/person per day and that all other materials are reduced, reused, recycled, or composted.
The first scenario presented below captures maximized waste reduction, recycling, and
composting only within New York State. Quantification does not include potential increases in
recycling and reduction in the disposal of construction and demolition debris, industrial waste, or
biosolids.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent [$/tCO2e]) for
the policy scenarios quantified by the Technical Work Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.7

8.0

Net Present
Value: Cost
(Million $)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$280

$35

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

6

This report is available at http://www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/41831.html.
9-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A second scenario, presented below, quantifies the full energy cycle for maximized waste
reduction, recycling, and composting.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
Total 2011–
2030
2030
32

248

Net Present
Value: Cost
(Million $)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$280

$1.0

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Special Considerations
•

The potential obstacles to achieving the objectives of this policy include the following:
o Political will: This policy calls for a significant change in how materials are managed in
New York. This change will require the engagement of all New Yorkers, including
residents, businesses, municipalities, state legislators, and policy makers.
o Financial resources: Significant resources will be needed in the short- to medium-term
to achieve the objectives of this plan. Resources include public and private investment
capital, as well as operating resources for municipalities and the state. Efforts to expand
the resources dedicated to waste reduction, recycling, and composting at the federal,
State, and local levels should continue.
o Technical constraints: Achieving these objectives will require the efficient deployment
of new and additional recycling technologies, particularly those related to organics
recycling and composting.

•

The global GHG reduction impacts of achieving these waste and recycling reductions are
significant; however, much of that reduction may happen out of state. Most of the GHG
emissions that can be reduced through aggressive waste prevention and recycling are
achieved through the life cycle of products and packaging; i.e., when a recycled material is
substituted for a virgin material, or when a material is not manufactured at all, thereby
avoiding the mining, extraction, and much of the production impact. While many of the
reductions related to organics recycling and composting would occur in-state, the export of
the waste generated by half the state’s population (in New York City, and Nassau and
Suffolk counties) further complicates the analysis of reductions within the state’s boundaries.

•

This policy has several additional benefits. This policy could result in substantial
opportunities for the creation and expansion of businesses in New York State. DEC estimates
that this policy could create more than 70,000 jobs. The jobs and businesses would generate
much needed tax revenue for the state. In addition, reducing the amount of waste going to
disposal reduces the environmental and public health impacts of waste handling, transfer,
transport, and disposal. While such a reduction benefits all New York State communities, it
is of particular relevance to environmental justice communities, which often bear a
disproportionate burden with respect to the solid waste management facilities and

9-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

infrastructure.

INTEGRATED FARM MANAGEMENT PLANNING and APPLICATION (AFW-4)

Policy Summary
This policy option introduces a farm-level system-based integrated approach to reducing
agricultural GHG emissions and proactively positions New York State agriculture for a carbonconstrained future. Integrated Farm Management Planning and Application will provide the
resources necessary for farms: (1) to develop comprehensive, farm-specific plans to reduce GHG
emissions, increase carbon sequestration, and address agricultural adaptation challenges resulting
from a changing climate; and (2) to implement the necessary suite of practices to achieve those
objectives. This policy adds managing GHGs as an on-farm resource management objective.
The existing New York State Agricultural Environmental Management program, outfitted with
technical standards and practices for GHG mitigation and carbon management, could be
employed to develop farm-specific, GHG conservation plans to coordinate implementation of the
best suite of GHG practices for the farm.
Providing producers with a suite of possible practices to improve on-farm environmental
performance ensures that the diversity inherent in New York State agriculture is recognized and
that the potential synergies among climate, air quality, and water quality benefits of individual
practices and technologies are captured and capitalized upon.
Quantification
The policy scenario includes: (1) by 2013, develop a comprehensive catalog and process for
planning and implementing GHG management practices and systems; and (2) by 2015, complete
training and certification of conservation professionals to develop site-specific GHG
management plans. The scenario for 2030 is 100 percent of mid-sized to large livestock farms
have developed and fully implemented comprehensive GHG management plans (835,000 dairy
cows and 1,670,000 acres); 30 percent of small livestock farms, 80 percent of grain and
vegetable farms, 90 percent of orchards and vineyards, and 100 percent of greenhouses have
developed GHG management plans; and 10 percent of small livestock farms, 33 percent of grain
and vegetable farms, 10 percent of orchards and vineyards, and 10 percent of greenhouses have
fully implemented GHG plans.
This policy option bundles a number of behind-the-farm-gate mitigation practices under the
umbrella of a comprehensive GHG management plan. These practices include feed management,
manure management, nutrient management, soil management, composting, grazing, pest
managemen,t and water efficiency. Metrics and timelines that recognize the size and type of farm
have been established for each component practice.
Anaerobic digestion of livestock waste is included under this policy option as it is an integral
component of manure management systems.

9-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Soil carbon management practices related to changes in tillage practices were not quantified due
to uncertainty of net carbon benefits presented in recent research.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work
Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

0.6

6.5

Net Present
Value: Savings
(Million $)

Net Savings per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

-$201

-$31

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Negative values represent savings.

Special Considerations
•

Quantification of an integrated comprehensive approach on a practice-by-practice basis may
not capture the cumulative GHG reductions that may occur.

•

Improved soil carbon practices could increase carbon-sequestration gains in the future, but
additional research is required.

•

These practices have significant water and air quality benefits; therefore, there is an
opportunity to leverage additional resources to implement practices.

•

There may be an opportunity to use current and future carbon market mechanisms to increase
implementation rates.

•

As with several of the other AFW policy options, the level of technical capacity and behavior
change required to achieve these changes is significant.

•

Since this policy is based on development of a Comprehensive Farm-Level GHG
Management Plan, this policy works in concert with AFW-1: Production of Sustainable
Feedstocks, AFW-6: On-Farm Energy Efficiency and Production of Renewable Energy,
AFW-5 Conservation of Open Space, AFW-7 Improved Forest Management, and AFW-3:
Waste Reduction. Through these linkages, AFW-4 is secondarily related to components of
PSD, RCI, TLU (biomass supply, energy efficiency, and renewable energy, respectively).

•

As the primary means of delivering outreach, education, and technical assistance to the
agricultural community, this policy is designed to incorporate significant components of
adaptation to climate change within individual farm GHG management plans.

9-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

ON-FARM ENERGY EFFICIENCY and PRODUCTION of
RENEWABLE ENERGY (AFW-6)

Policy Summary
This policy option seeks to achieve meaningful GHG reductions through energy efficiency by
employing a coordinated approach that addresses all forms of on-farm energy consumption
including embedded energy. These efficiency gains can be realized through a comprehensive
energy audit, which is a multi-disciplinary approach to energy-use analysis including equipment,
structural, and management related energy use, as well as identification of renewable energy
opportunities. Deployment of these energy efficiency measures will require shifts in farm-level
management practices.
The agricultural sector’s natural capacity (sun, wind, land area, available biomass) to generate
energy exceeds its energy demand. This policy also seeks to capitalize on agriculture’s ability to
produce energy using multiple sources and renewable energy technologies. Included in this
policy is recognition that multiple technologies at varying scales can be co-located at individual
operations.
As an implementation mechanism it is recommended that a State-level Agricultural Energy
Program be established to facilitate energy efficiency and renewable energy efforts at the
distributed generation level to achieve this aggressive policy. A sector-specific approach is
necessary due to the unique nature of the agricultural sector. One of the challenges in meeting
these changes is the diversity of the agricultural sector. The numerous types of operations (the
dairy segment alone has multiple production systems each having very different infrastructure
requirements) have very specific energy needs and present specific energy efficiency
opportunities. The diversity within any given segment of the sector is due to a number of
variables including age, location, and size of operation. This is very different from other sectors
in which standardization of production and retail sales is the norm. The age of the agricultural
building stock and infrastructure alone presents a significant opportunity for energy efficiency
improvements.
The second challenge is financing on-farm energy efficiency and renewable energy measures.
Farmers operate in very volatile markets with high risk and relatively small returns. Dairy, the
primary segment of our agricultural economy, operates in a controlled market (i.e., price of milk
is set at the federal level). The ability to invest significant amounts of planning time and capital
in energy efficiency and renewable energy measures with rates of return that span multiple years
predicated on unknown climatic (e.g., weather, disease, pest) and market forces (e.g., commodity
recall unrelated to individual farm) completely outside of the control of individual farms is
severely limited. An Agricultural Energy Program would begin to address these challenges. The
program would be responsible for coordinating and administering comprehensive energy audits,
coordinating efforts to streamline federal and state funding opportunities to maximize energy
efficiency and renewable energy implementation as identified in the comprehensive energy audit,
coordinating with utilities to facilitate interconnection, offering grant application assistance to
interested farmers, tracking implementation and documenting results, supporting and

9-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

coordinating research efforts related to energy efficiency and renewable energy, and technology
improvements required to achieve farm-level carbon efficiency.
Quantification
The policy scenario is a 40 percent fossil-based energy reduction, and quantification assumes
26,778 farms deploying energy efficiency measures. Quantification is based on a limited number
of currently available energy efficiency measures for which cost data exist. To achieve the
renewable energy deployment for 65 percent of farms (23,660), quantification assumes the mix
of generation will be 25 percent wind technology, 30 percent solar thermal technology, and 45
percent solar photovoltaics (PV). Quantification is based on currently available renewable energy
technologies for which cost data exist (PV, wind, solar thermal). Quantification is based on the
extrapolation of current renewable energy deployment rates for PV and wind. Quantification is
sensitive to cost of energy efficiency and renewable energy implementation and the type of
technology ultimately deployed.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost
effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the policy scenario quantified by the Technical Work
Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions (MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–2030

Net Present Value:
Cost
(Million $)

0.4

3.8

$3

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)
$1

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Special Considerations
•

This policy builds on existing RPS-Customer-Sited Tier program goals by significantly
increasing renewable energy deployment rates after 2015.

•

Since anaerobic digestion (AD) is an on-farm management system that influences many other
farm management systems, quantification of AD is included under AFW-4.

•

There may be significant interconnection and reliability concerns related to the scale of
distributed generation in rural areas.

•

This policy represents an adaptation strategy regarding heat stress in livestock, which results
in decreased milk yields and reproduction rates. Increasing the cooling capacity in livestock
housing will increase energy usage. Energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies
can mitigate negative impacts resulting from increased energy uses.

•

Renewable energy technology requires significant upfront capital investment. It is possible
that without coordinated and/or increased state and federal assistance that New York farms
will be unable to purchase renewable energy technology on the scale outlined in this policy.

•

This policy is cross-cutting with overlap in several areas, including AFW-4, PSD, and RCI.
This policy also impacts existing state policies, including RPS, the energy efficiency
portfolio standard, and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.

9-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

This policy provides significant workforce development and community-scale energy
opportunities in rural areas.
CONSERVE OPEN SPACE, AGRICULTURAL LAND, and WETLANDS (AFW-5)

Policy Summary
This policy option reduces the rate at which open space, including agricultural lands, forests, and
wetlands are converted to developed uses and increases the acreage in open space. Conversion
may be prevented through conservation land grants, landowner incentives, regulation, fee
acquisition, and purchase of conservation easements by State and local governments, or
nonprofit land preservation organizations. Support for agriculture and forest products may reduce
the risk of conversion to an undesirable land use.
Quantification
The policy scenario is described as follows:
•

Increase New York State agricultural land, as defined by the National Agricultural Statistics
Service, 25 percent by 2050 without converting mature forest. Restore 475,000 acres of
agricultural land (25 percent of the acreage lost since 1984) by 2020 and restore a total of
950,000 acres of agricultural by 2030. Permanently protect, through the State's Farmland
Protection Program, 200,000 acres by 2020 and 400,000 additional acres by 2030 of
agricultural land with the highest risk of conversion to higher-carbon intensive uses.

•

Maintain or increase forestland acreage, without converting agricultural land to forest, unless
the agricultural land would have higher carbon sequestration potential. Extend protections to
an additional 700,000 acres of forestland under threat of conversion by 2030 through a
number of tools, including private land stewardship programs, working forest conservation
easements, and tax incentives. Work to maintain or increase the parcel size of private
forestland.

•

Protect and restore freshwater and tidal wetlands through acquisition of fee or easement and
regulation to prevent releases of GHGs which will allow existing freshwater and tidal
wetlands to continue to sequester carbon and mitigate the effects of more intense storm
events caused by climate change.
The GHG reduction potential, total cost or savings (as measured by net present value), and
cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e) for the policy scenario quantified by the
Technical Work Group are presented below.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
Total 20112030
2030
5.5
95

Net Present
Value: Savings
(Million $)

Net Savings per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$1,500

$16

9-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Special Considerations
Uncertainties
•

Price of fee and easements can vary greatly with location of the parcel and the terms of an
easement.

•

Viability of farm operations is vitally linked to the health of available markets for farm
products.

•

Ability of agricultural land and forestland to produce current crop species is climate
dependant. Shifts in climate may alter the species that can be grown. The flux of sequestered
carbon in a shift of plant species is an uncertainty.

•

Leakage in the case of forest land protection is a concern because development could still
happen on unprotected acres within the state, or could be shifted out-of-state. Connecting this
policy with smart growth strategies is of upmost importance to avoid leakage issues.

•

Existence of wetlands is dependent on climate and rainfall patterns. If these patterns shift,
existing wetlands may disappear and new wetlands may form. The balance of this flux
remains uncertain.

Feasibility Issues
•

Increasing agricultural land and forest land are not mutually exclusive strategies. Shifts
between agricultural and forest land must be evaluated on a case by case basis.

•

Funding: Consistent funding is needed to ensure the protection of valuable open space, and
agricultural and wetland resources to mitigate and adapt to climate change. A diversity of
funding and capacity is needed at all levels of government, federal, State and local, as well as
private investment through non-governmental organizations, landowners, and private
citizens.

•

Local government capacity: New York is a home rule state, and the vast majority of land-use
decisions are made at the local level. Capacity building at the local level is necessary to help
local governments make good decisions. Many land conservation projects are dependent on
local government capacity to fund and complete projects.

Adaptation
•

The change in climate will have an impact on some plant species’ ability to grow and thrive.
Longer growing seasons potentially increase biomass productivity if not limited by drought
or nutrients.

•

Increased winter rain and increased total runoff could expand some wetlands. Increased
summer evaporation will decrease the hydroperiod of some wetlands.

•

There is a need for additional riparian corridor protection and restoration to mitigate effects
of predicted increase of intensity and duration of storm events, and possible extended periods
of drought.

•

Connectivity between wildlife habitats will be needed to facilitate climate related migrations.

9-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

The balance among carbon sequestration, adaptation, and other ecosystem services must be
examined.

Co-benefits
•

Co-benefits include water quality protection, flood mitigation through riparian buffers,
wetlands and storm water retention, clean air and reduced pollutants, improved quality of
life, wildlife habitat protection and connectivity for migration and adaptation, and avoided
additional costs of sprawling development.

Environmental Justice
•

Lack of open space, waterfront access, stormwater management, and the destruction of
wetlands are significant environmental justice concerns for many overburdened and lowincome communities. Many of the specific proposed actions in this policy area could help to
address one or more of these concerns in such communities.
IMPROVED FOREST MANAGEMENT for CARBON BENEFITS (AFW-7)

Policy Summary
This policy option seeks to develop a renewed and improved stewardship ethic among decision
makers that control rural forest lands and existing and potential urban planting spaces. Through a
wide variety of incentives, education, and technical assistance and support, both proven and
innovative practices could be applied to New York’s forests and urban areas to sequester
additional carbon, save energy, and, at the same time, supply New Yorkers with additional and
improved co-benefits supplied by improved forest management and green infrastructure related
practices.
Policy actions will be led by developing and implementing a system for identifying recently
unmanaged or neglected and degraded forest lands that are not stocked with trees to full
potential. A similar system will be developed for identifying vacant rural land that is unsuitable
for agriculture but suitable for reforestation with native trees.
Subsequent actions include the following:
•

Using various methods for forest management, site preparation, and wildlife management
allow for natural regeneration of trees at appropriate levels for optimum stocking levels;

•

Developing forest management plans and applying methods and technologies that increase
overall forest productivity, heath, and benefits while increasing the rate and levels of carbon
sequestration in trees, soil, and durable wood products;

•

Increasing forest cover and associated carbon stocks by planting native tree species on vacant
lands that are unsuitable for agricultural use; after establishment, employing forestry
practices that maintain and enhance the ability of the forest to sequester carbon and provide
forest related benefits;

9-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Maintaining and improving the health and longevity of existing trees in urban settings and
increasing tree cover area by planting new trees;

•

Developing and supporting prevention, early detection, and rapid response programs that
prevent invasive and destructive forest pests and mitigate or eradicate the impacts of current
or future introductions that threaten forest carbon stores.

Quantification
Three scenarios were quantified under this policy option. The GHG reduction potential, total cost
or savings (as measured by net present value), and cost effectiveness (as measured by $/tCO2e)
for the policy scenarios quantified by the Technical Work Group are presented below.
1. Identify and treat 25 percent of all under-stocked forest stands on timberland by 2025 in
order to achieve full stocking level.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

4.7

49

Net Present
Value: Cost
(Million $)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$290

$6.0

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

2. Increase tree canopy cover in cities, villages, or hamlets by 50 percent by 2030.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

2.0

22

Net Present
Value: Cost
(Million $)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$3,200

$140

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

3. Identify and reforest 50 percent of all suitable vacant idle land in the state by 2025.
GHG Reductions
(MMtCO2e)
2030

Total 2011–
2030

2.4

34

Net Present
Value: Cost
(Million $)

Net Cost per Avoided
Emissions ($/tCO2e)

$1,200

$36

$/tCO2e = dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas; MMtCO2e = million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalent.

Special Considerations
•

The establishment of new forests by planting native trees on vacant land conflicts with the
establishment of dedicated energy crops on vacant land proposed in AFW-1. In addition,
overlap exists with the AFW-1 proposal to identify vacant lands suitable for tree planting.

9-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Improving forest management practices in rural forests for carbon sequestration and other
benefits is a challenging proposition for a number of reasons. For example, goals and
objectives of owners for their forests may require management that does not take into
account societal benefits that accrue from improved carbon management. In addition, the
long-term nature of forest growth and the extended timeframe of revenues from timber
harvesting provide challenges such as investment of capital or willingness to accept
opportunity costs needed to improve forest growth and benefits.

INCREASE THE AVAILABILITY OF LOCALLY PRODUCED FOOD (AFW-8)

Policy Summary
Increasing the availability of locally produced foods to New York State residents can reduce the
energy required for transportation, packaging, and marketing; enhance rural economic
development; improve health and nutrition; and increase food security and food safety. However,
for this small but growing share of U.S. agricultural production there remains a lack of empirical
evidence to definitively support the claims of GHG reductions associated with local foods.
Recently the U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service (ERS) released a
comprehensive literature review of the current understanding of local food systems. 7 The study
had the following key findings:
•

Local food markets account for a small but growing share of total U.S. agricultural sales.

•

Production of locally marketed food is more likely to occur on small farms located in or
near metropolitan counties.

•

Consumers who value high-quality foods produced with low environmental impact are
willing to pay more for locally produced food

•

Empirical research has found that expanding local food systems in a community can
increase employment and income in that community.

Although much research remains to be completed on the direct reduction of GHGs resulting from
local foods, this policy option promoting increasing the availability of local foods is
complementary to several other GHG mitigation policy options, including AFW-5 and TLU-11
by encouraging an alternative land use to development in those areas experiencing the greatest
land-use conversion pressure; TLU-10 by enhancing local open space conservation efforts; and
AFW-3 by encouraging minimal processing and packaging of locally produced food. Direct to
consumer sales also provide producers with a higher rate of return, which further reduces the rate

7

Martinez, Steve, et al. Local Food Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and Issues, ERR 97, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, May 2010.
9-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

of land conversion to developed uses and better positions producers to cope with potentially
costly adaptation strategies.
Building on the work of the New York State Council on Food Policy this policy option seeks to
employ a multi-faceted approach to increase the availability of locally produced food to New
York State consumers.
Quantification
This policy option is currently not quantifiable.
Since this is an emerging field of research it is fully expected that in the future, as additional
empirical studies are completed, it will be possible to quantify GHG reductions for this policy.
Special Considerations
•

Several of the proposed policy initiatives involve significant levels of federal funding and
subsidies including food assistance programs and school meal programs. State policies that
encourage or incentivize local foods within these programs must be consistent with federal
policies.

•

Technical: Currently New York-specific data quantifying food miles traveled and the
resulting benefits have not been thoroughly studied. Additionally, it must be recognized that
food-mile reductions must be assessed on a product-by-product basis that includes life-cycle
analyses of the numerous crop specific inputs and concomitant production methods.

•

Financial: In the short term, increased public funds will be needed to expand existing direct
marketing programs; this may be somewhat problematic during austere budget times
regardless of the benefits.

•

Political support: According to a recent Cornell University survey “Imported food is a
concern for 72.6 percent of shoppers surveyed and "Local" is sought by almost 70 percent of
shoppers.”
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION NEEDS FOR THE
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, AND WASTE SECTOR (AFW-9)

See Chapter 10 for a complete presentation of Research, Development, and Demonstration needs
for this sector.

9-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 10
Research and Development Needs
for a Low-Carbon Future
Introduction
The New York State goal to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to 80 percent below 1990
levels by 2050 (80 by 50) may not be achievable in a politically and socially acceptable manner
with the suite of energy technologies commercially available today. New York’s Climate Action
Plan must include a commitment to support research, development, and demonstration (RD&D)
in partnership with the federal government and the private sector, to ensure that cost-effective
technologies and practices are developed to mitigate climate change impacts and promote the
economic strength of local businesses. Statewide RD&D investments, across all economic
sectors, must be targeted to provide direct benefits for New York companies.
A long-term RD&D investment strategy is needed to begin the process of improving the local
economy and reduce New York’s GHG emissions. The two issues are linked and
complementary. The subsequent development of this investment strategy represents a critical
follow-on task that will build upon the high-level recommendations presented in this chapter and
include broad stakeholder input across all economic sectors in New York State. The investment
strategy will further define New York’s technological strengths, establish multi-disciplinary
collaborative teams between universities and industry, and identify all opportunities to further
leverage limited in-state resources with federal and private sector funds.
A recent quote from Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Earth Institute at Columbia University,
emphasizes the importance of innovation in the energy sector and the need for additional RD&D
investment:
“If we try to restrain greenhouse gas emissions without a fundamentally new set of technologies, we
will end up stifling economic growth. We need to develop radically advanced low carbon technologies,
which can only come about with greatly increased spending by determined governments on what has
so far been an anemic commitment to RD&D.” 1

This Interim Report provides a high-level overview of the RD&D needs within the mitigation
sectors, identifies technology areas where New York can best leverage its investments and
capabilities to benefit local businesses, and presents “order-of-magnitude” funding estimates
necessary to support the innovation ecosystem to advance low-carbon technologies. It is
expected that any future state-funded RD&D program established to support the implementation
of New York’s 80 by 50 goal would be managed by a broad array of public stakeholders
throughout the State—with active private sector involvement.
It is important to note that New York State cannot support the entire technology development
process (basic research, technology development, large-scale demonstration, commercial
adoption) on its own. A clear role must be established for the federal government and the private
1

New York Times. April 6, 2008

10-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

sector that efficiently optimizes limited resources, appropriately assigns technical and business
risk, and ensures a consistent and stable flow of investment capital to finance advanced energy
technologies. Any State-level investment strategy must function as an advocacy tool to drive
national RD&D energy policy and leverage private-sector RD&D investments.

Overarching Principles
Developing a comprehensive RD&D strategy that cost-effectively reduces GHG emissions
across all sectors of the economy is a complex task that requires a coordinated effort among all
stakeholders. It is essential to recognize that a technology solution implemented in one sector
may impact another. For example, if plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (TLU sector) outfitted with
vehicle-to-grid capability achieve widespread market penetration, then these mobile electric
energy storage systems may obviate the need for larger stationary storage systems (PSD sector)
such as flow batteries and flywheels. A systems approach will be necessary that includes
technical/business experts across all disciplines and sectors in order to ensure that RD&D
investments yield optimized results. A set of seven overarching principles will be used to guide
the RD&D program to maximize effectiveness 2 :
•

There must be ample and sustained support for early-stage research and exploratory
development.

•

The research program must be managed to ensure that it encompasses the full range of
energy challenges from supply to production to distribution to end-use.

•

The research program must span the spectrum from early-stage research to later-stage
demonstration, and therefore, there should be an intimate relationship between setting policy
and designing programs to stimulate innovation.

•

The decision-making process must be integrated so that factors of cost, technical
performance, and environmental impact are factored in at every stage of development.

•

A multi-year plan must establish a role for governments, industry, universities, and
laboratories.

•

All later-stage demonstration projects must be carried out on as close to commercial terms as
possible in order to provide the private sector with the information it needs to make large
investments in new energy technologies.

•

There is an opportunity for substantial international participation in selected energy R&D
projects, and all energy initiatives must develop technologies that are attractive not only to
U.S. companies but to foreign countries and investors as well.

State-level RD&D investments will help New York businesses institute technology development
processes consistent with these principles in order to increase the pace of innovation and improve
the success rate of commercially viable low-carbon products and services.

2

The Center for American Progress. A New Strategy to Spur Energy Innovation. January 2008. Peter Ogden, John
Podesta, and John Duetch.

10-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

National Energy RD&D Perspective
Past
Energy RD&D funding peaked in 1980 at 10 percent of total U.S. RD&D spending (both private
and public) across all sectors of the economy (Figure 10-1). The precipitous reduction in energy
RD&D spending after 1980 correlates with the decline in global oil prices following the Iran/Iraq
War. Energy RD&D spending leveled off in 1985 to approximately 4 percent of total U.S.
RD&D expenditures until the electric power industry was de-regulated in many parts of the
country in the mid/late 1990s and oil prices plummeted further to new historic lows. Energy
RD&D funding has remained fairly level over the past decade and currently represents less than
2 percent of all U.S. RD&D funding.
It is worth noting that since the establishment of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) in 1977,
private sector energy RD&D (including large corporations and venture capital) investment has
never exceeded public funding levels. This is symptomatic of a fundamental problem and
reinforces the notion that 1) existing markets do not provide a sufficient return on investment to
warrant adequate private investment in energy RD&D, and 2) substantial benefits accrue to
society in general rather than to any specific industry segment or individual corporation.
Figure 10-1. Historical U.S. RD&D Expenditures 3

Present
Current (fiscal year 2010) annual federal energy RD&D spending is approximately $5 billion,
excluding recent one-shot initiatives funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA). Corresponding private sector investment in the U.S. is $3 billion annually. This ratio
(0.6:1) of private to public energy RD&D expenditures is significantly lower than other
3

Elsevier: Energy Policy. U.S. Energy R&D: Declining Investment, Increasing Need, and the Feasibility of
Expansion. February 2006. Greg Nemet and Daniel Kammen

10-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

sectors—specifically in comparison to the healthcare and defense industries, which maintain an
equivalent ratio of 2:1 and account for the vast majority of public RD&D funding. A
comprehensive national energy policy must be established that adequately encourages greater
private sector participation. A tangible metric for gauging the success of any given federal policy
may be to measure over time whether the private-to-public energy RD&D investment ratio
steadily climbs from 0.6:1 to 2:1. Although not a sole diagnostic, monitoring this ratio may yield
valuable insights.
U.S. energy companies, on average, spend 0.23% of total revenues on RD&D. This is in stark
contrast to other industries that invest on average 2.6% of revenues back into RD&D. 4 Some
more innovative industries such as IT and pharmaceutical companies invest closer to 15 percent
of their revenues in RD&D. Over the long-term this lack of revenue re-investment undermines
the competitive position and innovative rigor of the U.S. energy industry.
What is the appropriate level of federal energy RD&D investment to effectively address climate
change? Many research studies have focused on this question over the past decade. A report by
Robert Schock 5 presents a unique methodology for determining appropriate energy RD&D
levels by calculating its insurance value to mitigate four significant risk factors—oil price
shocks, electricity supply disruptions, local air quality, and climate change. Each issue is
independently analyzed to reveal separate price points or premiums for the four risk factors. The
results suggest that a three to seven-fold increase in federal energy RD&D spending is warranted
to insure against the potential impacts of climate change alone. Taking the average (five-fold
increase in RD&D funding) of this range translates to an annual federal energy RD&D budget of
$25 billion (5 X $5 billion). This level of funding is commensurate with commitments to other
grand challenges that the U.S has supported over the years (Apollo Mission, Manhattan Project).
New York’s portion of these federal funds could be as high as $1.5 to $2.0 billion annually (New
York represents 6.5% of U.S. total population).
Federal energy RD&D funds should be directed toward low-carbon initiatives that cannot be
adequately addressed by state governments and the private sector. These include high-risk/highcost areas focused on the development and deployment of nuclear energy systems and carbon
capture and sequestration technologies as two primary examples. Additionally, the federal
government must continue to support basic scientific research and first-of-a-kind large-scale
commercial demonstration projects, which require significant capital investment.

State Energy RD&D Perspective
New York State’s annual energy RD&D expenditure is approximately $50 million and this
supports a broad array of initiatives across all sectors. These energy RD&D funds are managed
by a number of state entities including the investor-owned utilities and have traditionally
leveraged an additional $150 million in cost sharing. By comparison, California invests roughly
$100 million annually in energy RD&D, also with substantial leveraging.

4

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). IEEE Spectrum Top 100 R&D Spenders. S&P Data2006.

5

Annual Review: Energy and Environment. How Much is Energy R&D Worth as Insurance? Robert Schock 1999.

10-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York State recognizes the need to continue support for long-term energy RD&D to create
our clean energy economy. The first step in formalizing this commitment occurred when New
York established the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) and successfully encouraged
neighboring states in the northeast to adopt GHG emissions targets for large-scale electric power
plants. New York further developed an Operating Plan, which detailed how auction proceeds
resulting from the RGGI cap and trade program were to be used to reduce carbon emissions
across all economic sectors.
The Operating Plan included a total annual budget of $100 million. Funds were allocated to
support both short-term mitigative initiatives and longer-term R,D&D initiatives that reduce
carbon dioxide emissions. Total annual long-term RD&D investments amount to $28.5 million
and reinforce the fact that a significant portion of the funds must support the continued
development of advanced technologies. The RGGI RD&D program targeted the four mitigation
sectors (RCI, PSD, TLU, and AFW) plus cross-cutting research.
The targets established under the RGGI program require the electric power sector (PSD) to
reduce aggregate GHG emissions by 10 percent by 2018. This pales in comparison to challenges
associated with attaining the economy-wide 80 by 50 goal. An order-of-magnitude increase in
RD&D funding, beyond that outlined in the RGGI Operating Plan; i.e., closer to $250 million
per year, may be necessary in order to achieve New York’s more stringent 2050 GHG reduction
goal. This level is consistent with preliminary estimates of specific research needs in New York
within the four sectors identified below. This estimate will be developed further in the Final
Climate Action Plan.
New York RD&D funds would be specifically targeted towards helping local businesses develop
low carbon technologies. This level of State funding must be integrated with a comprehensive
long-term economic development strategy to diversify New York’s economy. Total current
annual energy expenditures (across all sectors and all fuels) in New York sum to approximately
$80 billion. A $250 million energy RD&D cost therefore represents 0.3% of total statewide
energy expenditures. Relevant State agencies and the electric utilities would be responsible for
administering these funds in a coordinated manner that specifically builds on the technical
capabilities of New York businesses and optimizes all local economic development
opportunities.
It is assumed that continued environmental research (including climate change adaptation
planning) and business develop initiatives (technology incubators, proof of concept centers, etc.)
would be an integral component of each sector’s overall RD&D implementation plan. Specific
and tangible benchmarks for technological, business, and environmental performance must be
considered throughout the entire innovation process—from basic research through commercial
adoption.
RD&D Program Implementation
The formation of a statewide RD&D Advisory Council (Council) will be necessary in order to
effectively manage expenditures across all sectors in a manner that optimizes collective value.
Representatives from each mitigation sector (RCI, TLU, PSD, and AFW) will serve on the
Council. The first task will be to define a technology development framework consistent with
New York’s carbon mitigation abatement curve (the development of this abatement curve is

10-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

currently underway). Specific RD&D initiatives will be prioritized and sequenced in an effort to
systematically build on previous investments and carbon reductions in the most cost-effective
manner.
Although the Council will map out a high-level coordinated statewide strategy, the individual
sectors will be responsible for establishing multidisciplinary teams (including representatives
from industry, academia, government and the investment community) to execute specific carbon
reduction projects. Technology, environmental, and business milestones will be established
before a project is started in order to provide tangible benchmarks for gauging performance
along the way. Projects failing to meet pre-determined targets will be quickly abandoned and
RD&D funds will be allocated to other more promising areas within the sector. Federal and
private sector financial commitments to support a project throughout the entire innovation
process—assuming successful completion of all milestones—will be required before State funds
are assigned to the project.
The specific roles of the federal/State governments and the private sector may vary depending on
the type of project pursued. However, Figure 10-2 illustrates a reasonable template as to the level
of commitment necessary from all three parties (federal, State, and private sector) for the vast
majority of initiatives. The technology innovation process is broken down into four steps: basic
research, technology development, technology demonstration at scale, and commercial adoption.
A more granular breakdown is certainly possible, but these categories are used to simply
illustrate a common pattern.
The chart clearly illustrates a waning level of federal funds coupled with a concurrent waxing of
private sector investment as the technology moves closer towards commercial adoption. This
result is to be expected and is governed by the reduced level of technical and business risk as a
given technology matures.
What is less clear from Figure 10-2 is the underlying nature of the State’s role within this
continuum. This deserves more detailed scrutiny because the role varies substantially from one
step to the next. The main objective, however, is to spend the minimum amount necessary in
order exploit any/all opportunities for New York businesses that reveal themselves along the
way.

10-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 10-2. Apportionment of Funding Levels throughout the Innovation Chain

A brief description of New York State’s role in each step follows.
Step 1—Basic Research
State funds are predominantly used to increase the competitive performance of proposals
submitted by New York universities and companies to federal agencies seeking very high
leveraging, typically more than 10:1. State support can provide significant value and has recently
demonstrated successful results yielding five Energy Frontier Research Centers (EFRCs) and a
variety of Advanced Research Projects Administration—Energy (ARPA-E) grants in New York
through DOE.
Step 2—Technology Development
States can play a critical and potentially game changing role at this point in the innovation
process where the so called Valley of Death often presents a virtually insurmountable obstacle.
This area requires significant State investment to assist New York companies with a wide array
of risk-sharing and technology and business development support. This can then position the
company for subsequent private sector investment.
Step 3—Technology Demonstration (Full Scale)
This is a very expensive step (often referred to as the Mountain of Death) and limited State
resources cannot be expected to carry the high capital costs associated with large-scale
technology demonstrations. The State should participate at a minimum level to gain access to
important technical information that may be useful for New York businesses in a strategic
position to supply value-added parts/components/services associated with the technology. The
State should also begin the development of innovative policies that reinforce, streamline, and
accelerate ultimate commercial adoption.

10-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Step 4—Commercial Adoption
The commercial adoption step provides an opportunity for states to exploit potential work force
development and training opportunities resulting from widespread technology market
penetration. This may at first blush seem outside the realm of RD&D activities, but the initial
mobilization of qualified engineers, scientists, technicians, and service personnel can require
innovative training methods and catered instruction techniques developed in partnership with a
variety of New York academic institutions.
The RD&D program needed to achieve the 80 by 50 GHG reduction goal only works when
federal, State, and private-sector organizations collaborate. Risk profiles need to be fully
understood and costs equitably allocated to promote innovation. In the long-term, a private to
public energy RD&D funding ratio exceeding 2:1 will be necessary to ensure continued
development and market introductions of innovative low-carbon technologies. This will take
some time to achieve. The adoption of a national climate and energy policy is critical to
promoting long-term and sustainable levels of private sector RD&D investment within the
energy sector.
Descriptions of the RD&D strategy for each of the four mitigation sectors are provided in the
following sections. Adaptation related RD&D needs are presented in Chapter 11.

Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI) Sector
RD&D Needs
Overview
Buildings account for 40 percent of the state’s energy use and a similar percentage of GHG
emissions. Emissions associated with buildings and appliances are projected to grow
significantly yet according to the Brookhaven National Laboratory6 net carbon emission from
this sector needs to approach zero by mid-century to achieve New York’s 80 by 50 target. The
industrial sector is a heavy consumer of fossil fuels for process heating in manufacturing, and
while this sector can improve its efficiency substantially, this sector will likely account for a
sizable portion of the total economy-wide GHG emissions in New York under 80 by 50.
RD&D funds are needed to advance low- and zero-carbon energy technologies in buildings and
industry. Research for all building types should focus on more energy-efficient designs for new
construction and retrofit technologies for existing facilities, elimination of fossil fuel use,
increased use of on-site renewable energy, and human factors that influence operating modes.
For the industrial manufacturing sectors, RD&D should focus on new products and processes
that reduce the carbon intensity of the industrial sector.
Cost effective and easily implementable advances in energy technologies are needed to raise
building performance levels far beyond today’s best practices and available technologies. Present
best practices and commercially available technologies for residential and non-residential new
6

BNL; Envisioning a Low-Carbon 2050 for New York State; A White Paper submitted to the Climate Action
Council. Stokes and Looney. March 2010.

10-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

construction energy efficiency programs typically only attempt to achieve 20—30 percent energy
savings. Nearly all buildings are subject to financial decisions that favor property market values
over reductions in energy costs therefore technologies need to be exceptionally robust in terms of
return on investment. Building design, production, and warranty are performed by different
entities, as compared to other mass-produced goods, and require substantial external impetus and
coordination of RD&D activities to cost effectively achieve the performance necessary for a low
carbon economy.
Equally challenging are the efforts to reduce energy use by improving the fabrication methods
used by New York manufacturers. Typically manufacturers are reluctant to change their
established fabrication methods without clear and significant financial benefits, or without
government regulations. It is true that manufacturers are often very interested in reducing the
energy content of their product, which will reduce GHG emissions. However, as manufacturers’
financial resources are currently stretched so thin that they struggle to remain viable, few
manufacturers have the capital to invest in the engineering and equipment resources to research,
adopt, and implement emerging processes and products that would reduce GHG emissions.
Additionally, energy-efficiency technology developed in a laboratory may require innovative
fabrication methods for its mass production. Such new fabrication methods can require
significant financial capital to develop. Without sufficient financial capital, a proven
technology’s entry into the market may be delayed or prevented because it cannot be produced.
Program Design
The State should support RD&D activities that result in the advancement and commercialization
of clean energy and energy efficient products, services, and production methods for buildings
and industry. The State should strategically bridge gaps between federally supported basic
research and market-driven private interests, avoiding redundancy and inadequacies. The RD&D
strategy must be inclusive of near, middle, and long term elements and recognize those aspects
of RD&D that are best accomplished at the national, regional, or State level. State RD&D
investments in RCI should seek to achieve the following objectives:
•

Develop technologies that have the potential to increase energy efficiency and/or reduce
GHG emissions of the magnitudes necessary for accomplishment of 80 by 50 goals;

•

Prioritize technology goals to increase efficiency, eliminate use of fossil fuels, and promote
use of on-site renewable energy sources;

•

Prioritize technology development that is relevant to new and existing building stock and
industrial capacity in New York State;

•

Prioritize high-performance incremental and new technology in the context of near, medium
and long term implementation;

•

Prioritize technology development according to market-based value propositions;

•

Establish concurrent requirements to enable path-to-market; provide support for
manufacturing capacity development; increase consumer acceptance and education; and
coordinate government policy (codes, standards, regulation, deployment);

•

Utilize public, university; and private partnerships where appropriate.

10-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Federal Role
The primary research role of the federal government in RCI is to support basic energy research to
advance net zero-energy-use buildings, including development of new materials, new heating
and cooling processes, and low-density energy scavenging devices. For the industrial sector,
necessary federal efforts should include research for advanced materials, materials processing,
and electro-technologies that replace traditional thermal processes. The federal government
should also continue to co-fund some near-term research activities (e.g., demonstrations) and
medium-term activities located at regional building science and industry application centers.
State Role
Demonstrating advanced building and industry technologies at New York locations to accelerate
local adoption and help New York companies gain a strategic advantage is an important role for
State government. This research can best be accomplished at a regional level to address the
unique building stock, climate conditions, construction practices, and industrial activities at the
local level. Demonstration and evaluation of whole building systems will be critical to advancing
net zero-energy buildings. As we attempt to ramp up building performance, understanding the
human interface will also be critical. The State should also continue to support various building
science and industry application consortia in New York and facilitate university and industry
collaborations. Examples of successful research collaborations include lighting technologies with
the Lighting Research Center at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Building and Energy Systems
at Syracuse University, and materials work with the Center for Advanced Material Processing at
Clarkson University. Funding research in precision measurement and controls, robotics, and
sensors could help New York’s industrial sector to reduce its energy footprint.
Private Role
Many smaller and mid-sized corporations will need to participate as partners in demonstration
projects for innovative building and industrial technologies to advance. Large corporations,
which have the resources and talent pool to make major advances in technology, will need to
continue to make substantial investments in energy research (e.g., GE Global Research, IBM,
Corning, and Kodak). Utilities will likely need to be more involved in demonstrations of
advanced buildings systems, which will increasingly need to have two-way communications and
smart-grid interfaces.
Target Areas
The development period to commercialize a new technology and apply an existing one can be
long. This delay is often the result of start-up companies lacking the business skills to advance a
technology from the R&D phase to the commercialization phase, or of mature companies
unaware of potential partnering opportunities. Mechanisms need to be developed to provide
start-up companies with executive level mentoring and management advice to help them make
the jump between these stages. For buildings, RD&D target areas could include improved
building envelopes to reduce heating and cooling loads, down sized mechanical systems that are
more efficient, advanced controls for building optimization, and increased plug load efficiency.
Projects might also include the use of dual function elements, which provide either power
generation or increased energy efficiency in additional to a conventional purpose. Examples
include windows with embedded photovoltaic (PV) elements or thin films that generate
electricity when sunlight strikes them, or membrane roofing materials with PV films

10-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

incorporated in the layers. In both of these cases the PV systems replace conventional building
products, reducing the additional overall cost to the developer or owner. Additionally, projects
can include innovative design and construction processes that contribute to a carbon-neutral or
negative building.
Additional examples of possibly supported building technologies and systems include the
following:
•

Innovative energy storage systems,

•

Building-scale renewables,

•

MicroCHP,

•

Active power management,

•

Smart grid,

•

Energy-efficient building envelope technologies,

•

Breakthrough light emitting diode lighting products,

•

Consumer behavior modification,

•

Whole building system design.

Industrial sector RD&D investments could include advanced heating processes, methods that
reduce fossil fuel usage for thermal destruction of byproducts, new heat recovery approaches,
and novel cost-effective applications of combined heat and power technologies. Additional
examples of possibly supported industrial technologies include the following as examples:
•

Microwave sintering of ceramics,

•

UV curing that eliminates the need for VOCs and energy intensive thermal oxidizers used to destroy
them,

•

Electron-beam curing of coatings,

•

RF and induction heating.

For industry, examples of product improvement projects include:
• Lower energy content of products,
•

Reduced scrap and emissions,

•

Use of green and organic materials ,

•

Increase use of life-cycle assessment based concepts in product designs.

Other Considerations
The time frame to develop a new technology from an initial concept to its final design is
frequently five to ten years. Compounding this factor is that the construction industry is very risk
adverse, and therefore slow to adopt new technologies. An additional 5 to 10 years frequently
passes from when a new technology enters the market to it becoming standard practice in this
industry. Similarly, consulting engineering practices that offer process design services to

10-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

industrial clients are very risk averse, and therefore slow to recommend new fabrication
methods. To have new technology ready to assist in achieving 80 by 50 goals during the 2020 to
2030 timeframe, their development must start now.
The RD&D activities required to achieve the climate change goals need to start as soon as
possible so that their benefits can be accrued quickly and avoid unnecessary GHG emissions in
the mid- and long-term horizons.

Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Sector RD&D Needs
Overview
Twenty years ago the transportation options such as lithium–ion batteries and fuel cells, which
we now believe will play a key role in our ability to meeting our GHG reduction targets, did not
exist. These technologies supported by public RD&D investment are just now showing the
potential performance needed to achieve the performance and cost targets necessary meet 2030
goals. RD&D in yet additional transportation options over the next several decades will be
needed to achieve our 2050 goals. Public policy must provide increased support for research,
development and demonstration of technologies, products, and business models that create these
new options and accelerate their adoption. RD&D investments within the State and region
provide both immediate and long term economic benefits enabling the level of prosperity
necessary to fund continued improvements. Public RD&D investment will be needed in: vehicle
technology, low carbon fuels and infrastructure, public transit, transportation systems, and
demand management technologies and innovations.
It took 15 years from the time of initial development and demonstration for hybrid–electric
vehicles to achieve a 4 percent market penetration rate. The products and technologies we have
in the market today are not capable of delivering the level of efficiency improvements needed to
achieve our GHG reduction goals. Technology development, demonstration, and validation
cycles must be accelerated to deliver market introduction of new options that will play pivotal
roles in achieving GHG reduction goals.
Creating the clean energy economy will require a multi-faceted approach, including increased
use of alternative fuels, significant improvements in the energy efficiency of the vehicle fleet,
improving the performance and efficiency of public transit, and reducing trips and vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) through changes in travel habits and land management. RD&D investments that
support accelerated, validation, and utilization of GHG reduction technologies and approaches
are called for in all of these areas.
Program Design
The goal of public investment in transportation RD&D is to develop, demonstrate, and validate
new innovative transportation options, stocking the shelves with better products accelerating
progress towards meeting GHG reduction targets at lower overall cost. The investment must
promote new discoveries that will allow us to achieve our long term goals, demonstration of
emerging technologies to validate practicality and benefits, and pilot programs that seed the
market and accelerate the introduction of new options. Advancements are needed in all areas,
from basic research into new battery chemistries, innovations in public transit technology and
performance, new products, and business models that enable electric vehicle charging or on10-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

demand public transit. As noted above, the RD&D investment strategy must be inclusive of near,
mid, and long term elements and recognize those aspects of RD&D that are best accomplished at
a national, regional, or State level.
Federal Role
Light-duty vehicles (LDV) are produced on a global scale and it is primarily through influencing
vehicle standards that states influence LDV research efforts. In the United States, only the
federal government and California are allowed to set vehicle emission standards. New York has
elected to adopt California standards. State-funded research can support vehicle components
manufactured locally and result in a significant positive contribution to state gross domestic
product.
Similarly, Federal support of long-term and high-risk basic research such as fuel cell and new
battery chemistries is critical to the technology advancements and cost reduction necessary to
achieve 2050 goals. This Federally funded research will generally be done at competitively
selected research, academic, and industrial centers. States have an opportunity to influence the
choices through their own research investments and support of clusters of organizational
expertise in these clean tech growth areas.
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), U.S. Environmental Protection agency (EPA),
and DOE all support transportation research through the Transportation Research Board (TRB),
as well as programs run through Federal Highway Administration, Federal Transit
Administration, Federal Rail Administration, Federal Maritime Administration, and the Federal
Aviation Administration. In general the federal programs address issues based on national
priorities. New York’s transportation system components are unlike the rest of the country. No
other state approaches our commuter rail and subway system in terms of passenger trips or
physical size, or New York’s public transit bus operations, taxi fleets, or commercial delivery
truck fleets. Federal research programs often do not fund the research needed to improve
components these transportation system components.
Federal parties include: DOE, DOT, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
National Labs, ARPA-E, and TRB.
State, Regional, and Local Roles
State, regional, and locally supported research plays a key role in addressing specific needs not
adequately addressed by federal programs. Examples of high-impact State-supported RD&D
include the development of heavy-duty hybrid–electric drives for transit busses, and energy
storage products designed to capture train braking energy in electrified rail and subway
applications. Stat- supported RD&D in these areas has and is developing products that are
providing huge energy efficiency benefits to New York and creating jobs for New Yorker’s
manufacturing products that are being sold to the rest of the country.
State, regional, and local RD&D is also validating the benefits of new technologies and
approaches prior to transportation agencies making major commitments. Newly emerged and
unproven products and approaches involve risk both technical and financial. Few transportation
operations can allocate resources to unproven endeavors. State and local RD&D funding helps
minimize the risk associated with testing, demonstrating, and validating new products and ideas
10-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and in disseminating information on the cost and performance of the demonstration to other
potential beneficiaries.
Examples of State, regional, and local RD&D efforts that have helped inform public policy
decisions include: anti-diesel idling technologies such as fuel fired heaters and hybrid
refrigeration systems, traffic light signal controls, high speed commercial vehicle inspection
technology, car sharing, and van pool pilot program demonstration. Current projects in short sea
shipping, aviation departure optimization, off-peak utilization of subway assets, and commercial
goods movement show potential for significant GHG reductions. To achieve our clean economy
goals, the rate at which new options such are developed and validated must be accelerated
through RD&D programs that select sponsored efforts based on merit, mitigate risk, provide
creditable third party evaluation of performance, and disseminate the results via technology
transfer programs.
State, regional, local parties include: state DOTs, Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ), New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority (NYSERDA), regional transit properties, metropolitan planning
organizations, New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT), municipal
governments, academic institutions, private-sector service and product suppliers.
Private Sector Role
State RD&D should promote clusters of technical expertise that develop innovative products and
services, create jobs, and produce innovative solutions to New York problems. Helping private
firms minimize the technical and financial risk inherent to research activities provides public
benefits. Once technical risk or profitability risk is reduced, it is the role of the private sector to
complete development and commercialize the advancement.
Public funding alone is not always adequate to entice private investment and sometimes public
and private funding must be combined to reduce risk and accelerate development. Examples of
such cooperative successes in New York include: support of applied research in fuel cell
technology, batteries, and materials research with programs, such as the New York Battery and
Energy Storage Consortium (NY-BEST), which has catalyzed a cluster of expertise and attracted
outside investment developing next generation energy storage technology; programs supporting
developing products for heavy duty vehicle original equipment manufacturers, as well as
aftermarket and repower suppliers; improving the efficiency of electrified rail and subway
systems; support of intelligent transportation systems, transportation system management, and
transportation demand management technology development; and the creation of service
providers offering hardware, software, and operation that enable VMT reduction and system
level efficiency improvements.
Demonstration and assessment of newly emerged products, services, and approaches is an
important role for State and local RD&D and frequently the final step in verifying to the private
sector that their continued investment is warranted. In well designed research programs, cost to
benefit ratios, and best practices can be determined even in areas where cause and effect can be
difficult to assess and benefits difficult to quantify such as eco-driving education programs, some
DSM measures and ITS technology. This is what differentiates a research program from
financial assistance and deployment incentives.

10-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Implementation
A robustly funded RD&D program would be most effective if it is consistent with a State
Transportation Research Master Plan. The RD&D investment strategy should define individual
research programs, each focused on a specific segment of the Transportation and Land Use
sector. Each program area should be staffed and administered by representatives from
governmental units having responsibly in that segment and advised by representatives from
universities, industry, government, and private sector stakeholders.
To address New York’s pressing transportation challenges, a multi-dimensional program
involving NYSERDA, State agencies (New York State Department of Transportation, NYC
DOT, and New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), universities, and the
private sector is necessary. The program should not supplant the responsibilities of State
agencies, but should provide coordination of energy efficiency-sustainability measures, sponsor
research and pilot projects that validate benefits, and accelerate the utilization of products,
processes and alternative measures. In addition, funds should be utilized to educate, subsidize,
and accelerate the early adoption of solutions in both the public and private sectors. Extensive
use of the private sector will foster in-state economic and intellectual property development.
As indicated in Table 10-1, the program should support four types of activities in seven focus
areas. All program areas would involve analysis/policy studies and education/outreach activities.
Several of the program areas would additionally address needed RD&D, transitional strategies,
or deployment mechanisms aimed at developing, demonstrating and implementing innovative
solutions for the transportation sector.
Table 10-1. TLU RD&D Program Activities
Program Activity
Program Area

Policy Studies/
Analysis

Technology
Development

Demonstration
Verification

Education
Outreach

Government Agency Practices

X

Public Transit

X

X

X

X
X

Freight/Commercial

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Vehicle Efficiency
Transportation Infrastructure

X

Alternative Fuels

X

Smart Growth

X

X
X

X

X= areas of proposed funded activities.

Other Considerations
Each of the Transportation and Land Use policy working groups has established target
reductions goals for 2030. These goals will universally require the wide-scale utilization of
options that are today unproven or not currently cost effective. Most of these goals such as: 30
percent of vehicle-miles-traveled by zero-carbon vehicles, or 50 percent of all up-state (80
percent downstate) travel by public or shared ride leave open the pathway used to achieve the
goal. However, achieving the goal will require a major pathway decision in the near term

10-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

(electric vehicle charging infrastructure or fuel cell hydrogen) and significant public investments
in infrastructure if these targets are to be achieved. The first goal of public transportation RD&D
policy is to invest in research activities in the near term that allow accelerated exploration of
emerging options together with field test, demonstrations, and pilot programs for a wide variety
of the most promising options thereby allowing the best possible and most timely public policy
and investment decisions.
These public RD&D investment decisions should be driven by assessments of risk and benefit.
Benefits should consider economic development, mobility, environmental justice, and cost
effectiveness as well as potential to meet carbon reduction targets.
In a period of constrained resources it is important that RD&D investments are prioritized and
made in the most effective way. Modest investments must be made in long-term higher-risk
research into options that will be needed to achieve long term 2050 goals. Accelerated
investments must be made in optimizing and evaluating approaches that could meet mid-term
goals. Options showing the greatest potential must be demonstrated, piloted, and validated prior
to making major investments in approaches that prove to be dead ends or non-competitive.
It generally takes 10 to 15 years after initial introduction for a new technology (microwave oven,
cell phone, hybrid vehicle) to have significant market penetration. If we are to achieve 2030
goals the technologies and approaches that will get us there must at a minimum be at a point of
initial introduction with public policy commitment by 2015.

Power Supply and Delivery (PSD) Sector RD&D Needs
Overview
Substantial RD&D investments are needed to develop new sources of renewable generation,
improve the efficiency/performance of existing renewable and traditional generating options, and
develop technology that will enable the efficient and cost-effective delivery of electric energy.
Meeting electric demand in a manner that satisfies climate protection goals will require
continued advances in the performance of current renewable and traditional generating resource
technologies, the development of new sources of renewable generation including generation
utilizing fuels derived from sustainable chemical conversions and the fuels they will require, new
technologies associated with the efficient management (storage and regulation) of increased
intermittent renewable energy upstream from customers (e.g., large wind) and downstream, at
the end use level (e.g., distributed solar), the development of technologies and operating
practices for the transmission and distribution system (delivery system) that enable the
penetration of these new renewable resources while maintaining system reliability and increasing
the efficiency of the delivery system. Finally, electric supply and delivery systems must evolve
to accommodate the expectation for electrification of transportation and the resulting impacts on
electric use and peak demand.
New York is fortunate to have RD&D assets already in place that can be leveraged with federal
and non-New York interests to build an economy upon climate and environmental preservation.
These assets are listed below in the section: State Role.

10-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Program Design
This policy would support RD&D and early deployment activities that result in a material
increase in the proportion of electric energy used in New York generated by renewable, noncarbon emitting resources and increased capacity of the delivery system to enable their
integration and be more efficient at doing so. Such activities include:
•

Development of short, medium, and long term technologies;

•

Use of private‐public partnerships where appropriate;

•

Supporting the development and deployment of technologies by facilitating end-use customer
engagement in the RD&D and early deployment process and encouragement of early
adopters, to mitigate the risk of high cost technology development;

•

Supporting the development, testing and verification of control and communication
technologies that increase efficiency of the delivery system and enable the integration of
renewable, intermittent resources;

•

Supporting a continuum of activities from early-stage, scientific assessment through
technology demonstration and business development in support of new renewable energy
resources;

•

Supporting significant improvements in the environmental and efficiency of existing electric
generating technologies.

State and federal commitments to early-stage research, technology validation, and demonstration
will be critical to enticing increased infusion of private sector capital that will become necessary
over the longer-term to take new products to market and to finance the scale of renewable
generating projects that are expected to be necessary to achieve ambitious climate preservation
goals. Such a commitment will validate the significance and vitality of climate change policies
and reduce risks to levels where private capital will become vested in amounts sufficient to meet
policy goals. To be effective over the long term, RD&D and early deployment programs must
include consideration of the business and environmental case that must be made for adoption and
development of technologies, projects, and implementing mechanisms and provide
complimentary programs to ensure that businesses that will develop, manufacture, and deploy
preferred technologies can be created and operated profitably. Concerns about the impacts of
RD&D efforts that rely on expanding existing infrastructure or that involve the deployment of
new technologies with uncertain or unknown impacts on public health should also be accounted
for.
Federal Role
Marine-based Resources
Offshore marine hydrokinetic energy technology comprises only a few prototype systems today.
If New York is to exploit its vast offshore marine-based resources, and wave and ocean current
technologies are considered necessary, their development would require a research and
development program similar in scale to that enjoyed by onshore wind technology over the last
20 years, and involvement of the DOE and its national laboratories, industry, federal, and State
authorities, and academia. The research agenda for such early-stage resource development would
include proof-of-concept assessments for conversion devices; lab scale modeling/design;

10-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

development of enabling technologies (e.g., moorings, materials); met/ocean characterization
and modeling; and full scale in-ocean testing. This would be long-term and involve high risk
research so a strong federal commitment would be necessary. The use of such resources for the
period of interest (2025–2050) will also require the building of new supplier chains and
infrastructure (port facilities/service capabilities) and this must be considered when developing a
research agenda. If an ambitious research agenda supported at the federal level for wave and
current technology commenced immediately, New York would not likely benefit from this
resource until 2030–2035.
Energy production from offshore wind turbines could occur more rapidly (2015-2020) than that
from other marine technologies. The American Wind Energy Association Offshore Wind RD&D
working group set forth a RD&D agenda that should provide a basis for developing a long-term
offshore wind development program for the US and guide decisions on focus and funding that
would be of interest in New York. Current industry estimates place the cost for this research
agenda at about $600 million over the next 5–7 years. Pending federal legislation would
authorize the appropriation of $200 million a year over the 2010–2014 period for research,
development, and demonstration activities related to wind energy systems and would direct DOE
to establish a research and development program to improve the efficiency of wind turbines,
reduce the cost of wind energy systems, and conduct a demonstration program to measure the
performance of wind energy systems at locations across the United States. It is assumed that this
funding, if authorized, would be administered by DOE and allocated across land and offshore
based wind technology and require cost sharing between federal and state governments and the
private sector.
Nuclear Energy
The State will have limited influence on research into advancements in nuclear energy
generation. The federal government and selected, highly capitalized industries will dominate in
terms of any research agenda and investment. The federal government will be responsible for
managing the matter of long-term storage, reprocessing, and neutralization of spent fuel.
Fossil Generation
Compared to many other states, fossil generating resources in New York represent a smaller
fraction of the electric generation mix. New York should continue supporting a research agenda
that focuses on technologies that can be demonstrated to increase efficiency and environmental
performance of power plants. New York can partner with the federal government to support
the development of carbon capture and sequestration demonstration projects in New York.
Investment in this research can be funded through an appropriate mix of State, federal, and other
funding sources, while avoiding duplication of effort.
Power Supply Transmission and Distribution Systems
The federal government should be tasked with coordinating the development of a framework that
includes protocols and model standards for information management to achieve interoperability
of smart grid devices and systems including advanced networking and cyber-security.
Participation on DOE ARPA-E and other research, development, and demonstration initiatives
should continue to be evaluated and pursued if such activities can be shown to present

10-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

opportunities for learning, customer savings, and business growth that are unique to New York
and unlikely to occur through the actions of others.
Examples of federal organizations that would be key stakeholders with the states in any research
and development agenda include, but are not limited to DOE (including ARPA-E) and affiliated
laboratories, NIST, and the Electric Power Research Institute.
State Role
Marine-Based Resources
The coastal states and federal authorities have initiated processes to collaborate on various
aspects of offshore wind project development and to a limited degree, technology development.
Affected organizations include the US Offshore Wind Collaborative, Atlantic Offshore Wind
Energy Consortium lead by the U.S. Department of the Interior, the Mid-Atlantic Regional
Council on the Ocean; and specific to New York, New York State Department of State,
NYSERDA, Con Edison Company, Long Island Power Authority, and the New York Power
Authority. These organized efforts to address pressing technology and project development is
expected to drive the agenda for applied research and development activities for the ocean and
off shore environment. New York’s share could represent an investment of upwards of $60
million should the costs be shared by coastal states. The research agenda encompasses the
following areas: scale up of turbine size and evolution of gearbox and blade designs and
materials, development of alternative/deep water/floating foundations, development of facilities
for component testing/validation, comprehensive resource characterization/measurement
campaigns, aerodynamic flow modeling, codes and standards, deployment and servicing strategy
formulation and infrastructure development, avian and marine ecological evaluation, and grid
integration.
These same entities could play a role in field testing/demonstration of other marine-based energy
production technologies (wave, current, hydrokinetic) that emerge from federally supported
efforts. New York’s contribution to the evolution of technology, resource characterization, and
demonstration/validation could be measured in the tens of millions of dollars—staged over 20
years.
Land-Based Wind
State-funded research with respect to on-shore wind technology should be limited to advanced
wind resource forecasting/mapping and turbine condition monitoring and diagnostics, and such
efforts in these areas should continue in support of State policy objectives. Increased
performance of the existing fleet of turbines should be expected to occur during the next decade
(2010–2020) and improvements on the order of 1–2 percent in terms of energy capture are
realistic. Such an effort would require a modest investment of several million dollars over the
next five years.
Carbon Sequestration
New York may have the geology appropriate for sequestration of carbon, and characterizing and
testing this potential for the purposes of sequestering carbon from fossil-fired power plants is an
avenue of research that New York can undertake at reasonable cost. New York can partner with
the federal government to support the development of carbon capture and sequestration

10-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

demonstration projects in New York. A template for a state-specific research initiative would be
activities outlined in NYSERDA’s initial operating plan under the RGGI program 7 .
Solar
Additional research is needed to prepare utilities and other stakeholders for the eventual
integration of larger amounts of PV at the distribution voltage level. Analytical tools and models
must be developed that establish the value proposition for PV at this voltage level including
estimation of the benefits and costs to grid operations associated with deeper penetrations of this
technology coupled perhaps with local storage devices. Any research agenda should also include
the development of assessment tools and guidance for the integration of PV systems with
building energy management systems and infrastructure. In addition, since the large scale
deployment of solar has largely been a southwest exercise, the New York/Northeast performance
expectations and optimizations will require investigation. Investment for this research could
approach several million dollars over the next five years.
Biomass and Sustainable Fuels
Advances in biomass conversion processes (e.g., gasification, direct combustion, pyrolysis) as
well as advances in sustainable fuel generation (e.g. water splitting, carbon dioxide reduction,
fuel generation catalysis) should continue to be pursued. Equally important are the application of
life-cycle assessments of project attributes and fuel/feed stock (e.g., minimization of
environmental impact, i.e., carbon neutrality) and feed stock depletion. The question of what will
constitute low carbon or carbon neutral application of biomass and other sustainable chemical
conversions to create fuels is critical in terms of determining the contribution that biomass and
sustainable chemical conversions may make to long-term renewable energy production goals.
For biomass to be a material contributor to renewable energy goals, the definition of
sustainability with specific regard to carbon must be answered. The question of feed stock
availability for power generation (bio-power) was the subject of extensive review/analysis. 8 Any
research agenda for biomass should take into consideration the findings contained therein.
Investment in this research agenda could approach several million dollars over the next five
years.
Power Supply Transmission and Distribution Systems
With respect to improvements in the delivery system to increase its efficiency, enable greater
penetration, delivery, and value of renewable energy, New York stakeholders will have a more
influential role in research, development, and demonstration. The New York Independent System
Operator and utilities (transmission owners) will need to consider how best to deliver energy
associated with increasing penetration of intermittent, wind generation (land-based in the coming
years; off-shore by the last years of this decade) at both ends of the system. They will do this as
they consider making the delivery system more efficient and reliable and as they consider
7

Operating Plan for Investments in New York under the CO2 Budget Trading Program and the CO2 Allowance
Auction Program, April 16, 2009, pages 41 – 42, http://www.nyserda.org/RGGI/Files/Final%2020092011%20RGGI%20Operating%20Plan.pdf.
8

Renewable Fuels Roadmap and Sustainable Biomass Feedstock Supply for New York. NYSERDA Report 10-05.
April, 2010.

10-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

transforming the grid from an electromechanical to digitally controlled system and making the
delivery system more intelligent (smart grid). Energy storage will play a key role in enabling
smart grid functionality. NY-BEST will serve as a key stakeholder in the development and
demonstration of a wide variety of energy storage technologies for stationary power applications.
The New York Public Service Commission (PSC) has instituted a proceeding aimed at
establishing a strategic vision and plan for investing in smart grid technology for New York that
will guide future research, development, demonstration, and deployment (RDD&D) in New
York in support of the policy objectives stated herein. Some potential avenues of RDD&D for
consideration are described below.
Research should continue the development of technologies, practices, and programs that promise
to improve the efficiency and operation of transmission and distribution systems. Such activities
could include the automation of communication and control processes (e.g., deployment and
testing of advanced sensors and communication devices) to reduce energy losses and extend
equipment life, and would involve demonstrations, testing, and validation to aid in making
determinations as to the scale, phasing, and the expected costs of implementation. As the power
supply system in New York grows less-carbon intensive over time, the value of electric system
efficiency improvements will decline and the research focus shift toward evolving end-use
technologies such as electric-vehicle charging and distributed storage that offer the potential for
improved grid load shape, asset utilization, and reliability. Research of electric vehicles and
batteries, consumer and vehicle load profiling, smart charging and storage technologies at the
distribution voltage level, and related consumer metering and billing are expected to be a key
components of the RDD&D program over the next 10 years.
State investment in research in support of the Power Supply Transmission and Distribution
Systems RDD&D agenda could approach $75 million over the next 5–10 years, excluding
investment by electric utilities.
Investor-owned utility systems in New York will become a laboratory for testing/demonstrating
various smart grid technologies including distributed resources, grid power vehicles, smart
appliances, and storage. Utilities could also invest in research and demonstration of advanced
power conditioning and cabling related to the interconnection of off-shore renewable resources.
Such RDD&D investment could easily approach $250 million over the next 10 years
Examples of State organizations that would be stakeholders in any research and development
agenda include, but are not limited to, Smart Grid Consortium members, 9 the PSC, NYSERDA,
New York State Foundation for Science, Technology and Innovation (NYSTAR) Centers of
Excellence and Centers of Advanced Technology, New York Academy of Sciences, PANYNJ,
State University of New York (SUNY) colleges and universities, and Pace Energy and Climate
Center.
9

Advanced Energy Research and Technology Center, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Central Hudson G&E, City
of New York, Clarkson University, Computer Associates, Consolidated Edison (Con Ed), General Electric, IBM,
Long Island Power Authority, National Grid, New York Department of Public Service, New York Independent
System Operator, New York Power Authority, New York State Business Council, New York State Electric & Gas,
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, New York State Foundation for Science, Technology
and Innovation (NYSTAR).

10-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Private-Sector Role
While government is expected to set the agenda for long term societal imperatives, private sector
organizations/companies with the involvement of institutions of higher learning, are expected to
yield the ideas and innovation that government will look to enable with its funding. Companies
will provide valuable engineering and equipment/facilities to test and validate concepts that they
and academia collaborate on. State and federal government will partner with these types of
entities to buy down or cover risks that these and other private sector participants (e.g., venture
capital and infrastructure capital investors) are unable or unwilling to fund. As the menu of
options necessary to meet ambitious climate protection goals expands, existing institutions for
business incubation will grow in significance and number. Such institutions will continue to
provide essential support for business planning and product commercialization.
Private sector organizations located in New York State that would be stakeholders include Smart
Grid Consortium members, private universities and colleges, General Electric (e.g., solar, wind,
bio-fuels, batteries), IBM (e.g., thin film PV devices, consumer smart appliance controls),
AWSTruepower (e.g., meteorological modeling, wind/PV energy modeling and engineering),
technology incubators (e.g., Syracuse, SUNY Buffalo and Stony Brook, Rochester Institute of
Technology, Polytechnic Institute of New York University), and investors (e.g., Hudson Clean
Energy Partners, Environmental Capital Partners, GE Finance).

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management (AFW) Sector RD&D
Needs Overview
The agriculture, forestry, and waste management sectors are critical drivers in the economy of
New York State. With a long-term investment in research, development, and demonstration,
these sectors can also serve as a primary sustainable resource for the production of fuels,
chemicals, and products. An integrated portfolio of strategies can be implemented to achieve key
carbon reduction initiatives and prepare the state to adapt to changing climates. It is important to
acknowledge from the outset that many of the approaches and goals in these sectors are related to
each other. Progress in any one area requires concomitant commitments in the other areas.
The research agenda can be categorized into the following broad areas: Reduce the carbon
intensity of agricultural and forest management activities and optimize the ability of agriculture
and forestry lands to sequester carbon. Develop, demonstrate, and commercialize technologies
and processes to convert sustainable resources into fuels, chemicals, and products that will result
in an overall reduction in carbon. Support and optimize market participants along the relevant
supply chains to ensure that products can efficiently reach the customer. Invest in research
activities to continuously develop new crops and cultivation techniques that will supply the
conventional customer base and the renewable feedstock customer base as efficiently as possible.
Develop and implement adaptation strategies to allow for the continuation of resource supply as
environmental conditions change. Maximize urban green space, avoid forest land conversion,
and improve the long-term storage of carbon in New York’s rural forests. Maximize waste
prevention and recovery and utilization of recyclable materials.
Achieving the carbon goals outlined for this sector will require coordination at all levels of
government and an alliance among public and private stakeholders, including landowners and
research universities to identify strategic research needs, develop partnerships to move the
10-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

research forward, and financial mechanisms to provide long-term funding for the research to
achieve the state's carbon reduction goals. The federal and State governments have a long history
in the agriculture and forestry areas. Academic research institutions (land-grant universities)
serve as the foundation of research and training for these sectors. Private landowners will need to
make commitments to the goals of the program and commercial businesses will have the primary
responsibility to convert sustainable feedstock into fuels, chemicals, and products and establish
the supply chain.
Program Design
The recommended program involves the long-term commitment and investment of financial
support on the part of all participants. Early in the program, supported activities provide a
baseline of information and tools to define, for example, sustainable and best management
practices, and appropriate methods to verify performance, for agriculture and forestry; provide
insight into biomass resource competition to develop a sustainable feedstock/materials
management strategy that first aims to reduce or eliminate waste and divert materials for re-use,
recycling and composting; and analyze the waste stream to determine the amount, availability
and characteristics of waste biomass and trends in industrial and municipal solid waste
generation among rural, suburban, and urban areas. These are core activities that can bring
research and market participants up to a common level of knowledge. As outlined below, there
are some activities that with both federal and state roles. Also identified below is an activity that
is likely to be primarily a state effort.
Federal Role
Federal support is important to finance and facilitate the research programs that address key
problems of national, regional, and multi-state importance and to provide the financial support
and risk management for large-scale investments prior to private sector commercialization.
Research and development topics warranting federal support include:
Sustainable Feedstock Supply
• Research focused on crop breeding and optimization of new and existing bioenergy
feedstocks to increase yields and improve the economic viability of these systems;
•

Development and improvement the crop management for perennial energy crops;

•

Research on the long-term system-wide sustainability of specific existing and emerging bioenergy pathways.;

•

Developing models to predict responses of soil and biomass productivity to climate change;

•

Examining the balance between carbon sequestration, adaptation, and other ecosystem
services such as carbon sequestration, wildlife habitat conservation, or water quality
protection.

GHG Management
• Improving quantitative models of carbon, nitrogen, and water cycles in bioenergy feedstock
production systems to predict productivity and environmental outcomes from field to
landscape scales;

10-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Investigating landscape ecology at regional scales to understand the relationships among
diverse processes;

•

Determining approaches that will cost-effectively allow private landowners with relatively
small parcels of forest land to harvest biomass in a way that is conducive to carbon
sequestration and the long-term productivity and health of their woodlots;

•

Continued research focused on improving cradle to grave efficiencies (increasing yields,
improving conversion technologies, understanding and improving sustainability criteria) will
impact the rate at which biomass production occurs.

Feedstock Conversion and Business Risk Management
• A long-term commitment of public (primarily federal) sector funding will be necessary to
partner with industrial funding to support the development of new technologies and the
realization of the lessons learned from market experience. Research will be conducted in both
academic and private laboratories. The importance of a long-term commitment to research
cannot be overemphasized. After the initial research stage, new products will need to move
through a demonstration and market assessment stage of development. The relative level of
investment to move a new product or process towards commercialization will tend to
increase at this stage.
•

When the technology is ready to be developed at a commercial-scale, public support could be
in the form of low-cost financing or other innovative mechanisms to reduce the technical
uncertainty of the new technology to the private investment community. Building
commercial-scale manufacturing/conversion process systems for new technologies is a risky
venture. Innovative risk-sharing programs can be implemented to share the technical and
market uncertainty and promote private-sector investment.

State Role
States will take the lead in areas where the benefits are easier to define at the state or local level
and the majority of the program participants are in the state. For projects along the research –
commercialization continuum, State support will primarily focus on supply chain and market
transformation issues. The State should also lead the effort to design and implement tools to
manage integrated programs, evaluate, and assess progress towards goals and to provide overall
program integration and coordination.
Baseline Date/Resource Inventory and Tools
• Ongoing assessment of measurements of state-wide, sustainable resource availability;
•

Support the development of a comprehensive inter-agency database to store baseline and
monitoring data on land and forest management and the condition of the state’s agricultural
and forest land resources.;

•

Develop and implement a system for identifying recently unmanaged or neglected/degraded
forest stands that are under stocked by 2015. By 2025, identify and treat, using necessary and
appropriate methods, 25 percent of all appropriate (i.e., poletimber and sawtimber size
classes) timberland acres.

10-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Develop and implement critical survey, monitoring, and mitigation methods for potential and
existing forest pests;

•

Develop and implement programs that alter traditional cultural and commercial conventions
that have proved to spread destructive pests;

•

Develop and implement a system for identifying owners of vacant idle land that is unsuitable
for agriculture but suitable for reforestation by 2015. By 2025, identify and reforest 50
percent of all suitable vacant idle land.

•

Currently New York-specific data quantifying Food Miles Traveled and the resulting benefits
has not been thoroughly studied. Additionally, it needs to be recognized that food mile
reductions must be assessed on a product-by-product basis that includes life-cycle analyses of
the numerous crop specific inputs and concomitant production methods.

•

Establish benchmark sites, suitable for measurement of soil carbon and other parameters;
integration of remote sensing data and application of new technologies for more rapid less
expensive measurement of carbon stocks and GHG fluxes; and improvements in forecasting
future agricultural GHG emissions and sinks;

•

State-level monitoring to document trends and predict forest composition changes; research
to focus on identifying tree species that will be suitable for the anticipated changes in
climate.

Business Risk Management
• Develop targeted programs to share the risk of new business development. This includes
business models for biomass feedstock production, infrastructure requirements, employment
options, and possible public awareness concerns in order to overcome misperceptions and
barriers to the use of biomass.
•

Conduct research on strategies to connect consumers with farmers who direct market their
products (i.e. farmers’ markets) that will work in rural, suburban, and urban communities and
with a broad base of consumers within each community. Such strategies may include various
means of transportation, outreach, and incentive programs.

•

Support initiatives that add both economic and nutritional value to New York State
agricultural products through the development of new products (such as sauces, jams, juices,
etc.). This includes processing and packaging initiatives that help make fresh foods more
accessible and convenient. Recognize that minimally processed products often preserve
optimal nutritional benefit.

Stakeholder Coordination
• Support the development of a system for State agencies and State-owned facilities that
purchase food and food products to identify the percentage of locally produced agricultural
products purchased throughout the fiscal year; and track and report locally produced
agricultural products purchased on an annual basis.

10-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Sustainable Feedstock Supply
• Support sustainable production strategies and research that help farmers remain competitive
and viable such as organic, integrated pest management; season extension technologies, and
nutrient management programs. Sustainable production strategies are consistent with
adaptation strategies.
•

Develop and support prevention, early detection, and rapid response programs that seek to
prevent the introduction of exotic and invasive forest pests and mitigate/eradicate the impacts
of current or future introductions. In addition, develop and support programs that reduce the
potential for and severity of wildfire.

•

Develop forest management plans, methods, and technologies that increase overall forest
productivity and benefits on all forests identified as timberland, and that increase the rate of
carbon sequestration in forest biomass and soils and in harvested wood products.

•

Data on key management practices (e.g., tillage, fertilization, and grazing) could assist in the
design of policies to maximize the role of agricultural in mitigating climate change.

Private-Sector Role
As a land-based policy, the private landowner community is an integral partner in the success of
strategies in the agriculture, forestry, and waste management sectors. Landowners will need to be
involved in every component of the program. In the case of product development, beyond the
point of commercial-scale manufacturing, private-sector support will be the primary mechanism
to build and operate conversion facilities and to move products along the supply chain. Public
(both federal and State) support will be necessary to reduce risk and uncertainty to a level that
private-sector investment can take over.
Other Considerations
Achieving the research, development, and commercialization goals outlined in the section will
require the commitment of a diverse set of stakeholders and the application of a portfolio of
financial strategies. It will be incumbent upon the State sector to facility the coordination of the
stakeholders.

10-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 11
Adapting to Climate Change
The Earth is experiencing changes in climate that appear to be accelerating and permanent.
Climate change is already affecting New York State’s communities, economy,, and natural
ecosystems, and these effects are expected to increase. Historical climate conditions are no
longer a reliable guide to the future for planning within natural, social, or economic systems.
Adaptation refers to actions taken to prepare for climate change, to reduce adverse impacts, or to
take advantage of new opportunities. Adaptation can take place at many levels—individual,
community, organizational, and institutional. In many respects adaptation is simply better
planning, incorporating the most current information about future climate change into routine
decision making. Adaptive capacity is the ability of a system to adjust to climate stresses or to
cope with their consequences. New York State already has substantial adaptive capacity, but also
significant vulnerabilities. The overarching goal of the adaptation recommendations is to create a
more climate-resilient New York State.
Our current understanding of how the Earth’s climate system will change does not provide the
level of accuracy and precision desired often by decision makers, so adaptation planning must
include flexible responses. Flexible adaptation enables stakeholders to take actions and put
strategies into place that can be adjusted over time as climate science matures and initial
adaptation efforts yield valuable lessons.

New York’s Climate Action Plan Adaptation Technical Work Group
The Adaptation Technical Work Group was charged with identifying measures to safeguard New
Yorkers’ public health, infrastructure, ecosystems, and environment from the impacts of climate
change. The Technical Work Group was comprised of more than 25 individuals including
representatives from State and local government, academia, utilities, environmental justice
groups, non-governmental organizations, environmental groups, and the insurance industry. The
group was co-chaired by NYSERDA and DEC, with facilitation provided by the Center for
Climate Strategies.
The Technical Work Group used the work of the NYSERDA-sponsored project entitled,
Integrated Assessment for Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New York State, also known
as “ClimAID,” as a foundational resource for its work. The ClimAID project provided New
York- specific climate projections and climate vulnerability analyses, and strategies to reduce the
detrimental effects of climate change on the State’s economy, ecology, and public health. The
project team was led by researchers from Columbia University, Hunter College, and Cornell
University, with additional partners including Rutgers University, the Mt. Sinai School of
Medicine, and New York University. The draft ClimAID summary report is included as
Appendix H. The full report will be available at
www.nyserda.org/programs/Environment/EMEP/. Information from other ongoing initiatives
also provided valuable input to the process, including New York’s Sea Level Rise Task Force,
The Nature Conservancy’s Rising Waters, and New York City’s PlaNYC.

11-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The Adaptation Technical Work Group developed policy options around the following concepts:
•

Reduce physical, social, or economic impact of climate change.

•

Take advantage of new opportunities emerging from climate change.

To facilitate discussions, the Adaptation Technical Work Group members divided themselves
into eight subgroups, each of which developed recommendations for review by the entire
Technical Work Group. Each subgroup addressed one of eight sectors: agriculture, coastal zones,
ecosystems, energy, public health, transportation, telecommunications and information
infrastructure, and water resources.
The process to assess risks and vulnerabilities was based on the latest climate projections for
New York State and built on the process used in the ClimAID project. While the ClimAID
project focused primarily on producing adaptation strategies to reduce vulnerabilities and exploit
opportunities, the Technical Work Group took the process one step further by generating policies
and some mechanisms to implement the strategies in New York State. Technical Work Group
members prioritized adaptation strategies according to climate-risk levels, vulnerability and
exposure, cost effectiveness, distributional and equity concerns, and institutional capacity and
capability. Other factors considered include regulatory, design, and engineering standards; legal
structures; and insurance opportunities. An overview of each recommended strategy is included
later in this chapter. More detailed descriptions of each recommendation are available at
www.nyclimatechange.us.
New York is just beginning climate adaptation planning. This Adaptation Plan should be viewed
as a living document and must be revisited on a regular basis to incorporate the latest scientific
research and knowledge, including actual climate impacts and the effectiveness of the proposed
strategies. Such periodic reassessment will permit development of flexible adaptation pathways
and increasing adaptive capacity.

The Adaptation Planning Process 1
While New York has a wide range of vulnerabilities to changing climate, it also has the potential
to adapt to and take advantage of some of these changes. Some of the hazards associated with
climate change include higher temperatures leading to greater incidence of decreased air quality,
and heat stress caused by more frequent and intense heat waves; increased droughts and extreme
rainfall affecting food production, natural ecosystems, and water resources; and sea level rise
causing enhanced flooding in coastal areas.
Climate change poses challenges for decision makers because of the uncertainties inherent in
climate projections and the complex linkages among climate change, physical and biological
systems, and socioeconomic factors. Fortunately, there is already a large body of knowledge on
climate change that will assist in developing strategies to reduce vulnerability and building
adaptive response capacity.

1

Much of this discussion is based on the work of the ClimAID team.
11-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A New York State climate change adaptation plan must consider a number of components:
•

Understanding how the climate in New York State might change,

•

Identifying potential vulnerabilities to a changing climate,

•

Assessing risk levels of those vulnerabilities,

•

Developing adaptation strategies that will help to minimize those risks,

•

Prioritizing strategies, considering other adaptation tools, and developing an overall
adaptation plan that is coordinated with greenhouse gas mitigation efforts.

Figure 11-1 from ClimAID illustrates five integrating themes across the eight sectors studied.
Figure 11-1. Relationship of Adaptation Sectors to Integrating Themes

The following elements were considered as part of the evaluation of adaptation strategies:
•

Cost: What are the general costs of the proposed strategy, including human and other
resources? This assessment can yield a rough measure of benefits and costs to the extent that
the consequences are measured in economic terms, but there will be important non-economic
consequences as well.

•

Timing: The timing of implementation should be considered relative to the timing of impact;
if the impact will occur in a time frame comparable to the time required for implementation,
there is need for immediate consideration.

•

Feasibility: How feasible is the strategy for implementation? Are there organizational, policy,
legal, or engineering concerns; or expected technological changes that would affect
feasibility?

11-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Efficacy: To what extent will the strategy, if successfully implemented, reduce the risk?

•

Robustness: Is there the potential to install equipment or upgrade infrastructure that is
resilient and designed to withstand a range of climate hazards? Are there opportunities for
flexible adaptation pathways?

•

Co-benefits: Will any strategies have effects on another stakeholder or sector? Is there
potential for cost-sharing? Are there impacts on mitigation of greenhouse gases? Are there
impacts on the environment or a vulnerable population?

Other important factors that must be taken into consideration include environmental justice,
equity, social justice, sustainability, institutional context, and unique circumstances.
Indicators and Monitoring
The monitoring of climate change variables and other factors that might directly or indirectly
influence risks and adaptation strategies is an important component of any adaptation plan.
Monitoring of key indicators can help to initiate course corrections in adaptation policies and/or
changes in timing of their implementation. Indicators must be devised and tracked over time to
provide quantitative measures of climate change and its impacts, and the efficacy of adaptation
strategies.
Summary
Climate hazards are likely to produce a range of impacts on the urban and rural fabric of New
York State in the coming decades. Adaptation strategies described in this report can provide the
basis for adaptation planning for decision makers who must work to reduce future impacts.
These adaptation strategies will also produce benefits today, since they will help to lessen the
impacts of current climate hazards. Some adaptation strategies also have the co-benefit of
reducing greenhouse gasses.
Regular monitoring of climate and impacts indicators is critical. Indirect climate change impacts,
including effects resulting from climate change impacts in other regions, must be considered as
well. By continually evaluating this evolving information, New York State can best develop
robust and flexible adaptation pathways that maximize climate and societal benefits while
minimizing climate hazards and costs.

Adaptation Recommendations: Common Themes
Several common themes emerged from the sector-specific recommendations. Many of these
common themes represent steps that must occur before other recommended actions could be
implemented:
•

Dissemination of climate change information to decision makers at all levels is critical to
adaptation planning. Using academic and governmental resources New York State should
develop the capacity to disseminate the best available climate projections, including
associated uncertainties. These projections would be updated periodically and be the standard
for decision making across the state. This capacity could be provided through State support
of a Climate Science Institute— a collaborative effort of qualified academic institutions that
could provide guidance on applications of climate projections.
11-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

New York State should develop capacity to identify and monitor climate change indicators,
including indicators of climate factor interactions, to provide necessary information to
decision makers..

•

New York State should develop a framework for describing, monitoring, assessing, and
reporting progress on adaptation efforts within the state. An assessment of adaptation efforts
by local governments, State agencies, and federal programs should be started to collect
baseline information. This will help identify gaps in information, research, or tools needed
for decision making and will help better prioritize next steps. Adaptation information should
be shared and efforts coordinated among all levels of government.

•

Support for research and development is necessary to develop new strategies and
technological advances, and to provide the proper detail and confidence for recommended
strategies.

•

Emergency management capabilities across the state must be evaluated in light of climate
projections to determine where these capabilities will be compromised. Emergency warning
systems, access and availability of cooling centers, barriers to emergency evacuation, and the
effects of power and communications outages must be assessed.

•

Education and outreach at all levels are critical to the success of climate change adaptation
efforts. Climate science should be incorporated in education curricula to bring the most
current, science-based information to tomorrow’s leaders. Targeted outreach to affected
communities will also be necessary.

•

Certain groups will be disproportionately affected by climate change; it is necessary to
identify these groups and ensure their participation throughout adaptation planning processes.
Climate change risks, vulnerabilities, and capacities to adapt are uneven across regions,
sectors, households, individuals, and social groups. Equity concerns emerge because climate
change impacts and adaptation policies can worsen existing inequalities and can also create
new patterns of inequities. The impacts of climate change adaptation policies on different
populations, areas and industries must be considered and addressed.

•

Immediate action is needed. Current state investment decisions and policies as well as
infrastructure siting and design decisions should be informed by climate projections to ensure
necessary adaptive capacities the best use of state resources. Many recommendations focus
on vulnerable populations that are already likely to experience adverse climate effects.

Many of the recommendations are based on existing state programs and policies. While specific
opportunities for integration are not explicitly mentioned in these policy summaries, additional
information on related efforts and potential implementation mechanisms will be available in the
policy adoption descriptions at www.nyclimatechange.us.

11-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Adaptation Recommendations
Summaries of the recommendations from the Adaptation Technical Work Group are listed
below, by sector subgroups. 2 Detailed descriptions will be posted at www.nyclimatechange.us.

Agriculture
Vision Statement
Develop and adopt strategies and technological advances that recognize agriculture as a critical
climate and resource dependent New York State industry that is inextricably linked to Earth’s
carbon and nitrogen cycles, and ensure that in 2050, the agricultural sector is not only viable,
but thriving in a carbon-constrained economy, and is continually adapting to a changing
climate.

Background
Agriculture is a significant component of the New York economy; it includes large wholesale
grower-shippers selling products nationally and internationally, a substantial dairy industry, and
thousands of small farm operations selling direct retail and providing communities throughout
the state with local, fresh produce. Farmers will be on the front lines of coping with climate
change, but the direct impacts on crops, livestock, and pests, and the costs of farmer adaptation
will have cascading effects beyond the farm gate and throughout the New York economy. While
climate change will create unprecedented challenges, there are likely to be new opportunities as
well, such as developing markets for new crop options that may come with a longer growing
season and warmer temperatures. Taking advantage of any opportunities and minimizing the
adverse consequences of climate change will require new decision tools for strategic adaptation.
Adaptation will not be cost- or risk-free, and inequities in availability of capital or information
for strategic adaptation may become a concern for some sectors of the agricultural economy.
The agriculture sector in New York State encompasses more than 34,000 farms that occupy
about one-quarter of the state's land area (more than 7.5 million acres) and contribute $4.5 billion
annually to the state's economy. New York is the dominant agriculture state in the northeast and
typically ranks within the top five in the United States for production of apples, grapes, freshmarket sweet corn, snap beans, cabbage, milk, cottage cheese, and several other commodities.

Climate Impacts
Warmer temperatures, a longer growing season, and increased atmospheric CO2 could create
opportunities for farmers with enough capital to take risks on expanding production of warmer
temperature-adapted crops (e.g., European red wine grapes, peaches, tomato, watermelon),
assuming a market for new crops can be developed. However, many of the high-value crops that
2

Much of the text in the Background and Climate Impacts sections of each sector description has been drawn from
the ClimAID report.

11-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

currently dominate the state’s agriculture economy (e.g., apples, cabbage, potatoes) and the dairy
industry benefit from the state’s historically relatively cool climate. Some crops may have yield
or quality losses associated with increased frequency of drought; increased summer high
temperatures; increased risk of freeze injury as a result of more variable winters; and increased
pressure from weeds, insects, disease, or other factors. Milk production per cow will decline in
the region as temperatures and the frequency of summer heat stress increase, unless farmers
adapt by increasing the cooling capacity of animal facilities.
The impacts from climate change will occur on top of non-climate stressors already affecting the
sector. For example, as with many other businesses in New York and elsewhere, agriculture is
sensitive to the volatile and rising costs of energy. Also, New York farmers are affected by often
rapidly changing consumer preferences and demands of supermarket buyers; increasingly,
farmers must consider global market forces and international competition as well as competition
from neighboring states. As a final example, too much as well as too little rainfall is currently a
recurrent problem for farmers in New York. Currently, summer precipitation is insufficient to
fully meet the water needs of non-irrigated crops most years, while brief, intense rainfall events
can have detrimental effects on crops. Climate change is likely to exacerbate these challenges.
Recommendation 1.

Support research, development, and deployment of
agricultural adaptation strategies that simultaneously
manage on-farm GHG emissions and adaptation
concerns.

The development of a coordinated statewide research, development, and deployment (R,D &D)
program focused on agricultural adaptation strategies is necessary to ensure that New York State
agriculture is positioned to respond to changing climatic conditions. This program could also
identify research needs and opportunities that could be addressed by private industry. Research
and development of the various adaptation practices and strategies should be disseminated to the
agricultural community in a coordinated fashion. This effort will likely be a partnership among
private and public entities, including universities.
Specific Actions
A.

Support the introduction of existing varieties and the development of new
varieties that can take full advantage of the beneficial effects of climate
change.
Introduction of plant varietals that are adapted to extreme heat events and have increased
drought tolerance and pest resistance will reduce climate-related vulnerabilities.
Implementation should include the following:
• Development of varieties that are optimized for increasing levels of atmospheric CO2;
• Introduction of new crop varietals from other regions into New York State;
• Development of crops with increased tolerance to climate stresses. These stresses include
summer heat stress; and drought, frost/freeze and extreme precipitation events. These
traits can be developed using conventional breeding, molecular-assisted breeding and
genetic engineering.

11-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Potential Cost
Low to moderate when compared to the cost of no action. Opportunity to encourage
private/public partnerships in this effort (seed companies).
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term: Some research in progress. A more coordinated and focused approach would
permit more efficient use of scarce resources.
B.

Develop improved responses to extreme weather events (frost, freeze, heat,
precipitation).
The ability of farmers to employ new and improved methods of protecting crops from
extreme weather events would further reduce climate-related risks. These methods could
include the following:
• Development of new pruning strategies;
• Shifting planting dates;
• Improving the efficiency of irrigation practices;
• Improving cover crop and mulching practices;
• Continued optimization of feed rations to reduce the effects of heat stress;
• Continued research on improving the cooling capacity and efficiency of new and existing
livestock facilities.
Potential Cost
Relatively low when compared to the cost of no action.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term: Many of these low-cost strategies have already had some level of research and
represent low-cost/high-return strategies with a relatively low level of risk.

C.

Develop improved responses to increased weed, disease and insect threats.
Providing agriculture, forestry, and communities with the tools to manage weed, disease,
and insect threats in the most environmentally sound manner will require concerted and
continued research efforts, which should include, at a minimum, the following:
• A primary focus on non-chemical control strategies for looming weed, disease, and insect
threats;
• Development of target-specific chemical control methods with reduced environmental
impacts;
• Continued research into species disruption effects of climate change specific to
agricultural pest control;
• Development of pest-resistant plant varieties.

11-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Potential Cost
Relatively low to moderate when compared to the cost of no action (i.e., no adaptation).
The use of traditional means to manage new and increasing pressure from weed, disease
and insect threats carries inherent environmental risks. Significant opportunities exist for
private/public partnerships.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term: Many of these low-cost strategies have already had some level of research and
represent low-cost/high-return strategies with a relatively low level of risk.
D.

Increase the accuracy of the existing real-time weather warning systems.
Improved delivery of state-of-the-art weather forecasts will be needed to inform growers of
extreme events and to allow farmers to take appropriate measures to protect at-risk crops.
Needs include the following:
• Development of sophisticated real-time weather monitoring and forecasting; current
guidelines for many agricultural practices are based on outdated observations and the
assumption of a stationary climate.
• Continued regional and climate science and modeling research to discern between normal
climate variability and long-term climate shifts
Potential Cost
Low when compared to the cost of no action.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term: Accurate weather forecasts in real time are critical to farmers making daily
management decisions. Monitoring and forecasts also provide technical specialists and
researchers with critical information related to the movement of weeds, diseases, and
insects.

E.

Support the development of decision-making tools to assist the agricultural
community in adapting to climate change.
Tools may include methods for assessing the cost and benefits of crop diversification,
shifting planting dates and/or locations, introduction of new varieties, changes in
management strategies, and infrastructure changes. These tools will be crucial in
determining the optimal time for adaptation investment. Needs include the following:
• Development of new economic decision tools for farmers that incorporate the best
available science;
• Development of new decision tools for policy makers that integrate economic,
environmental, and social equity impacts of agricultural adaptation efforts.

11-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Potential Cost
Relatively low to moderate when compared to the cost of no action. Decision-making tools
also help research and implementation dollars to be invested efficiently.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term and requiring continual revisions to account for improving adaptation strategies.
F.

Increase climate change impact education and outreach efforts to
agricultural producers.
Inform agricultural producers of the impacts of climate change and enable the delivery of
applied research and decision-making tools to the farm level. Ensure that adaptation
strategies are integrated into farm management systems.
Potential Cost
Relatively low, especially when coupled with agricultural mitigation efforts as proposed in
Climate Action Plan Mitigation Strategy AFW4, Integrated Farm Management Planning
and Application.
Timeframe for Implementation
From 2010 -2013, build the technical capacity necessary to deliver this type of program,
including pilot-programs. In 2013 roll out the statewide integrated program.

G.

Ensure equity is incorporated into programs targeting agricultural
adaptation.
In addition to regional variability in vulnerability related to the scale of impacts from
climate change, there is also vulnerability due to the diversity of farm size in New York
State. Small family farms with little capital to invest in on-farm adaptation strategies are
most at risk and less able to take advantage of cost-related scale economies associated with
such measures. Survival of many smaller farms will hinge on making good decisions
regarding not only the type of adaptation measures to take but also the timing of the
measures. The most vulnerable farmers will be those without access to training about the
full range of strategies or those who lack adequate information to assess risk and
uncertainty.
Potential Cost
Relatively low for development of decision-making tools and outreach and education
efforts. Relatively low to moderate for cost-shared incentive programs.
Timeframe for Implementation
2010 -2013. Development of programs to address equity concerns. 2013. Statewide
integrated program roll-out.

11-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Some crops may have yield or quality losses associated with increased frequency of drought,
increased summer high temperatures, increased risk of freeze injury as a result of more variable
winters, and increased pressure from weeds, insects, disease, or other factors. Milk production
per cow will decline in the region as temperatures and the frequency of summer heat stress
increase unless farmers adapt by increasing the cooling capacity of animal facilities.
Environmental Justice Considerations
In New York State, there is a range of equity and environmental justice (EJ) issues at the
intersection of climate change and agriculture. Particular agricultural sectors, regions, and crops
will be most at risk from exposure to climate change and burdened by adaptation measures.
Adaptation to climate change will put additional stresses on the fragile and economically
important dairy industry in the region. Regional vulnerabilities include farmers on Long Island
facing a disproportionate risk of crop damage from increasing storm frequency. Finally, certain
crops have disproportionate vulnerabilities, such as perennials for which the cost and economic
risk of changing crops as an adaptation strategy is sometimes much higher than for annual crops.
In addition to supply-side dimensions, climate change also may impact agricultural demand.
Changes in climate both in New York State and in other regions may disrupt supply chains,
leading to closing of retail centers and limiting consumer access to markets. Low-income farmers
with insufficient information and training or without access to credit or infrastructure are
particularly at risk when conditions demand immediate flexibility and require the ability to
quickly line up alternative supply lines and retail locations.
Under such conditions, rural, resource-dependent communities may feel pressure to supplement
incomes or diversify their business beyond agriculture but may lack the training or capital
necessary to engage in such strategies. Decreasing yields and the high costs of adaptation may
translate into significant downstream job losses and cascading economic effects across rural
communities. Low-wage, temporary, seasonal, and/or migrant workers are particularly exposed
to these shifts.
Examining equity in adaptation involves evaluating existing vulnerabilities, but it also requires
evaluating the unintended outcomes, externalities (secondary consequences), and emergent
processes of specific adaptation strategies. Successful adaptation by individual farmers or
regions may create downstream inequities. As some farmers successfully adapt, other farmers
may experience relative increases in inequality related to rural income and agricultural
productivity. Certain industries (such as the grape and wine industries) also may consolidate in
such ways that it becomes difficult for smaller businesses to enter the market. Increasing
chemical inputs, such as fertilizers and pesticides, may create or exacerbate inequitable
distributions of human health burdens, or negatively affect waterways, disproportionately
impacting low-income or natural resource-dependent communities involved in hunting- and
fishing-related revenue. Furthermore, degrading land and community health could drive down
property values, exacerbating geographic inequities. Finally, increasing natural resource use,
whether it is water for irrigation or energy for cooling, may result in increased utility costs and
prices. These increases are felt most by low-income families who proportionally spend more on
these basic goods than middle- and upper-income families.

11-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Addressing and avoiding spillover effects in the implementation of adaptation measures require
engaging local communities and agricultural managers in each stage of the planning process.
This includes mechanisms for expressing and addressing property disputes and conflicting
claims to resources, collaborative regional planning across sectors and communities, and
training/retraining to provide information regarding strategies and best practices. In particular,
adaptation strategies focused at regional or state scales have the capacity to marginalize local
actors who are unable to capitalize on social or economic networks or access policymaking
procedures.
More broadly, equity should be considered along every part and process of the agriculture foodsupply chain. For example, climate stress on agriculture could impact the quality, accessibility,
and affordability of local produce. This has implications for food security among low-income
groups, communities with fragile connections to markets offering nutritional options, or those
otherwise burdened by pre-existing poor nutrition.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Climate change may provide an incentive for farmers and consumers to take advantage of some
opportunities that benefit both the farmer and the environment. Some of these opportunities may
eventually be applicable to carbon-offset payments in emerging carbon-trading markets:
•

Conserve energy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions (increases profit margin and
minimizes contribution to climate change);

•

Increase soil organic matter (improves soil health and productivity and, because organic
matter is mostly carbon derived from CO2 in the atmosphere via plant photosynthesis,
reduces the amount of this greenhouse gas in the atmosphere);

•

Improve nitrogen-use efficiency (synthetic nitrogen fertilizers are energy intensive to
produce, transport and apply; and soil emissions of nitrous oxide increase with nitrogen
fertilizer use);

•

Enter the expanding market for renewable energy using marginal land for wind and solar
energy, biomass fuels, and energy from anaerobic digestion of manure and food processing
wastes ;

•

Improve manure management (reduces nitrous oxide, methane and CO2 emissions, and can
be used as renewable energy source in manure digesters);

•

Increase consumer support—from households to large institutional food services—of local
“food shed” networks.

Adaptive actions taken to address specific climate change vulnerabilities may have additional
effects beyond their primary intentions. In some cases adaptive actions may raise new problems,
while in others it is possible to design actions with multiple co-benefits.
•

Increased water use and increased chemical loads to the environment. Increases in water and
chemical inputs will not only increase costs for the farmer but may also have society-wide
impacts in cases where the water supply is limited, by increasing the reactive nitrogen and
pesticide loads to the environment, and the risks to food safety, and by increasing human
exposure to pesticides.

11-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Increased energy use and greenhouse gas emissions may be associated with some adaptation
strategies. Examples include increased use of cooling fans in livestock facilities, more energy
use to pump irrigation water as more farmers expand irrigation capacity or pump from deeper
wells, and increased energy use associated with increased use of products that are energy
intensive to manufacture, such as some fertilizers and pesticides.

•

Changes in land use could result from changes in cropping systems and other farm
adaptations. Harvesting of wooded areas for biofuel crops and increased diversion of corn
acreage for biofuel markets are possible. Such effects can be averted with appropriate
strategic planning, and efforts toward this end have been initiated in the Renewable Fuels
Roadmap and Sustainable Biomass Feedstock Supply for New York State (NYSERDA 2010).
Land clearing for expansion of food or forage crop acreage may occur, particularly if other
production regions of the country are more adversely affected by climate change than New
York.

•

Cascading negative effects on rural economies (see Environmental Justice Considerations
above).

Recommendation 2.

Incorporate anticipated increases in the incidence of
weeds, diseases, and insect threats due to climate
change in current detection, monitoring, and integrated
pest management efforts.

An overall increase in the number of outbreaks of a wider variety of insects and pathogens is
likely. Additionally, there are strong empirical reasons for expecting climate change and/or rising
levels of CO2 to benefit undesirable (noxious and invasive) weeds more than crops. New York
State is fortunate to have existing statewide programs that target these specific threats while
minimizing social, environmental, and economic costs. This policy recommendation has the dual
purposes of initializing a comprehensive evaluation of existing programs to identify gaps; and
leveraging existing state programs through expansion of outreach and education materials and
curriculum, research and development of new management strategies, and enhanced coordination
of monitoring, detection, and response efforts. Since many of these threats (specifically insects)
have impacts beyond the farm that require similar responses, the Community Integrated Pest
Management Program is included in the policy recommendations. (Note: Ecosystems
Recommendation 1 discusses invasive species.)
Specific Actions
A.

Conduct a formal evaluation of the capacity of existing federal, State, and
local agriculture and forestry programs or systems focused on identifying
and monitoring existing and emerging weed, disease, and insect threats as a
response to a changing climate.
Federal, State, and an increasing number of local governments have programs focused on
addressing the threats of weeds, disease, and insects in an economically and
environmentally sound manner. An evaluation and gap analysis of these programs is
necessary to address problems that may reduce the ability to adequately respond to these
increasing threats in a cost-effective and proactive fashion.

11-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Potential Cost
Cost of a review and evaluation should be relatively low.
Timeframe for Implementation
2010-2011. This recommendation should be implemented in the near term to ensure state
resources are expended efficiently.
B.

Develop coordinated protocols and multiple response tactics such as the
development and deployment of pest-resistant plant varieties, regional
coordination for early detection, and rapid-response approaches to emerging
threats.
Existing State programs focused on agricultural and forestry threats are important
mechanisms for ensuring the viability of these industries, which will increasingly face these
threats under a changing climate. Integrated pest management programs are important
mechanisms for communities to address infestation problems in housing, schools,
recreational facilities, houses of worship, and other gathering places.
Potential Cost
For the past several years the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) program has been funded
through a legislative appropriation of approximately $1 million annually for the agricultural
IPM program and $400,000 for the community IPM program. Due to State budgetary
constraints, funding for the 2010-2011 budget year was cut to $500,000 for agricultural
IPM and $0 for community IPM. Historically, the IPM program has used the state IPM
allocation to leverage $2-$3 million for New York State by obtaining grants from federal
and private sources. With significantly reduced State funding, much of this leveraged
funding will be lost. The New York State Cooperative Agricultural Pest Survey program
has been funded exclusively through federal funds at $235,000 annually for the past several
years. The public benefit of expanding these and similar programs is expected to
significantly outweigh the cost of full programmatic funding.
Timeframe for Implementation
2010–2012. Restoration to historical funding levels should occur in the very near term as
some programs that have experienced reduced levels of funding have had to cut staff and
programs. 2012–2020: Expanded funding should occur in areas identified in the
comprehensive review and evaluation of existing programs and be consistent with the
timeline found in the Climate Action Plan Mitigation Strategy for IPM under AFW 4
1.2(e).

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Resources being impacted include all agricultural crops and forests. The increase in weeds,
disease, and insect pressure will result from several climatic factors including higher
temperatures, increased frequency of intense precipitation, and increased CO2.

11-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Environmental Justice Considerations
Decreasing yields and the high costs of adaptation may translate into significant downstream job
losses and cascading economic effects across rural communities. Low-wage, temporary, seasonal
and/or migrant workers are particularly exposed to these shifts.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Early detection and rapid response to emerging or increasing weed, disease, and pest pressure
while minimizing the use of chemicals to control these pressures will provide for reduced
chemical loads to the environment. This will result in improved water and air quality, and
improved public health. Employing a comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing these
concerns will also decrease input costs for the farmer.
Recommendation 3.

Evaluate and develop mechanisms to more effectively
protect livestock from the effects of greater temperature
variability and extremes.

The dairy industry in New York is likely to be affected by rising temperatures under climate
change. These changes are expected to cause longer and more frequent episodes of heat stress for
dairy cows, resulting in potential production losses and reduced calving rates. Mechanisms to
protect dairy livestock from the projected temperature changes should be developed.
Specific Actions
A.

Channel appropriate resources to continue research, development, and
deployment of livestock protection measures and techniques such as
climate-related modifications to feed management systems and approaches.
Short-term impacts of heat stress in dairy cows include decreases in feed intake and milk
production; long-term effects include higher incidence of lameness and poorer reproductive
performance. Modification of feed rations has proved to partially ameliorate heat stress
effects in dairy cows.
Potential Cost
A comprehensive strategy of feed management that addresses multiple environmental
concerns at the same time is a relatively low-cost approach under which multiple public
benefits can be realized. The difficulty is assigning or accrediting benefits to individual
funding sources, which are often based on single-resource objectives.
Timeframe for Implementation
Should be consistent with the timeline for Precision Feeding for Mitigation found under
Climate Action Plan Mitigation Strategy AFW 4 1.3(f), which begins in 2013 and
progressively ramps up to meet 2050 targets.

B.

Support the increased installation of energy-efficient cooling systems and
other structural or mechanical interventions.
Increasing the cooling capacity of existing livestock facilities is an obvious adaptation
strategy to address heat stress in livestock but will bring with it increased expenditures in
11-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

energy costs. Opportunities to deploy energy-efficient systems and maximize on-farm
generation of clean renewable energy to power these systems should be encouraged and
supported.
Potential Cost
Cost of providing technical assistance will likely be relatively low. Costs of providing
financial assistance to make structural and mechanical modifications will be relatively
moderate to high. Costs to deploy renewable energy technologies will be relatively high.
Multiple funding programs exist for the implementation of renewable energy technologies
and the conduct of energy efficiency audits, as well as implementation of energy efficiency
measures. Ability to use necessary structural and mechanical modifications as an eligible
cost-share when coupled with renewable energy technologies to address heat stress in
livestock as part of an adaptation strategy should be explored.
Timeframe for Implementation
Heat stress in livestock is already having a negative impact across New York State; there is
also a high certainty that this will continue for the foreseeable future. Investments made
now will be less expensive than in several decades. Many of these practices will require
significant planning and design as well as capital. To ensure continued competitiveness and
long-term viability of the New York State livestock (dairy) industry, these policy options
should be pursued in the near term. Additionally, timelines for the complementary
mitigation policies have been established with near-term and long-term goals.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
The New York State Livestock Industry will likely experience production loss and reduction in
calving rates due to heat stress. The ClimAID assessment concluded that negative economic
impacts on the New York State dairy industry will be substantial unless dairies are able to adapt.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Vulnerability and capacity to adapt to climate change may vary substantially across different
dairy regions in New York State due to differences in climate change exposure, regional cost
structures, farm sizes, existing farm infrastructure, and overall productivity. Should climate
change induced heat stress have a highly detrimental effect on dairy farming in the state overall,
those regions with higher concentrations of dairy farms are likely to experience a more
substantial economic disruption.
Differences in farm and herd size are also potentially significant factors in determining
vulnerability and capacity to adapt to climate change. Comparison of small versus large farms
throughout the state reveals significant differences in the costs, milk production per cow, capital
efficiency, income, and profitability. All of these differences may affect the overall capacity of
smaller farms to adapt to climate change, particularly if such adaptation requires significant new
outlays of capital for the purchase and installation of cooling systems in dairy barns, as well as
additional costs associated with energy for operating the equipment, and the installation of onfarm renewable energy generation.

11-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
•

Contributing to the competitiveness and long-term viability of a significant, albeit currently
struggling, sector of the upstate rural economy;

•

Contributing to the size diversity of New York State livestock farms;

•

Increasing the energy efficiency and renewable energy capacity of New York State, leading
to greenhouse gas reductions.

Coastal Zones
Coastal Zones Adaptation Vision Statement
By 2050, all coastal waterfront communities, including those in the Hudson River estuary, and
critical coastal resources and infrastructure, have prepared for and are protected from the
changing climate.

Background
The U.S. Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, as amended in 1996, defines the coastal zone
as the land inward of the shoreline needed to control or manage uses that are likely to directly
and significantly impact coastal waters or are likely to be “affected by or vulnerable to sea level
rise.” New York State considers coastal waters to extend three miles into the open ocean and up
to the state lines of Connecticut and New Jersey along the shore. In this assessment, the coastal
zone is considered to include the shoreline of New York State, including coastal wetland areas
and inland areas adjacent to the shoreline that are likely to be affected by sea level rise and
coastal storms. Also considered are the potential effects of climate change up the Hudson River
to the Federal Dam at Troy and the influence rising ocean temperatures may have on migratory
and sedentary fish and shellfish populations.
Coastal ecosystems include near-shore sub-tidal areas, the low-marsh intertidal zone, highmarsh, beaches, dunes, stream channels, rocky platforms, sea grass meadows, algal beds, and
tidal flats. Even in a densely populated urban environment such as New York City, these coastal
ecosystems provide numerous functions and values. Tidal marshes provide wildlife habitat,
storm surge protection, wave attenuation, pollution absorption, and aesthetic appeal. More than
300 species of birds spend part of their life cycle in New York’s coastal shores, feeding, resting,
or nesting. Every May and June, thousands of horseshoe crabs come to spawn on the sandy
beaches of Long Island, New York City, and Westchester County. Many bird species depend on
the horseshoe crab eggs or other invertebrates of the tidal zone to replenish their fatty reserves
and continue on migration routes along the Atlantic flyway.
Coastal marshes and wetlands are highly sensitive and must maintain a delicate balance as they
are affected by rapid sea level rise, wave erosion, sediment deposition, and other forces; these
important ecosystems provide wildlife habitat, protect coastlines against storms, and absorb
pollution. New York State’s coastal marshes are limited to the north and south shores of Long
Island, New York City, Westchester County, and Hudson River. In the tidally influenced portion
11-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

of the Hudson River Estuary (up to the Troy Dam), the dominant ecological communities are
freshwater and brackish tidal marshes, freshwater tidal swamps, tidal creeks, mud and sand flats,
and freshwater sub-tidal aquatic beds. However, these are limited to north of the Tappan Zee
Bridge, as there is little or no break in shoreline armoring (bulkheads and riprap) from Manhattan
to the bridge.
The New York State coastline is comprised of a unique combination of glacial bluffs, pocket
beaches, and extensive barrier island—bay systems. Long Island is particularly vulnerable to the
effects of shoreline erosion since it is largely formed of sand and gravel deposits left by the
retreating glaciers after the end of the last ice age around 20,000 years ago. The south shore of
Long Island is a sandy environment consisting largely of barrier islands, spits, and back-barrier
salt marshes that are very erodible and subject to inundation.

Climate Impacts
The coastal zone of the New York City metropolitan region faces both ongoing and future
natural hazards of flooding, beach erosion, and sea level rise. The anticipated global sea level
rise due to climate warming will have a significant impact on New York’s coastal areas, in
addition to other impacts like ocean circulation changes and higher water temperatures. The
effects of global sea level rise will be amplified in New York State due to coastal subsidence
caused by ongoing adjustments of the Earth’s crust to the melting of the ice sheets that began
20,000 years ago.
New York's coastal zones are becoming more developed, increasing the consequences of
flooding and coastal erosion. Sea level rise will greatly amplify current risks to coastal
populations and will lead to permanent inundation of low-lying areas, more frequent flooding by
storm surges, and increased beach erosion. Saltwater could reach farther up the Hudson River
and estuaries, contaminating urban water supplies, while increased water depth could permit the
tide and storm surges to propagate faster up the Hudson River to the Troy Dam, increasing flood
risk far from the ocean coast.
Sea level rise may become the dominant stressor acting on vulnerable salt marshes. Loss of
coastal wetlands reduces fish and shellfish populations. Higher water temperatures also affect
these populations. Some marine species, such as lobsters, are moving north out of New York
State, while other species, such as the blue claw crab, are increasing in the warmer waters.
High water levels, strong winds, and heavy precipitation resulting from strong coastal storms
already cause billions of dollars in damages and disrupt transportation and power distribution
systems. Barrier islands are being dramatically altered by strong coastal storms as ocean waters
wash over dunes, create new inlets, and erode beaches. Warming ocean waters have the potential
to produce stronger storms by increasing the source of energy for these storms.
Non-climate-related stresses will compound the effects of climate change. In the coastal region,
most of these are associated with human consumption of natural resources and land-use
practices. For example, coastal development, construction of organized drainage, and impervious
surfaces has led to a reduction in groundwater recharge and degraded coastal water quality. The

11-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

interconnection among precipitation, land use, and local fish populations has also been
documented, suggesting that increased urbanization may lead to a reduction in stream
biodiversity. In addition to water-quality-related stresses, fish stocks and other marine
ecosystems may be affected by harvesting practices, disease, normal population dynamics
(increased predation), and recruitment processes. Over-development along the coast increases the
demand for groundwater, which could lead to drawdown of the aquifer and increased saltwater
intrusion. Coastal infrastructure inhibits natural migration of marine systems, including wetlands
and barrier islands.
Impacts and Vulnerabilities Addressed for All Sea Coastal Recommendations
Sea level rise will progressively affect both human and natural systems, affecting water levels on
the ocean and estuarine coastline including the Hudson Estuary to the Troy dam; shortening
flood-recurrence intervals; increasing risk and geographic extent of coastal hazards such as
storm-surge-related flooding, erosion, and groundwater intrusion. New York State needs the best
available climate data to best plan for climate impacts. As outlined in the “Common Themes”
section of this chapter, the provision of climate data and projections could be facilitated through
state support of a Climate Science. The guidance that would be provided by this organization
would be extremely helpful to decision makers in all sectors affected by climate change.
Recommendation 1.

New York State should endorse a coordinated set of
projections for sea level rise and associated changes in
flood-recurrence intervals in all coastal areas, including
the Hudson River to the Federal Dam at Troy, for use by
State and local agencies and authorities for planning
and decision-making purposes.

New York State should formally endorse projections for sea level rise and associated changes in
flood-recurrence intervals in all coastal areas. It is necessary to factor this information into
planning and decision making now to reduce risk to communities and infrastructure vulnerable to
sea level rise and strong storms and to conserve coastal natural systems, where the greatest threat
from sea level rise is the construction of protective barriers that will prevent them from naturally
migrating inland in response to rising waters (see Recommendation #2). Columbia University,
NASA/Goddard Institute for Space Studies has developed projections for sea level rise for the
entire coastal area of New York State based on the findings and methodology of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and leading climatologists and glaciologists.
These projections have been adopted by the New York State Sea Level Rise Task Force
(SLRTF), New York City Panel on Climate Change (NPCC), and the NYSERDA Statewide
Climate Impacts and Adaptation Assessment (ClimAID). However, projections should be
regularly updated, modified, and refined.
Potential cost
There would be no direct cost to endorse the recently developed projections of the New York
State Sea Level Rise Task Force, NYC Panel on Climate Change, and ClimAID. The cost of
updating projections in the future may be minimal, since projections are expected to be based on
existing global and regional models. The adoption of sea level rise projections offers the
opportunity to change planning and decision making to reduce future impacts. Some coastal
development opportunities may not be pursued as projections of vulnerability are factored into
11-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

permitting decisions. If no projections are adopted, New York State could incur significant longterm costs from flood damage and potentially damaging ad hoc responses to flood events.
Funding will be needed to support the revision of statewide projections of climate change on a
regular basis.
Timing of implementation
This recommendation should be implemented immediately. In New York State people and
infrastructure are currently at very high risk of a powerful storm event in coastal areas. Coastal
ecosystems are at greatest risk from human decisions to erect protective barriers in response to
flood events. These risks are increasing over time due to sea level rise. The endorsement of sea
level rise projections, followed by State policy, regulatory actions, and decision making changes,
will support new planning and development processes in coastal areas aimed at reducing these
risks.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Incorporation of projections of future conditions in State policies, planning, and decision making
will make State spending more efficient by emphasizing appropriate development. Identification
of area of greatest risk and the direction of resources to vulnerable communities within such
areas would help reduce risk to those communities. Vulnerable communities will need assistance
if they must relocate from high-risk areas, and there may be community objections to changes in
State spending necessary to address sea level rise.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Adoption of sea level rise and storm-recurrence would provide the basis for a wide variety of
State and local planning efforts. See recommendations 2-5.
Recommendation 2.

Integrate sea level rise and flood-recurrence interval
projections into all relevant agency programs and
regulatory, permitting, planning, and funding decisions.

All State agencies should factor the projections of sea level rise and associated impacts from
Recommendation 1 into relevant aspects of long-term planning, programming, permitting,
regulating, and funding decisions. As necessary, the State should seek and/or provide technical
guidance to make appropriate policy changes. Agencies should require or complete analyses of
storm and sea level rise impacts over the design life of proposed projects in State permitting and
funding decisions. Agencies should regularly update, modify, and refine guidance documents
and plans based on current and new information on sea level rise. Local governments should also
incorporate considerations of sea level rise into planning, zoning, and permitting decisions.
Potential cost
Although incorporation of sea level rise projections into agency decision-making per se would
have minimal staff costs, resulting decisions could include costly capital outlays, reduction of
some economic opportunities, and potential controversy. For example, denial of permits within a
greater portion of the jurisdictional adjacent wetland area, may lead to legal challenges regarding
private property rights. However, incorporation of these projections into agency decision making

11-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

can lead to better planning for future conditions, prevention of loss, and avoidance of the larger
dramatic and potentially catastrophic costs of inaction.
Timing of implementation
Immediate action is necessary to respond to the causes and impacts of sea level rise and climate
change. Given current agency cooperation on adaptation efforts, this recommendation could
reasonably be implemented within two to five years. Delays in planning for current and
increasing risks of sea level rise and coastal hazards will result in greater the risk to humans,
infrastructure and ecosystems.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Incorporation of sea level rise projections in agency decisions would likely enhance protection of
communities within areas of environmental justice concern. For example, sea level rise
projections should be used to prioritize the analysis of potential toxic exposures in Significant
Maritime and Industrial Areas (SMIA) and inform Waterfront Revitalization Programs (WRP).
However, there is the potential for some decisions to affect such communities disproportionately,
for example by resulting in decreased property values or reduced opportunities for economic
development. Agency decisions must include clear evaluation and description of risk, robust
public participation, and enhanced efforts for public involvement in areas of environmental
justice concern. With increased regulatory protection against building in flood zones, a tradition
of construction on cheaper land that historically is flooded may be prevented, saving state and
community resources.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Specifics vary by program and type of decision, but co-benefits of accounting for sea level rise in
regulatory decision making would generally include minimizing the extent of erosion and coastal
flooding and inundation, thereby enhancing protection of critical natural habitats providing new
opportunities for passive recreation; reducing the risk of disruption of important communication,
transportation, and health services; improving land-use planning; reducing potential for forced
relocation; and reducing expenditures for shoreline armoring and beach nourishment.
Unintended consequences could include intensified land use outside the coastal zone, capital
outlays for elevation and relocation, and political ramifications.
Recommendation 3.

Identify and map areas of greatest current risk from
coastal storms and greatest future risk from sea level
rise and coastal storms in order to support risk
reduction actions in those areas

New York State should take action immediately to define the most vulnerable coastal areas and
revise standards for development and redevelopment to reduce risk in these areas, taking into
account the progressive nature of sea level rise. Regulatory and planning programs to reduce risk
will require identification, classification, and mapping of high-risk areas including the following:
•

Areas at greatest risk from sea level rise;

•

Areas at risk from storm surge with current sea levels;

•

Areas at risk from storm surge with sea level rise.
11-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

In addition, criteria should be developed to identify areas that may be sites of dune, barrier
island, and/or wetland migration in response to sea level rise. Maps of the coastal zone should be
updated to include these areas. All of the above maps should be updated on a regular basis and
the most up-to-date maps should always be used for official decision making.
The following information will be needed to fully assess vulnerability: localized projections of
climate effects; projections of storm surge; environmental information such as high resolution
elevation and bathymetry; spatial information for natural, built, and human resources; socioeconomic data; and development models such as build-out scenarios.
This recommendation is consistent with and critical to the implementation of several
recommendations of the New York State Sea Level Rise Task Force (SLRTF) and the ClimAID
Statewide Climate Impacts and Adaptation Assessment.
Potential cost
The New York State Office of Cyber Security and Critical Infrastructure, in coordination with
the NYSDEC and NYSERDA, is seeking to initiate a mapping mission to collect high resolution
elevation data using light detection and ranging technology (LiDAR) on the coastal regions of
New York State. High resolution contours of 1 foot are desired to be developed for all coastal
areas of Long Island and the Hudson River estuary from its mouth at New York City, north to
the Troy Dam. This effort would provide the resolution necessary to map communities and
critical infrastructure at greatest risk of sea level rise in the near term (next 30-50 years), and to
project the most likely path of inland tidal wetland migration in response to sea level rise. The
total cost, including the development of maps, is estimated to be nearly $1 million. The
combined costs of the development and update of storm surge projections, build-out scenarios,
and tidal wetland migration areas could be significant but may benefit from federal support.
Timing of implementation
Recommendations for enhanced elevation mapping should be advanced immediately. At a
minimum, digital base maps from the National Flood Insurance Program could be utilized as the
basis for mapping projected flood plain inundation in 2050 and 2100. The technology exists to
complete revised storm-surge projections and build-out scenarios, but funding is needed for
research to identify coastal areas most suitable for tidal wetland migration. With adequate
funding the extension of interactive mapping tools with high-resolution elevation data to enable
visualization of future sea level rise and storm surge scenarios could take 2-5 years to develop.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Assessment of areas vulnerable to sea level rise could be used to identify program and planning
needs to serve less affluent communities and to enable effective adaptation in those areas. Public
investments could be used to support communities that have a lack of capacity to address the
highest risks from coastal flooding. However, there is the potential for updated mapping products
to result in decreased property values or reduced opportunities for economic development in
areas that are highly vulnerable to flooding.

11-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Identification of high-risk coastal areas would allow identification of priorities for capital
investment funding to reduce risk, enhanced management planning for at-risk natural habitats,
preservation of areas for public access and passive recreation, and the identification of risk to
communication, transportation, and health services. Unintended consequences could include the
development of land-use conflicts and the political ramifications of mapping high-risk areas
coastal areas with high property values.
Recommendation 4.

Reduce vulnerabilities in coastal areas at risk from sea
level rise and storms (coastal risk management zone)
and support increased reliance on non-structural
measures and natural protective features to reduce
impacts from coastal hazards.

Where appropriate, the preference for new development and re-development in the coastal risk
management zone should be for projects or actions consistent with policies and programs that
emphasize reliance on natural protective features and non-structural measures, such as elevation
and relocation, to minimize negative impacts from coastal storms, erosion and sea level rise.
Support should be provided to regional and/or local planning that aims to reduce risk from sea
level rise and coastal hazards, to projects or actions identified in plans to conserve natural
protective features and to secure opportunities for habitat migration in response to sea level rise,
and to implement site-appropriate structural and non-structural measures to reduce risk of coastal
hazards. Decision makers must be cognizant of the sensitive nature of land-use decisions and
provide for local participation in decisions. Policies and programs must be consistent with the
New York State Coastal Management Program Policies (Article 42) and Coastal Zone
Management Act and should accomplish the following:
A.

Development of Coastal Resilience Plans
Direct public investment, programs, and policies toward regional, county and/or local
planning offices in coastal areas to support the development of long-term, regional-scale
coastal resilience plans. Opportunities to develop partnerships at the federal level should
also be pursued. Coastal resilience plans would be developed with the participation of the
appropriate local governments and authorities. They should strive to reduce vulnerability in
the coastal risk management zone through non-structural measures wherever possible; to
identify areas of significant public investment, water dependent uses, and/or critical
infrastructure that require structural protection because options for relocation, elevation, or
employment of non-structural measures are not feasible; and to outline opportunities to
reduce vulnerability during recovery and restoration following high-intensity coastal
storms.
Potential Cost
State support is needed for the funding, guidance, and technical assistance necessary for the
development of Coastal Resilience Plans and a policy shift toward a preference for nonstructural solutions. Overall costs would be low, provided supporting recommendations on
data acquisition and mapping are completed, compared to the costs of inaction.

11-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

B.

Assistance in Funding Measures to Reduce Risk
Direct public investment, programs and policies to assist regional, county, and/or local
planning offices in coastal areas to implement the risk-reduction measures outlined in
approved coastal resilience plans.
Potential Cost
In the last five years, New York State spent more than $22.6 million in projects to protect
public infrastructure, and commercial and residential property in high-risk coastal areas
from erosion and flooding. Tens of millions of dollars are being allocated for coastal
protection structures in the coming decades. Funding for these types of projects should be
redirected over time to reduce vulnerability in coastal communities and support nonstructural measures that will reduce long-term risk from coastal hazards with minimal
ecosystem impact.

Timing of implementation
Modification of State coastal policies and programs to advocate and support preparation of
coastal resilience plans should be proposed in the near term. Other planning supported by the
State or involving State facilities or infrastructure should be coordinated with coastal resilience
plans. Specific criteria that should be addressed in coastal resilience plans and the standards by
which such plans would be evaluated for completeness should be identified. Plan preparation
will take time and should be started as soon as possible. It will take a minimum of 2- 5 years for
the first coastal resilience plans to be prepared after they are initiated. The completion of plans in
all of the coastal areas of New York State would take several years depending on the
commitment of funding.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Less affluent communities and individuals will have difficulty finding adequate resources to
develop coastal resilience plans. Lower income community members in low-lying coastal areas
may also have more at stake than, for example, second-home owners on the coast, and less time
and resources to devote to participating in local planning efforts, and their needs may be
overlooked if they don’t have adequate representation. Assistance for developing plans, adapting
public infrastructure and facilities, and addressing the needs of private low-income property
owners is needed. Incentives should ensure participatory planning in low-income communities.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
•

Community planning for sea level rise will help identify critical development, infrastructure,
and natural resource assets for risk management.

•

Planning to reduce sea level rise impacts is more likely to secure natural resources than
individual or uncoordinated actions in response to storm events as they occur. It is also
possible that mapping of natural resources and systems will improve as a result of regional
planning.

•

Vacated lands could be converted to public-access points with broad community benefits.

11-24

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Allowing natural features to migrate and adjust to changing conditions via natural processes
(breaching, washover, migration, etc.), unhindered by development improves their long-term
survivability and flood-protection benefits to communities.

Recommendation 5.

Develop a long-term interagency mechanism to
regularly evaluate climate change science; set research
priorities to foster adaptation; coordinate programming,
regulatory, and funding actions; and assess progress in
adapting to climate change and sea level rise

A permanent mechanism is needed to ensure interagency and multi-organizational coordination;
to review projections of the anticipated impacts of climate change on a regular basis following
the IPCC schedule (roughly every 5 years); to develop priorities for federal, State, and local
research and policy and regulatory initiatives to respond to climate change; and to oversee
progress in Council-recommended policy implementation, including the recommendations of the
SLRTF and the ClimAID statewide impacts assessment. Prioritized recommendations for federal
policy changes should also be developed since federal programs and policies often contribute
indirectly to increasing or maintaining risk. Opportunities for regional coordination should also
be investigated. The creation of a New York State Climate Science Institute would greatly assist
these efforts.
With broad support at the executive level this recommendation could be highly effective at
addressing state management of resources. Effective interagency communication would reduce
duplication of efforts, allow expression of a broad range of perspectives on challenges, and a
pool of resources and strategies to address them, and would provide a structure for policy
adjustments, improving resiliency as new and better information becomes available.
Potential cost
Agencies will require staff to organize the interagency effort and advance these
recommendations, develop products and disseminate information, and facilitate integration of
new policies and programs into agency operations. Funding will be needed to monitor climate,
impact, and adaptation indicators.
Timing of implementation
Action is needed immediately to advance agency coordination, initiate discussions with partner
agencies, and establish information priorities. This recommendation could be implemented
within 2 years.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Groups or communities with the least economic resources will be disproportionately affected by
climate change because they are most likely to be living in more vulnerable areas and living in
less durable homes, and have the least personal resources to enable them to adapt. The proposed
interagency work group could offer a forum to discuss environmental justice issues and potential
solutions, identify long-term funding so advocates for environmental justice can participate, and
provide a venue for addressing related needs in state agency operations.

11-25

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
True interagency coordination on climate change would have an enormous benefit to regional
and local governments. Regulated entities in the coastal zone must deal with an array of
uncoordinated agency funding and regulatory programs that can confuse even the most seasoned
of local officials. Consolidation of policy and regulatory priorities, funding programs, and
technical assistance, and integration across agencies, could conserve both state and local
resources and tax dollars. At a minimum, the interagency group offers an opportunity for State
agencies to present unified information concerning climate change and sea level rise and a forum
for two-way communication with communities and community groups on climate change
adaptation needs. If climate change projections, and protective policies and regulations are not
adopted to reduce vulnerability in high-risk coastal areas, New York State could incur significant
long-term costs into the billions of dollars and increased risk to life and property.

Ecosystems
Vision Statement
Ecological systems will continue to sustain healthy, diverse, well-distributed and abundant
populations of fish, wildlife, plants, and human communities that are adapted to survive and
thrive in a world impacted by unprecedented and accelerating climate change.

Background
New York State covers an area of 54,077 square miles, including 47,047 square miles of land,
1,894 square miles of inland lakes and rivers, and 3,988 square miles of the Great Lakes.
Variations in topography and in proximity to bodies of water cause large climatic variations and
distinct ecological zones that support the complex web of biological diversity and provide
important ecosystem services.
Valuable ecosystem services provided by New York’s landscapes include harvested products
(food, timber, biomass, and maple syrup), clean water and flood control, soil conservation and
carbon sequestration, biodiversity support and genetic resources, recreation, and preservation of
wild places and heritage sites. New York’s ecosystems recharge groundwater supplies and
reduce soil erosion by creating catchments that enhance rainwater infiltration into soils as
opposed to allowing rapid runoff of storm water into streams. The healthy vegetation of
landscapes helps to stabilize and conserve soils, and also sequesters carbon above ground in the
standing biomass of trees and perennial plants and below ground in the form of roots and soil
organic matter. The diverse flora and fauna supported by New York landscapes play a role in
maintaining earth’s biological heritage, and the complex interactions among species benefit
society in many ways, such as natural control of insect pests and disease. Genetic diversity will
be essential for the natural adaptation of ecosystems to environmental stresses such as high
temperatures and drought that will be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, genetic
diversity has potential economic value in the search for new pharmaceuticals or organisms or
compounds with biotechnology applications.

11-26

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Ecosystems, as defined here, encompass the plants, fish, wildlife, and resources of all natural and
managed landscapes (e.g., forests, grasslands, aquatic systems) in New York State except those
land areas designated as agricultural or urban. This sector includes timber and maple syrup
industries, and tourism and recreation businesses conducted within natural and managed
ecosystems. It also encompasses interior wetlands, waterways, and lakes as well as their
associated freshwater fisheries and recreational fishing.
The impacts of climate change cannot be viewed in isolation, as other stressors are also affecting
ecosystems and will affect vulnerability to climate change. While society and policymakers are
likely to focus on ecosystem services, adaptation interventions by natural resource managers
often will be implemented at the level of species, communities and habitats. As climate changes
and the habitable zones of wild species continue to shift northward and/or up in elevation
throughout the century, natural resource managers will face new challenges in maintaining
ecosystem services and difficult decisions regarding change in species composition.
Climate Impacts
The initial impacts of climate change on species are already apparent, with documented accounts
of changes in the seasonal timing of events like bud-break or flowering and species range shifts
across the Northern Hemisphere. Within the northeastern United States, researchers have
documented earlier bloom dates of woody perennials, earlier spring arrival of migratory birds,
and other biological and ecological responses. Species and ecosystems are responding directly to
climate drivers and indirectly to secondary effects, such as changes in timing and abundance of
food supply, changes in habitat and increased pest, disease and invasive species pressure.
Ultimately, biodiversity, net primary productivity, vegetation water use, and biogeochemical
cycles could be affected by climate change. To date, however, there is no unequivocal evidence
of climate change impacts on ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration or water storage
and quality in New York State. The certainty in projecting climate change impacts diminishes as
projections are scaled up from individual species and ecosystem structure to ecosystem function
and services.
Within the next several decades New York State is likely to see widespread shifts in species
composition in the state's forests and other natural landscapes, with the loss of spruce-fir forests,
alpine tundra, and boreal plant communities. Warmer temperatures will favor the expansion of
some invasive species into New York, such as the aggressive weed, kudzu, and the insect pest,
hemlock woolly adelgid. Some habitat and food generalists (such as white-tailed deer) may also
benefit. Additionally, higher levels of CO2 tend to preferentially increase the growth rate of fastgrowing species, which are often weeds and other invasive species. Both of these climate factors
could also increase the productivity of some hardwood tree species, provided growth is not
limited by other factors such as drought or nutrient deficiency.
Lakes, streams, inland wetlands, and associated aquatic species will be highly vulnerable to
changes in the timing, supply, and intensity of rainfall and snowmelt, groundwater recharge, and
duration of ice cover. Increasing water temperatures will negatively affect brook trout and other
native coldwater fish.

11-27

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recommendation 1.

Continue to support and maintain the Invasive Species
Task Force, Invasive Species Council, Invasive Species
Advisory Committee, and Partnerships for Regional
Invasive Species Management (PRISMS) and support
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Invasive Species Task Force.

Invasive species pose a serious threat to the state’s environment and economy, and these threats
are exacerbated by the threat of climate change. Through the creation of the Invasive Species
Task Force, New York State has taken proactive steps to address the spread of aquatic and
terrestrial invasive pests and pathogens and to ensure state agencies, NGOs, businesses, and
researchers are coordinated in their efforts to control this threat. In order for the state to be
properly prepared to rapidly respond to emerging invasive species threats from a changing
climate, investments must be made to implement the recommendations of the Invasive Species
Task Force (ISTF).
The Invasive Species Council (ISC) has been established through legislation to continue the
coordination of invasive species management across the state, enacting an important
recommendation of the ISTF. In addition, the Invasive Species Advisory Committee has been
formed and is helping to coordinate the broader efforts of outside partners and to provide
important recommendations to the ISC. Both of these committees should be continued and
supported to ensure that these important efforts continue. As these efforts progress, the state
should ensure the federal government, neighboring states, municipal leaders, and NGOs are
active participants in mitigation and response efforts. The continuation of the PRISM is an
important way to achieve that coordination.
The ISC recently completed a final report on development of a regulatory system for non-native
species that would prevent the importation and/or release of certain non-native species into the
state and regulate the importation and sale of other invasive species. The recommended system
would create the first official lists of invasive species for New York State. The recommendations
in this report should be enacted, and an official regulatory system that would prevent future
introductions of invasive species should be established.
As rapid response plans are developed and implemented to address emerging threats, these plans
must include specific steps and funding to remediate the damage caused to the affected
ecosystems. This will ensure that native ecosystems are healthy, productive, and resilient in the
face of climate change. Also, all such invasive species response and management efforts must be
coupled with a strong public outreach effort that educates and engages private landowners and
the public on these restoration efforts.
Potential Cost
Aquatic and terrestrial invasive species cost the state and businesses millions of dollars to control
and in lost productivity, and these costs will increase as climate change causes a wider
distribution of invasive species. Although the continued operation of the Invasive Species
Council and Invasive Species Advisory Council has minimal costs associated with it, the
implementation of the recommendations could be quite costly. However, when the recommended
actions are considered as preventative measures, and the costs of no action are included in the

11-28

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

cost determination, it is likely that the cost of prevention is much smaller that the impact of no
action. A discussion of this is included in the ISTF report.
Timing of Implementation
Near-term, as the impact is currently being experienced and must be addressed. Since it is hard to
predict exactly which invasive species on the horizon will impact New York’s ecosystems,
investing in the creation of a rapid response plan is critical to the capacity to address emerging
invasives that may take 10-20 years to enter the state.
Environmental Justice Considerations
The spread of certain pests and pathogens, e.g., West Nile virus, is increasing and lower income
communities may have fewer resources available for prompt and effective treatment. However,
by proactively controlling invasive species, impacts to these communities can be reduced. There
are opportunities to coordinate with adaptation recommendations from the public health sector.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
By investing in the control of invasive species now, the state will realize improved agricultural
health and output, improved public health, improved water quality, improved ecosystem
resilience, and improved habitat value for species. However, these control measures may
potentially increase costs of transportation of goods in the state and increase costs for certain
recreational activities such as boating and fishing.
Recommendation 2.

Ensure that New York State’s ecosystems sustain
healthy, diverse, well-distributed, and abundant
populations of fish, wildlife, plants, and human
communities that are adapted to survive and thrive in a
world impacted by unprecedented and accelerating
climate change.

Specific Actions
A.

Support State agency efforts to incorporate an ecosystem-based
management approach that factors ecosystem function, services, and
biodiversity into decision making, including management plans, funding
decisions, and policies.
Established as the result of the 2006 New York Ocean and Great Lakes Ecosystem
Conservation Act (Act), the New York Ocean and Great Lakes Ecosystem Conservation
Council (NYOGLECC) has a goal of integrating ecosystem-based management (EBM) and
smart-growth principles into state programs that manage human activities affecting ocean
and Great Lakes ecosystem health 3 . Much of New York State’s response to climate change
would benefit from an ecosystem-based management approach, as developed through the
above initiative, and should be applied on a statewide basis.

3

See Draft Summary Report of Agency Guidelines and Recommendations. http://nyoglecc.org/reports.html

11-29

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Potential Cost
Continued NYOGLECC activities are being undertaken within existing agency operating
budgets. Several council agencies are incorporating EBM principles into their respective
organizational structures without significant additional cost or creation of new programs.
Timing of Implementation
EBM integration underway for State agency decision making has multiple timelines.
Overall, NYOGLECC has advanced or completed priority recommendations on schedule
according to its 2009 report. Continuation of this work is critical to developing additional
momentum within the NYOGLECC member agencies as well as to the expansion of the
concept to other agencies and broader regional entities and organizations.
Environmental Justice Considerations
An ecosystem-based management approach, by definition, includes the human component
of the ecosystem as an integral part of the planning process. Environmental justice
communities in New York State’s coastal areas are particularly susceptible to many of the
projected impacts of climate change, and an EBM approach will help to provide
comprehensive solutions that target environmental and human needs. EJ communities must
be involved with the planning and decision making from the start.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
An EBM approach leads to greater efficiencies and effectiveness in the application of
government funds to advance ecosystem goals and specific projects.
B.

To enable ecosystems to better respond to changing climate conditions,
incorporate adaptive-management principles, techniques, and approaches
into New York’s forest-management policies and programs.
The State of New York manages more than 775,000 acres of state forests recognized for
sustainable management by the Forest Stewardship Council and the Sustainable Forest
Initiative. The State holds conservation easements on an additional 700,000 acres, some of
which is managed for timber production. On these lands the state should develop forest best
management practices (BMPs) for adaptation to climate change and management for
carbon sequestration. These BMPs could also be used by private forestland owners, who
own the majority of the state’s 18.5 million acres of forests.
Potential Cost
While funding for the research component of this recommendation would be substantial,
little of the cost would fall on the State of New York. The benefits of the research would be
applicable over the northeastern states that share common forest types; therefore, probable
sources of funding would be those traditionally used by the academic research community
(e.g., National Science Foundation, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Forest
Service).
The Department of Environmental Conservation already manages 768,000 acres for timber
production. Therefore, the costs of giving priority to management practices that maintain
11-30

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

the resiliency of forests stressed by climate change would be minimal. Rather, it requires a
redirection of management objectives. Additional costs would be necessary in the
demonstration component of this recommendation. This could be accomplished by adding
four demonstration foresters to the DEC staff located across the state. An alternative
approach would be to enhance Cornell University’s Cooperative Extension Service by an
equivalent amount. The estimated cost of this would be approximately $500,000 per year,
including salary, travel, and operating expenses.
Timing of Implementation
The impact of changing forest practices is measured in decades, not years. Therefore, it is
important to implement BMPs immediately to realize the carbon benefits of forest
management that would occur by mid-century. The demonstration portion of this
recommendation should begin in 2011 using the best information available on the influence
of climate change on forests and on carbon storage and sequestration. At the same time, the
demonstrators would be emphasizing the flexibility associated with adaptive management
practices so that adjustments in forest management could be made as more research
becomes available or as landowner objectives change.
Environmental Justice Considerations
There is little impact on environmental justice in the traditional use of the term. However, it
is important to point out that average incomes in rural areas are, on average, lower than in
urban areas.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Forests play an intriguing role in climate change in that the composition of forests are
likely to change if there is significant climate change, while at the same time they can play
a role in mitigating the impacts of climate change. A related issue is the potential for
woody biomass as a substitute for fossil fuels as an energy source. The potential for solid
fuels in the form of pellets, gasification as a source of heat and electricity, and liquid fuels
such as ethanol is in its infancy but will likely grow. Thus, the combination of impacts of
climate change on forest composition, the potential for improved carbon sequestration and
storage, and the potential for forest products as a source of energy that may be more carbon
neutral than fossil fuels is of high priority.
C.

Protect and enhance the stability and function of stream, river, and aquatic
coastal systems to accommodate changing climate conditions.
Safeguarding the integrity and increasing the resilience of stream, river, and aquatic coastal
systems and associated wildlife corridors will greatly bolster the capacity of fish and
wildlife to meet the many challenges of climate change. The following four inter-related
strategies will address this goal:
• Maintaining and improving aquatic habitat connectivity by removing or mitigating manmade aquatic barriers including culverts, dams, and shoreline armoring;

11-31

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

• Increasing the protection for in-stream habitat features such as cold-water refugia,
oxygen-rich riffles and runs, and natural shorelines with undercut banks and overhanging
vegetation;
• Removing pollutants, including heat, from runoff entering water bodies;
• Maintaining hydrologic flows consistent with the needs of fish and wildlife and the
functions of streams and rivers.
Shoreline corridors provide effective means of movement and dispersal of fish and wildlife.
As such, they enable species to adjust their ranges in response to changing climate and
environmental conditions. Much of the landscape is fragmented with human development,
including subdivisions, roads, and commercial and industrial development. On the coast
many shorelines are armored, preventing habitats like tidal wetlands from responding to sea
level rise. This inhibits the ability of many species to adjust their ranges. However, New
York has a rich and widely distributed network of streams and rivers. Providing shoreline
buffers to coastal, stream, and river systems can provide the “transportation” system for
fish and wildlife—both aquatic and terrestrial—to move on the landscape and establish
new ranges in response to climate change.
Potential Cost
Protecting and restoring shoreline buffers will be a highly cost-effective strategy.
Regulatory programs that protect existing buffers would require staffing. Although not
inexpensive, these efforts are cost effective because they maintain existing habitats, offer a
wide array of additional social and environmental benefits, and prevent other societal costs
(e.g., addressing the effects of flooding along stream corridors). Incentive programs that
pay to restore or protect shoreline buffers would vary in cost depending on the nature and
magnitude of the restoration required.
Timing of Implementation
Adopting policies to protect and restore buffers should be undertaken immediately; it is a
no-regrets action that has both short-term and long-term benefits. Buffers are already being
restored in the state, so elevating this as a priority could result in very rapid
implementation. This is a durable effort that could continue to restore additional buffers as
future opportunities arise. Implementation of large-scale restoration programs would be a
longer-term endeavor, with 86,000 miles of streams and rivers in the state, and 3000 miles
of ocean and estuarine coastline, most of which have some degree of impact. It would be
helpful to divide the state into priority watersheds and shoreline areas to concentrate initial
attention and funding on the most critical areas.
Environmental Justice Considerations
This strategy would have positive impacts on all communities in the state, including EJ
communities. Creating green space along shorelines and stream corridors improves the
local environment and contributes positively to the quality of life in highly urbanized areas.
Since the environmental justice community may have the least means to address the
impacts of climate change, actions in environmental justice areas should be given high
priority. Providing adequately sized road stream crossings such as bridges and culverts will

11-32

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

significantly decrease the frequency and severity of flooding at these key junctures,
improving safety for the traveling public and residents alike. Conserving the natural
processes of tidal wetlands, dunes, and barrier islands can also contribute to coastal flood
protection from strong storms.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
The co-benefits of protecting and restoring riparian buffers are numerous: improved flood
protection, improved protection of transportation infrastructure and surface drinking
waters, improved water quality, increased availability of important habitats, increased
property values, reduced threats of erosion (including to agriculture lands), improved
public health, decreased costs of drinking-water treatment, decreased costs of farming,
improved recreation opportunities, and reduced liability insurance premiums. Conversely,
by protecting additional land adjacent to streams, there will be a somewhat reduced
availability of developable or farmable land with perhaps a corresponding decreased tax
base for local communities, although this probably would be offset by the reduced cost of
infrastructure maintenance and improved quality of life benefits.
Recommendation 3.

Develop a research and monitoring plan to detect,
record, and analyze changes in species, habitat
composition, natural cycles, and fish and wildlife health,
and effectively address current and future threats in
changing climate conditions.

To effectively manage the natural resources of New York State, practitioners must understand
the baseline condition of species, habitats, and population trends. Rapidly changing climate and
associated changes in habitats and ecological community structure will likely increase fish and
wildlife exposure to stressors (both existing and those caused by climate change), compromise
their ability to adapt to stress, and affect the ability to detect harmful trends in fish and wildlife
ecology and health. An increase in the capacity to identify key stressors is needed to inform
management decisions and abate threats. Assessments of species’ and habitats’ climate
vulnerabilities, including exposure sensitivity and adaptive capacity, should be used to prioritize
conservation actions.
The information from baseline condition surveys, stressor identification, and vulnerability
analyses will directly inform the development of a research and monitoring plan for New York.
Such a plan should be based on explicit, predictive, and measurable objectives and indicators,
and include monitoring protocols that can reliably detect signs of climate change impacts.
Potential Cost
Developing a research and monitoring plan will not be of extremely high cost and can most
likely be done with current staff if prioritized. On the other hand, implementing the plan will
have high start-up costs and will be fairly labor-intensive. This is a primary reason why most
New York entities have not conducted whole-scale resource monitoring to date, though there are
exceptions.
Inaction on this recommendation is far more costly to society and ecosystems in the long term
than is implementation. Sound science forms the basis of effective adaptation strategies in
11-33

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

response to expected impacts from climate. In addition to the loss of ecosystem services gained
directly and indirectly from nature, New York also stands to lose tens of millions of dollars
annually from various grants and federal funding if it cannot demonstrate effectiveness of its
conservation actions..
Timing of Implementation
The advent of climate change has increased the need for, and urgency of, developing and
implementing a monitoring plan.
Environmental Justice Considerations
This recommendation would provide benefits across the state and all communities. Sciencebased projections of future conditions and vulnerabilities will assist in identifying communities
most at risk, result in more efficient state spending and reduce long-term risk.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
The research and monitoring detailed above will assist in incorporating adaptive-management
principles into New York’s natural resource management programs, protecting the stability and
function of stream and river systems, developing and implementing an education and outreach
strategy, and protecting and managing important migratory and dispersal corridors. To be
effective, all of these activities must be based on sound science. This recommendation will also
increase partnering efforts, maintain and leverage funding, help prioritize conservation actions,
and maintain critical ecosystem services.
Conversely, by allocating staff time and dollars to research and monitoring, other management
programs may be negatively affected in the short term. This will most likely be offset by greatly
informing future management efforts to achieve the most cost-effective conservation actions.
Recommendation 4.

Expand climate change education and outreach
initiatives for students, landowners, and local
governments. Include sound scientific information on
the potential impacts of climate change on natural areas
and ecosystem services.

Developing outreach and education mechanisms based upon up-to-date and reliable climate
change data is a necessary component of the Climate Action Plan and the State’s Climate Smart
Community Program. Climate change education should be a component of general science
curricula, and teachers across New York State and at all levels should be provided with reliable
scientific information and have access to a suite of curriculum materials, including study lessons
and student activity plans related to climate change.
On-the-ground and accessible demonstration sites reinforce climate education initiatives. The
State should seek to secure funding and incentives for environmental educators to develop
interpretive materials and assist schools in climate change education. Further, the State should
encourage all agencies with programs related to education, resource management, and
community planning to develop materials and displays that demonstrate the impacts associated
with climate change and the role of each agency in the mitigation of these impacts.

11-34

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Education and outreach to private landowners and land managers are critical to advancing onthe-ground climate-smart land management practices. State agencies involved in resource
management should provide landowners and local governments with information on climatesmart BMPs related to planting climate resilient species, stochastic event planning, and
optimizing wildlife habitat, managing riparian buffers, and controlling invasive species.
Expanding and focusing current community technical assistance efforts to include standardized
climate-smart BMPs is one way to expand education and outreach mechanisms to landowners
and land managers across New York State.
Potential Cost
The costs of integrating climate education modules into general science curriculum standards are
varied and long-term, and depend largely on the needed course materials relative to the level of
training. The cost to New York State agencies to construct and implement climate demonstration
sites and projects is immediate and short-term, but as learning sites for students and citizens
would yield long-term benefits. The costs associated with expanding outreach to landowners and
local communities may be offset substantially by effective coordination of non-governmental
and state technical assistance initiatives.
Timing of Implementation
For New York State to successfully meet current and future challenges associated with climate
change, education and outreach policy and mechanisms must be implemented immediately.
Currently, there are successful efforts being undertaken across New York State; however, these
initiatives must be expanded to adequately prepare New Yorkers for the myriad of impacts
associated with climate change. Education and outreach to students, landowners, and local
communities will require ongoing strategies, immediate implementation, and long-term resolve.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Education and outreach activities should be multi-lingual and multi-cultural, and include input
from environmental justice communities as to the most effective means of communication.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
The co-benefits associated with efficient education and outreach of students, landowners, and
local communities are vast and varied. They include improved land management practices on
private lands; expanded community energy efficiency, development, and planning initiatives;
increased locally conserved lands; expanded green-technology workforce; clean-energy
innovation; constituent support for environmental policies; increased wildlife habitat suitability
as a result of changing land management practices; and increased wildlife habitat connectivity.
Unintended consequences associated with pursuing dynamic goals include effort fragmentation
resulting in inefficiency, complex delivery mechanisms that reduce effectiveness, and crosseffort redundancy. Progress metrics must be clearly established upon policy and mechanism
implementation due to the ongoing nature and qualitative components inherent to many
education and outreach initiatives.

11-35

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Energy
Vision Statement
Ensure that the energy generation and delivery infrastructure throughout the state will prepare
for, and adapt to, a changing climate by building system resilience, while providing the public
with clean, safe, and reliable services.
Background
Energy is derived from a wide variety of fuel sources and technologies in New York State.
Roughly 49 percent of the state’s electricity is generated in-state using fossil fuels; nuclear power
(30 percent) and renewables (21 percent) account for the balance. The generation mix varies
widely in different parts of the state. The state's annual electricity load has increased by about 4.3
percent per year. New York City is by far the largest load zone in the state, responsible for
approximately one-third of total annual electricity demand statewide
Thermal energy needs are satisfied in a variety of ways. New York State is home to more than a
dozen district energy systems, which centrally generate steam, hot water, or cold water and
distribute it to customers via a series of underground pipes. Natural gas and heating oil are the
most commonly used sources of heating fuel in buildings around the state.
Reliable energy systems are critical to commerce and quality of life. New York State’s electricity
and gas supply and distribution systems are highly reliable, but weather-related stressors can
damage equipment, disrupt fuel supply chains, reduce power plant output levels, or increase
demand beyond the energy system’s operational capacity.
Climate Impacts
Global climate change is expected to alter both average climate and the frequency and intensity
of extreme weather events in New York State, affecting energy demand, system efficiency, and
power supply potential. In certain cases, climate change may help New York’s energy system
function more smoothly, by eliminating weather-related supply chain problems through milder
winter weather in some areas for example. However, climate change is more commonly
predicted to adversely affect system operations, increase the difficulty of ensuring supply
adequacy during peak demand periods, and exacerbate already-problematic conditions, such as
the urban heat-island effect.
Impacts of climate change on energy demand are likely to be more significant than impacts on
supply. Decreases in heating demand will primarily affect natural gas markets, while increases in
cooling demand will affect electricity markets; such changes will vary regionally.
On the supply side, more frequent heat waves will cause an increase in the use of air
conditioning, stressing power supplies and increasing peak demand loads. Increased air and
water temperatures will affect the efficiency of power plants. Transformers and distribution lines
for both electric and gas supply are vulnerable to extreme weather events, temperature, and

11-36

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

flooding. Coastal infrastructure in downstate areas is vulnerable to flooding as a result of sea
level rise and severe storms.
Renewable generation may also be affected. Hydropower, located primarily in upstate areas, is
vulnerable to drought and changes in precipitation patterns. The availability and reliability of
solar power systems are vulnerable to changes in cloud cover, although this may be offset by
advances in technology; wind power systems are similarly vulnerable to changes in wind speed
and direction. The effect of climate change on biomass as an energy feedstock is unclear, though
biomass availability depends to some degree on weather conditions during the growing season.
The indirect financial impacts of climate change may be greater than the direct impacts of
climate change. These indirect impacts include those on investors or insurance companies linked
to vulnerable energy system assets or on customers forced to grapple with changing energy
prices resulting from changing climate conditions.
Recommendation 1.

Ensure the accuracy of electric demand and peak
demand forecasting for planning purposes and build
resilience for meeting peak demand.

Currently, forecasts of long-term energy use and peak demand are based on historical use of
electric and gas utilities. Forecasts do not currently reflect the energy requirements that would
result from changes in temperature or greater occurrences of heat events anticipated in the future
resulting from climate change.
Specific Actions
A.

Incorporate best available projections of changes in seasonal average
temperatures and increased frequency of extreme heat events in near- and
long-term demand forecasting for electricity and natural gas.
Peak demand forecasts in particular should be revised to incorporate predicted higher
seasonal average temperatures and increased frequency of extreme heat events. These
climate impacts will likely result in increased energy use and/or increased reliance on
demand response, energy storage, and other energy resources to meet peak demands.

B.

Plan to meet regional demand growth and improved system resiliency
through local implementation of demand response and energy efficiency
measures, greater use of localized distributed generation, energy storage,
other energy-supply technologies, and smart-grid technologies, beyond
those efforts already underway and planned.
The current regulatory and planning frameworks should be made more flexible and
adaptable to a rapidly changing climate and related adaptation and mitigation efforts and
accommodate new and emerging technologies more quickly to meet emerging needs.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Higher seasonal average temperatures and greater frequency of heat events will contribute to
transmission line sags and to increased energy demands, possibly resulting in additional stress on
distribution transformers. Energy-demand forecasts are already implemented to ensure that

11-37

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

regional distribution capacity exceeds projected peak-load demand, thereby ensuring reliability
of energy services. The regional load-planning process is an appropriate location for integrating
temperature increases into demand forecasts, because problems with reliability will have
disparate impacts based on where people live (e.g., urban heat islands). Furthermore,
identification of energy efficiency and renewable distributed generation opportunities through
this process can decrease the need to build additional distribution infrastructure. Planning for
long-term increases in temperature will result in a more holistic approach to balancing the costs
between distribution infrastructure and demand-reduction opportunities.
Energy demand will be impacted heterogeneously throughout the state. Some distribution
systems will be impacted more than others, depending on regional characteristics. Rural areas
could likely be impacted to a lesser extent than urban areas where there is a measurable heatisland effect.
Potential Cost
This recommendation calls for more effective planning and for incorporating projected
temperature changes into demand forecast modeling. Doing so may add to the complexity of
forecasting, but the increase in costs should be minimal. Identifying load conditions under hightemperature scenarios will facilitate more accurate cost/benefit comparisons between options for
delivery infrastructure and for demand-reduction.
Timing of Implementation
Near-term: Incorporation of temperature increases into regional long-term load planning should
begin at next opportunity (2-5 years).
Environmental Justice Considerations
There is concern over localized impacts of energy use and a desire to ensure that reductions in
energy use result in localized emission reductions that improve regional air quality, including
opportunities associated with peak-demand generation units. Better regional demand forecasting
and planning can protect overburdened communities by accurately projecting future
infrastructure requirements and identifying new sources of power or energy savings that reduce
emissions for EJ neighborhoods by siting these facilities elsewhere, distributing the negative
effects of power production, or reducing the need for operating those units presently located in or
near affected communities, while maintaining electric system reliability.
Recommendation 2.

Increase utilities’ and energy providers’ resiliency to
climate-related impacts.

Climate models predict that higher ocean and atmospheric temperatures will contribute to the
addition of energy to the global hydrologic cycle. As a result, it is predicted that New York State
and the northeastern United States will experience more frequent and intense storm events.
Higher wintertime temperatures may also contribute to more frequent ice storms. Electric
outages that resulted from the March 2010 nor’easter storm in downstate New York
demonstrated that heavy of precipitation coupled with high winds can be damaging to the electric
transmission and distribution system. Many utilities in the southeastern United States operate in
areas where high-energy storms occur. The exchange of risk-management criteria between

11-38

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

southeastern and northeastern utilities helps to establish the best management practices that
maintain reliability at the lowest achievable cost and should continue.
Specific Actions
A.

Ensure that best available projections concerning the frequency and severity
of extreme storm events are incorporated into State and regional emergency
response plans.
State and regional emergency response plans should continue to work with a spectrum of
stakeholders including utilities, first responders, community organizations, and individual
households to gather necessary information, share it effectively, and use it to continuously
improve emergency preparedness.

B.

As part of a statewide vulnerability assessment and planning effort, ensure
that detailed statewide maps are available to assist in identifying areas and
infrastructure at high risk from storm and flood damage.
Energy infrastructure includes electricity generation, transmission, substation, and
distribution facilities; interstate natural gas pipelines, storage facilities, compressor stations,
and local distribution systems; propane facilities; and transportation and storage systems
for a wide range of petroleum products (including pipelines, large and small-scale storage
tanks, barge and rail operations, and various transfer facilities). Development of inventories
of this infrastructure and potential vulnerabilities to climate change is critical to prioritizing
protection of existing facilities.

C.

Work with organizations such as the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI)
and NYSEARCH (a voluntary sub-organization within the Northeast Gas
Association) to survey and assess utility industry best practices for
increasing resilience to climate change.
Development of effective protocols and procedures for considering climate change-related
risks in decisions to locate, design, and build energy infrastructure, both to maintain the
reliability of existing systems and to meet the future energy needs is important. To
incorporate innovations and best practices in climate adaptation, the State energy- planning
process should evaluate strategies and techniques employed by utilities, regulators, and
independent power producers regionally, nationally, and internationally. This evaluation
process would examine the appropriateness of strategies and techniques for particular
regions in the state.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Outages on the electric distribution system during storm events can limit delivery of health care
and emergency services, banking, commerce, and air conditioning, heating, communication, and
transportation pathways. Currently, no central resource to identify areas of the state most likely
to experience one or all of the possible impacts exists. Recommendation 2.B. calls for a
centralized state mapping system to document the areas of high risks of weather-related damage
to infrastructure. This information will inform utilities and the Public Service Commission (as
well as other infrastructure-owning stakeholders) about which areas are most susceptible to

11-39

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

wind-tunnel effect, flooding, ice formation, erosion and other impacts from major storm events
and which factors should be addressed in their infrastructure’s risk assessments.
Differences in the manner in which infrastructure will be impacted by major storms across the
state is a primary reason for identifying infrastructure risk through a central mapping program.
Some distribution systems are more likely to be impacted by coastal storms from mid to late
summer, whereas others are more likely to be impacted by severe snow and/or ice storms in the
winter. Some utilities will also be susceptible to both types of storm events. Differences in
regional characteristics will be a determining point for benchmarking.
Potential Cost
It is assumed that utilities and generators will upgrade their infrastructure to more resilient
equipment as storms events become more frequent as a result of climate change. This set of
recommendations seeks to minimize the cost of this process through analysis, climate
forecasting, and benchmarking. Specifically, the cost of building resilience to climate change can
be minimized or avoided if infrastructure is prioritized and triaged based on compelling longterm benefits and/or risk reduction (e.g., avoiding significant outages).
Timing of Implementation
Near to mid-term (10 years): Planning for and coordinating greater communication among
emergency responders, utilities, and their customers, and independent power producers should
proceed on an ongoing basis. Tracking infrastructure damage caused by storm-related incidents,
initiating benchmarking between utilities, and developing best-management practices should be
completed within the next 5-10 years.
Environmental Justice Considerations
During periods of storm activity, fuel and electric distribution can be compromised, as can
communication pathways. Currently, utilities maintain records and prioritize restoration of
services for individuals with home health care needs, emergency service providers, and hospitals.
A significant or serious public health problem could arise if both electric power and
communication networks are compromised at the same time. Leading up to and preceding large
storm events, communicating with this at-risk population will be a critical and necessary public
health concern. Communication efforts should be multi-lingual.

Public Health
Vision Statement
Begin planning now to protect and promote public health by reducing individual and community
vulnerability to the potentially significant public health consequences of climate change.

11-40

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Background
A diverse state, with populations spread unevenly over urban and rural service areas, New York
is one of 26 states that rely primarily on a county-based system for public health service delivery.
Local health departments operate under the authority of either the county legislature or local
board of health. The result is a highly decentralized system with a non-uniform provision of core
services. For example, local health departments provide environmental health services in 37 out
of New York’s 62 counties, while the State Department of Public Health provides service to the
other areas. The New York State Public Health Council has identified this decentralization of
public health service delivery as a key obstacle to efficient coordination of programming and
data resources for climate-health preparedness. The Council has recommended regional, multicounty initiatives, which are proven models for more efficient and equitable distribution of
expertise and services.
In an effort to improve health care provision, in 1996 New York State initiated a data and
knowledge communication program linking a wide range of partners, including hospitals, local
health departments, nursing homes, diagnostic centers, laboratories, insurance provider networks,
and federal agencies. Current communication networks—Health Alert Network (state and city
levels), the Health Provider Network, and the Health Information Network—are viewed as “both
very helpful and very underutilized” by the Public Health Association of New York City.
However, as a result of non-standardized data systems, the value of these networks across user
groups is compromised. These would be appropriate organizations to target for climate-health
educational outreach and to evaluate climate-health interventions.
Some current health conditions are considered potentially sensitive to the changing climate.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the state and is made worse by extreme
heat and poor air quality. Childhood asthma is an important current health challenge in many
parts of New York State, especially in the five counties that comprise New York City, and is
made worse by poor air quality. New York State has experienced the emergence of several
vector-borne diseases (those spread by carriers such as mosquitoes and ticks) in the past few
decades.
Climate Impacts
Climate change vulnerabilities in the public health sector are, to a large extent, those in which
public health and environmental agencies are already engaged. However, climate change places
an additional burden on public health agencies that are already burdened by low levels of staffing
and funding. Climate-related risk factors include heat events, extreme storms, disruptions of
water supply and quality, decreased air quality, changes in timing and intensity of pollen and
mold seasons, and alterations in patterns of infectious disease vectors and organisms. Demand
for health services and the need for public health surveillance and monitoring will increase as
climate continues to change.
As a result of these climate risks, some climate-related health vulnerabilities have emerged.
Heat-related illness and death are projected to increase, while cold-related death is projected to
decrease. Increases in heat-related death are projected to outweigh reductions in cold-related
death. Cardiovascular and respiratory-related illness and death will be affected by worsening air

11-41

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

quality, including more smog, wildfires, pollens, and molds. Allergy and asthma cases are
projected to increase and become more severe.
Vector-borne diseases, such as those spread by mosquitoes and ticks (e.g., West Nile virus), may
expand or their distribution patterns may change. Water- and food-borne diseases are likely to
increase without adaptation intervention. Water supply, recreational water quality, and food
production will be at increased risk due to increased temperatures and changing precipitation
patterns.
More intense storms and flooding could lead to increased stress and mental health impacts,
impaired ability to deliver public health and medical services, increased respiratory diseases such
as asthma, and increased outbreaks of gastrointestinal diseases.
These vulnerabilities span a range from the relatively direct, data-rich, and well understood to
more complex, multi-factorial systems for which both data and models are currently
underdeveloped. Uncertainties pervade any effort to predict either direct or indirect health
impacts of climate change. These uncertainties increase the importance of building resilience
into the public health system to cope with inevitable surprises to come. Vulnerability
assessments combined with a full accounting of uncertainties will help in prioritizing climatehealth preparedness plans, informing communities on which actions should be taken first which
information gaps are most critical to fill.
Recommendation 1.

Improve or establish robust public health mechanisms to
reduce the potential for heat-related morbidity and
mortality in New York State.

Projections indicating that extreme heat events in New York State are likely to increase in
frequency, intensity, and duration point to the need for mechanisms to reduce the potential for
heat-related morbidity and mortality. These mechanisms include expanded outreach and
education activities, assessment of the adequacy of existing heat warning systems and cooling
center programs, working with utilities to address health needs associated with heat-related
power outages, working with community-based organizations to provide assistance to vulnerable
populations, and implementing a statewide plan to reduce the urban heat-island effect.
Specific Actions
A.

Assess the adequacy of existing heat-warning systems and, as necessary,
expand the capacity of existing cooling-center programs. For the latter,
factors that should be considered include siting, potential transportation
obstacles, effects of power outages or flooding, and other needs of
vulnerable population/communities.
As heat-related climate events increase in frequency and severity, significant additional
resources may be needed to prevent heat-related morbidity and mortality. A thorough
assessment of existing systems and programs must be undertaken as soon as possible.
Potential Cost
11-42

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

State and local agencies will need additional staff resources to effectively implement this
action. Other partners, such as academic researchers and community representatives, also
may seek compensation for their efforts. Significant capital costs are likely to be associated
with the siting of any additional cooling centers, relocating existing cooling centers, and
with any necessary maintenance of cooling centers. Costs of staffing and operating some
cooling centers and providing for public transportation to cooling centers also may be
significant.
Timeframe for Implementation
New York State already uses systems to warn people about excessive heat. Therefore,
while the recommended assessment of existing systems should begin in the near term, it
has somewhat less urgency than some of the other recommended public health strategies
and actions described in this section. Given the anticipated increase in the frequency and
intensity of extreme heat events, work to begin expanding and enhancing cooling center
programs should begin as soon as possible.
B.

Enhance existing education and outreach activities, employing multilingual
and culturally sensitive approaches and making use of appropriate media to
increase awareness of the public health consequences of heat exposure and
measures to avoid heat-related morbidity and mortality. Efforts should target
particularly vulnerable populations.
Education and outreach may be the single most important way to reduce heat-related
morbidity and mortality. To achieve effective awareness of heat-warning systems and use
of cooling-center programs, efforts should be tailored to reach target audiences.
Additionally, many vulnerable people lack personal mobility and may not be easily
reachable via public-service announcements. Often they will be under physician care for
chronic medical conditions; it may be effective to work with physicians and managed-care
organizations to help get information to vulnerable patients, and to provide a
communications link that those patients can use to call for help. Physicians and managedcare organizations might also be in the best position to identify those most vulnerable
according to medical condition, language, and residential information (e.g., living on the
top floor).
Potential Cost
One or more agencies should be provided with the necessary staffing resources to
implement this action or be directed to reallocate existing resources. Additional costs will
include those associated with publishing and distributing printed materials, purchasing
space and time for commercial media message distribution (e.g., newspaper, radio,
television) and social-networking media via the Internet, and necessary training (e.g.,
training of people to effectively deliver key messages).
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin immediately upon adoption of a final Climate
Action Plan, as heat-related illness and death are already a problem under current climate
11-43

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

conditions. Since outreach programs already exist, refinement or expansion of the efforts
may be achieved relatively quickly.
C.

Coordinate with utilities to develop an approach to address the public health
needs resulting from power disruptions associated with extreme heat events.
A spectrum of stakeholders including state and local agencies, utilities, and community
organizations must work together to identify the best ways to protect public health if heat
events result in power disruptions. Local electricity generation resulting from demand
response programs also can exacerbate poor air quality.
Potential Cost
It may be possible to accomplish initial planning efforts by redirecting existing resources.
Possible costs associated with any necessary actions identified by the initial planning
efforts are unknown at this time.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin as soon as possible.

D.

Expand upon existing community-based volunteer networks and, as needed,
establish additional networks to identify and assist vulnerable populations
including senior citizens, people with impaired mobility, and people with
limited English-language proficiency.
Volunteer efforts may be needed to augment outreach and education activities in order to
better protect the most vulnerable populations in climate-related emergency situations.
Volunteers would need climate change education and awareness training. Such networks
could become part of existing community-based emergency preparedness activities.
Potential Cost
See 1-B above.
Timeframe for Implementation
See 1-B above.

E.

Develop and implement a statewide “Green Cool-down Plan” to reduce the
heat-island effect, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable
communities.
Reflective building materials and green space can significantly reduce heat islands.
Because communities with the least amount of green space often suffer most acutely from
the heat-island effect, a plan to address and mitigate this phenomenon’s negative impacts
would be of significant benefit. The proposed statewide “Green Cool-down Plan” could
build on existing programs and plans focused on creating open space and recreational

11-44

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

facilities, promoting urban forestry and agriculture, and employing green infrastructure
practices. Augmenting building codes to maximize reflectivity of roofs, windows, and
exterior walls in vulnerable urban neighborhoods should also be considered. These actions
would contribute to both mitigation and adaptation efforts in the state.
Potential Cost
Initial costs of developing this plan should not be substantial as they probably would be
limited to providing agencies and authorities with adequate staff resources and expertise (or
redirecting existing resources) to develop an effective plan. Costs of implementing the plan
could be substantial, but these costs probably would, to a greater or lesser extent, be
balanced by the cost benefits achieved after implementation.
Timeframe for Implementation
Ideally, implementation would begin as soon as sufficient staff resources are available.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Climate change is likely to increase the frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme heat events
in New York State. Extreme heat can directly cause an increase in heat-related morbidity and
mortality, including increased risks for those with medical conditions such as cardiovascular
disease, renal disease, emphysema, and others. Extreme heat also may lead to increased
electricity demand, potentially resulting in short-term blackouts and brownouts, which can lead
to other health effects. Weather conditions associated with extreme heat events often are
associated with an overall decline in air quality.
All New Yorkers are vulnerable to the range of possible public health consequences associated
with extreme heat events. However, certain sensitive populations are thought to be especially at
risk for heat-related morbidity and mortality. The effects of extreme heat may be exacerbated in
urban areas because of urban heat-island effects. Additionally, some people (e.g., in more rural,
northern areas) may less readily acclimatize to heat and may be more sensitive to extreme heat
events.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Research indicates that while the health consequences of climate change may affect all sectors of
society, low-income people and people of color are likely to experience the greatest harm. These
same populations often have limited transportation choices, as well, restricting their capacity to
move to cooler areas or cooling centers. The California Climate Adaptation Strategy identifies
factors that could contribute to health inequities related to people’s exposure to extreme heat:
•

Chronic illness co-morbidity: Some low-income and minority communities may have a
higher prevalence of chronic illnesses that place individuals at greater risk of heat-related
illness. Especially vulnerable are people who are receiving treatments at home that
require electricity to operate and those who may have no means of transport to a medical
clinic or facility.

11-45

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•
•
•
•

Exposure to urban heat-island effect: Low-income individuals and people of color are
often concentrated in urban areas subject to the heat-island effect.
Access to air-conditioning: Low-income individuals are less likely to have air
conditioning. Differences in air conditioning prevalence have been shown to exacerbate
racial differences in mortality due to heat effects
Occupation: Some workers (e.g., agricultural and construction workers, road crews) are
especially at risk of heat illness due to the combination of outdoor work in hot weather
and jobs demanding physical exertion.
Fear of crime: People in some communities (e.g., low income communities) may be
reluctant to open doors and windows for ventilation during heat waves for fear of crime.

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Public access to cooling centers and other air-conditioned spaces during extreme heat events can
help to reduce people’s exposure to outdoor air pollutants such as ozone, reducing the risk of air
pollution-related health effects. Implementing a statewide “green cool down” plan to reduce
urban heat-island effect can potentially reduce energy use, resulting in reductions in greenhouse
gas emissions. This also can reduce energy costs. Increases in the amount of urban green space
(e.g., through urban forestry or the creation of additional urban park space) also can contribute to
healthier lifestyles if people take advantage of such spaces for exercise and recreation.
Recommendation 2.

Educate, empower, and engage all New Yorkers to foster
a better understanding of the public health consequences
of climate change and take actions to reduce or eliminate
those consequences.

The success of public health adaptation strategies will require that all New Yorkers, from policy
makers and government officials to the general public, have access to information about the
health consequences of climate change and the importance of allocating resources to reduce or
eliminate those consequences.
Specific Actions
A.

Raise the awareness of policy makers, State and local government officials,
community leaders, businesses, institutions, health-care providers, and the
general public about the public health significance and related costs of
climate change.
Statewide awareness of the public health consequences of climate change is essential to the
success of climate change adaptation.
Potential Cost
Initially, the costs associated with implementation will be those for adequate staff resources
to develop the education and outreach program. Since this will be an ongoing campaign,
those costs will be ongoing. Additional costs will include those associated with publishing

11-46

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

and distributing printed materials, purchasing space and time for commercial media
message distribution, social networking via the Internet, and training. Implementation costs
should be compared to the costs of no action.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation should begin as soon as possible, when necessary staff resources are
available.
B.

Create effective outreach materials and mechanisms focused on vulnerable
and/or hard-to-reach populations, identify key health and mental health-care
providers for training and capacity building, and establish sustained
community dialogues that communicate critical information.
The creation and dissemination of multilingual and multicultural outreach materials and the
identification of outreach mechanisms will be more effective with input from key
community stakeholders, including health care professionals, religious and civic leaders,
and community-based organizations. Such community leaders are often best positioned to
communicate the possible public health consequences of climate change and its impact on
their particular town, city, or neighborhood.
Potential Cost
The costs of this action are a subset of the costs of 2-A, above.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation should begin as soon as possible, when necessary staff resources are
available.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
There is an immediate need to provide effective communication to improve understanding of
climate change and advance a public sense of urgency. Individuals can then see the local impact
climate change can have on their lives, from day-to-day to extreme weather events. Preparing
and alerting the public of these events provides an opportunity for climate change
communication.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Different cultures, languages and literacy levels pose challenges to any public health education
and outreach effort. While these challenges may be present in any population or community, they
all are likely to be present in environmental justice communities, which are likely to be among
the communities at the greatest risk of climate-related public health consequences. Implementing
this recommended strategy will require an awareness of these challenges and the incorporation of
approaches (e.g., employing a multilingual approach that incorporates cultural differences) to
overcome them. Collaboration with community leaders also can help to identify approaches to
overcome communication challenges.

11-47

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Public health and safety messages must be received, understood, and acted upon to be effective.
Cultural, linguistic, and technological advances in health and safety communication mechanisms,
strategies, and techniques may help to inform difficult-to-reach populations. Lessons learned in
trying to inform people about ways to reduce the health impacts of climate change may help to
improve all public health communication programs.
Recommendation 3.

Assess and improve the capacity of existing public health
preparedness, response, and recovery programs to
respond to climate-related impacts and direct resources
where needed.

A number of the potential health consequences of climate change are associated with events that
may result in public health emergencies (e.g., floods, severe summer and winter storms, extended
power outages). While New York currently has robust public health preparedness, response, and
recovery programs, the capacity of those programs to handle the anticipated increase of extreme
weather-related events must be evaluated and any necessary measures to enhance the capacity of
the programs should be implemented.
Specific Actions
A.

Assess and, as necessary, enhance the capacity of existing preparedness,
response, and recovery programs.
Measures such as expanding capacity for coordination and communication, evaluating
existing early warning systems and the logistical feasibility of evacuation plans, and
enhancing overall preparedness of the public health response to the potential increase in
severe climate-related events may require additional planning and resources.
Potential Cost
Initial costs of performing the necessary assessment(s) may be limited to staff resources
needed (e.g., through redirection of existing staff resources). Costs for
enhancing/expanding program capacity are unknown at this time.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin as soon as adequate staffing resources are
available.

B.

Determine how existing telecommunications technology and social
networking systems can be better integrated into early warning and
evacuation systems.
In the era of texting, Twitter, and Facebook, information of interest to an individual can be,
and often is, communicated in real-time. These technologies have already proved to be

11-48

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

extraordinarily valuable in crisis situations and should be fully incorporated into the
emergency management system.
Potential Cost
The costs of this action are a subset of the costs of 3-A, above.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin as soon as adequate staffing resources are
available.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
In terms of emergency management, the most vulnerable populations are those that are not able
to prepare for, respond to, or recover from emergency events without significant support because
of their social, physical, or mental status (e.g., people at hospitals, nursing homes, or that require
oxygen therapy; disabled or homeless people).
Environmental Justice Considerations
The potential for climate change to affect people’s health in communities that already experience
inequitable environmental burdens is discussed elsewhere in this section.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Any climate-change-related enhancements to public health preparedness and emergency
management programs in New York State will better prepare those programs for all public health
emergencies.
Recommendation 4.

Build community resilience and integrated public health
capacity to reduce human health impacts of climate
change.

The effects of climate change on natural systems and the built environment can result in a
spectrum of adverse public health consequences. The health consequences can be reduced by
implementing measures to enhance the ability of individuals and communities to recover from
climate change impacts and measures to help facilitate an efficient, coordinated public health
response to climate-related events. These measures include planning for climate change at the
state and local levels, directing the resources necessary to increase the climate resilience of
individuals and communities, and coordinating emergency preparedness planning with a range of
local entities.
Specific Actions
A.

Consider the possible public health-related impacts of climate change in
planning, programs, policies, and regulations.

11-49

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Currently state and local agencies often make planning, policy, and regulatory decisions
without considering climate change and the corresponding public health implications. This
can decrease community resilience and increase climate-related risks and impacts. Future
planning should include community resiliency planning efforts already underway.
Potential Cost
Given the numerous entities to which this action would be applicable and the diversity of
programs, policies, and regulations, the cost of this action is likely to be significant.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin as soon as adequate staffing resources are
available.
B.

Increase the resilience of communities by providing additional support for
healthy-built environment concepts, such as smart growth and green
infrastructure, and for local and urban agriculture initiatives that strengthen
food security.
Healthy-built environment concepts will help attenuate flooding, reduce the urban heatisland effect, and reduce air pollution, all of which are likely to be exacerbated by climate
change and affect public health. Additional resources (both state and federal) should be
directed to adaptation strategies that also protect and improve human health as critical
components of building community climate change resilience. Implementation of these
concepts will also lead to improved human health overall, which will make individuals
more able to cope with the effects of climate change, such as extreme heat events. These
efforts can yield mitigation co-benefits as well by reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Potential Cost
Additional staff resources or redirection of existing staff resources will be necessary for the
planning and program design activities. Costs of implementing the plan(s) that would be
developed could be substantial, but these costs likely would, to a greater or lesser extent, be
balanced by the cost benefits achieved after implementation.
Timeframe for Implementation
Ultimate implementation of this action could occur over the longer term (e.g., 5-10 years),
but planning activities could begin as soon as adequate staffing resources are available.

C.

Require that emergency preparedness plans include coordination and
communication among critical stakeholders such as community-based
organizations, local businesses, local health departments, utilities, and local
government leaders.

11-50

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Coordination and communication with key stakeholders, including people who live and
work in a community, are integral aspects of well-formulated emergency preparedness
plans.
Potential Cost
The costs of this action are a subset of the costs of 3-A, above.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation of this action should begin as soon as adequate staffing resources are
available.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Climate change impacts in multiple sectors can have indirect effects on public health. These
effects can compound the more direct public health impacts of change in climate and weather
patterns. Adequate integrated public health capacity and the resilience of communities will serve
to reduce the consequences of climate change discussed throughout this document.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Some New York communities of color and low-income status already suffer from disparities in
health outcomes and disproportionate burdens of environmental insults. These communities,
especially in urban areas, typically have limited access to resources such as adequate health care,
nutritious food, adequate housing, and safe neighborhoods (see the NYS 2009 Energy Plan
Environmental Justice Brief). Furthermore, lower incomes can restrict opportunities to engage in
health promoting behaviors. For these reasons, low income communities and communities of
color are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change on public health, essential
resources, and infrastructure. These communities may lack the resilience necessary to effectively
adapt to changing climate and recover from impacts to public health and resources.
The combination of limited access to essential resources (such as health care, clean air, and
others), and elevated incidence or prevalence of some health outcomes, results in the
vulnerability of many communities of color or low income. Solutions include ensuring equity in
access to resources and reducing health disparities.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Community resilience and integrated public health capacity that are developed in an effort to
promote adaptation to climate change can have many co-benefits. Communities that are prepared
to absorb the stresses of climate change impacts with minimal public health consequences will
also be best prepared to absorb shocks from natural disasters unrelated to climate change, as well
as from terrorism, crime, and other threats. Since programs that bolster resilience to climate
change also impart resistance to other threats, efforts can be carried out collaboratively with
other preparedness and capacity-building programs and the program costs shared.

11-51

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recommendation 5.

Evaluate and enhance, as necessary, the capacity of
existing surveillance programs for vector-, food-, and
water-borne diseases and disease-causing agents to
monitor and respond to the anticipated climate changerelated increase in such public health threats.

New York State currently has extensive and robust programs for detecting, preventing, and
controlling vector-, water-, and food-borne diseases, and disease-causing agents. However,
changes in temperature and precipitation are likely to cause changes in the distribution and
numbers of disease-causing vectors and changes in the quality of water used for drinking,
recreation, and food production. These changes may result in increases in the incidence of some
diseases (e.g., Lyme disease, West Nile virus, eastern equine encephalitis, Salmonella food
poisoning). New York should implement measures so that existing programs, at both the State
and local levels, are adequately prepared for the possible increase in these kinds of diseases and
disease-causing agents.
Specific Actions
A.

Evaluate the capacity of existing programs, enhance surveillance of disease
and disease-causing agents, and enhance the capacity of public health
programs that control disease-causing agents.
New York State programs for the detection, prevention and control of vector-, water-, and
food-borne diseases, and disease-causing agents are likely to require additional resources.
Potential Cost
Although uncertain, it may be possible to accomplish the evaluation of existing program
capacity with limited additional staffing resources. The costs associated with any necessary
program enhancements are unknown at this time but could be estimated as part of the
evaluation of existing program capacity and would be offset to a degree by the avoided
health impacts.
Timeframe for Implementation
Since New York State already has extensive and robust programs in this area, immediate
implementation may not be necessary. If feasible, initial implementation of this action (i.e.,
the recommended program evaluation) should begin as soon as adequate staffing resources
are available.

B.

Provide necessary assistance to local governments.
Much of the burden of responding to extreme climate variability and climate change will
fall upon local governments. Mechanisms for providing assistance to these entities will be
essential.
Potential Cost

11-52

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Costs of determining the kinds of assistance that may be needed for local governments are
a subset of the costs of 5-A. Costs of actually providing any necessary assistance to local
governments could be substantial but are unknown at this time.
Timeframe for Implementation
Same as for 5-A, above.
C.

Expand analytical laboratory capacity to support essential environmental
monitoring, disease surveillance, and outbreak investigation/control
activities.
Adequate analytical laboratory capacity is a critical component in detecting and preventing
vector-, water-, and food-borne diseases.
Potential Cost
Additional staffing may be needed to evaluate existing laboratory capacity. The cost of any
possible expanded analytical laboratory capacity is unknown at this time.
Timeframe for Implementation
Same as for 5-A, above.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
The interaction of climate, vector populations, and other factors in determining incidence of
vector-borne illnesses remains complex and not adequately understood. Validated models to
predict future vector-, water-, and food-borne disease incidents in New York under extreme
climate variability and climate change scenarios are not available. Even qualitative assessments
remain highly uncertain. This recommendation would help address these gaps.
Environmental Justice Considerations
People with compromised immune systems will be particularly vulnerable to the increase in
infectious diseases resulting from climate change. In addition, people of color, people living in
remote areas, and persons of low socioeconomic status are often medically underserved, and so
are potentially more likely to delay treatment for infections.
Small communities with limited resources to direct toward water and wastewater infrastructure
may have a relatively high risk for water-borne illness. Similarly, small communities that rely on
surface water supplies may find those supplies threatened by increased chemical and microbial
contamination resulting from the impacts of climate change.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Implementation of this recommendation may improve New York's capacity to prevent and
control many vector-, water-, and food-borne diseases that are not related to climate change. For

11-53

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

example, microbiologists and epidemiologists that investigate food-borne Salmonella outbreaks
resulting from climate change are also available to investigate outbreaks due to many other
agents.
Implementation may also improve New York's capacity to respond to agents that may be
deployed by bioterrorists. The U.S. CDC lists plague (Yersinia pestis), botulism (Clostridium
botulinum toxin), and viral hemorrhagic fevers among its Category A (high-priority) bioterrorism
agents. Category B (second-highest priority) bioterrorism agents include food safety threats (e.g.,
Salmonella species, Escherichia coli O157:H7, Shigella); viral encephalitis (alphaviruses [e.g.,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, eastern equine encephalitis, western equine encephalitis]); and
water safety threats (e.g., Vibrio cholerae, Cryptosporidium parvum). These potential
bioterrorism agents are also vector-, water-, and/or food-borne disease agents.
Recommendation 6.

Assess and prepare for the significant public health risks
associated with hazards related to sea level rise.

Rising coastal waters and the associated potential increase in storm surges can cause widespread
coastal flooding, which may result in a range of adverse public health and safety outcomes. The
risks to be addressed include storm surges, flooding, poor indoor air quality, saltwater
contamination of public water supplies, post-traumatic stress, increases in disease vectors,
inundation-related contamination problems, impaired access to health care, and loss of food
security.
The SLRTF has been assessing the anticipated effects of sea level rise and developing
recommendations for state action to address them. This Climate Action Plan recommendation
supports the implementation of the public health recommendation 4 developed by the Sea Level
Rise Task Force. Additional information can be found in the Coastal Zones section of this
chapter.
Potential Cost
Additional agency staff resources are likely to be needed to implement this action.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation should be initiated as soon as possible after New York State adopts the
recommendations of the SLRTF. According to the draft SLRTF recommendation, full
implementation may occur within two to five years.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Sea level rise itself and the associated potential increase in storm surges are likely to cause an
increase in coastal flooding. Forecasted storm surges from coastal storms may result in
population evacuations that will displace people from home and work, which can have a range of
possible health consequences including lack of access to medications and routine or emergency
4

http://www.dec.ny.gov/energy/45202.html
11-54

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

medical care. Health care facilities may be at risk of flooding and may require evacuation,
relocation, or protection (e.g., by floodwall construction). The flooding that may occur has the
potential to cause a range of adverse public health consequences.
Environmental Justice Considerations
As with all of the potential health consequences of climate change, sea level rise and its attendant
consequences will likely have the greatest effect on some people who are members of ethnic and
racial minorities and people who are poor. People in these groups may live in areas that are
subject to severe flooding from coastal storms, yet these areas may be poorly prepared to avoid
the consequences of flooding. Poor people may lack the resources and means to evacuate highrisk areas and many, if not most, will have limited options in securing temporary or permanent
alternative housing. Any loss of community centers, senior centers, and public recreational
facilities may have a greater effect on poor than on more affluent communities. Overall, most of
the possible effects (e.g., contamination resulting from combined sewer overflows and releases
of toxic materials, power outages, mold growth) probably will have greater consequences for the
poor. Actions to adapt to sea level rise must, as a priority, address the public health issues that
will be confronted by these most at-risk populations.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Measures to avoid the public health consequences of sea level rise may include the construction
of new dwelling units, commercial space, and other structures away from flood-prone areas. New
construction initiatives will present opportunities to create healthier built environments. Climatesmart building practices can increase the energy efficiency of buildings and lead to energy cost
savings for building owners and occupants.
Recommendation 7.

Conduct and support research on the public health
consequences of climate change and their effective
incorporation into adaptation strategies.

A New York State research plan on the public health aspects of climate change would enable a
more thorough understanding of the possible consequences of climate change. The plan also
would provide a foundation for assessing the effectiveness of adaptation strategies so that those
strategies can be optimally designed and modified to reduce or eliminate the health consequences
of climate change.
Specific Actions
A.

Develop a research agenda that includes making use of health impact
assessments, developing appropriate health indicators, and assessing the
effectiveness of adaptation technologies.
Developing a coherent research agenda focused on climate-related public health impacts
and issues will help shape public policy and facilitate more efficient and effective use of
scarce public resources. This research, together with monitoring and surveillance efforts,
could help to identify and refine strategies to reduce the impacts of climate change on
11-55

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

human health, reduce uncertainties about the possible impacts, and design effective
adaptation strategies.
Potential Cost
It may be feasible to develop a research agenda by redirecting existing staff resources. New
York State agency costs of performing any research may be partially offset by seeking
grant funding.
Timeframe for Implementation
Immediate or even near-term implementation of this action is probably not essential, but if
feasible, implementation should be initiated as soon as necessary resources are available.
B.

Develop participatory methods to assess the effectiveness, accessibility, and
quality of public health-related climate change adaptation programs.
To further strengthen and develop measures, policies, and programs focused on the public
health dimension of climate change adaptation, New York State should develop and
implement assessment methodologies and practices designed to fully engage a wide
spectrum of stakeholders, especially those members of the public most at risk from
particular climate change-related health impacts such as heat-related morbidity and
mortality, post-emergency mental distress, and respiratory, cardiovascular, and other
diseases.
Potential Cost
While it may be feasible to perform this activity by redirecting existing staff resources,
some limited additional staffing may be required.
Timeframe for Implementation
Same as for 7-A, above.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Climate-related risk factors include heat events, extreme storms and storm surge events,
disruptions of water supply and quality, decreased air quality, and alterations in patterns of
infectious disease vectors and organisms. Demand for health services and the need for public
health surveillance and monitoring will increase as climate continues to change. Climate change
places an additional burden on public health agencies that are already burdened by low levels of
staffing and funding.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Expanded research can improve the understanding of potential health impacts to traditionally
underserved groups that are likely to be affected by climate change.

11-56

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Research to advance public health adaptation to climate change would enable proactive measures
and overall community public health and resilience. Developing methods to link and quantify
relationships among climate change, changes in energy production and use, air pollution, and
health outcomes would provide opportunities for improved public health protection and its
associated societal benefits.
The costs of investing in public health research will be offset by reduced health care costs
resulting from improved preparedness and adaptation (Ebi et al., 2009). Ebi et al., 2009
concluded: “(g)iven the real risks that climate change poses for U.S. populations, the National
Institutes of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, and other agencies need to have robust intramural and extramural programs with
funding of >$200 million annually. Despite the risks, extramural federal funding of climate
change and health research is estimated to be <$3 million per year.”

Telecommunication and Information Infrastructure
Vision Statement
Prepare for, and adapt to, a changing climate by building increased resilience into the
communications infrastructure via opportunities for system-level redundancy, diversity, risk
management, and review.
Background
Telecommunications infrastructure is vital to New York State's economy and welfare; its
capacity and reliability are essential to the effective functioning of global commerce and the
state's economy and are especially vital during emergencies. The sector has important public
functions, but it is largely privately operated. The rapid technological changes inherent in the
sector mean that the planning horizons and life spans for much of its infrastructure are at best on
the order of a decade. The sector is tightly coupled to the energy sector, with power outages
affecting the reliability of communication services; many of its communication lines also are
located on the same poles as power lines. Modern digital technologies, including communication
services based on fiber optics, broadband, and the Internet, can be more vulnerable to power
outages than traditional landline technology.
A focus of the communication infrastructure sector is how to ensure that the perpetual
introduction of new technologies enhances the reliability and uninterrupted access to services,
rather than degrading these services. Such a focus is essential both now and in the future, when
the perils from climate change may increase.
Climate Impacts

11-57

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Communication service delivery is vulnerable to hurricanes, lightning, ice, snow, wind storms,
and other extreme weather events, some of which are projected to change in frequency and/or
intensity. Communication lines and other infrastructure are vulnerable to the observed and
projected increase in heavy precipitation events and resulting flooding and/or freezing rain. In
coastal and near-coastal areas, sea level rise in combination with coastal storm surge flooding
will be a considerable threat later this century. The delivery of communication services is
sensitive to power outages, such as those resulting from the increased demand associated with
heat waves, which are expected to increase with climate change.
Under current climate conditions and severe weather events, there are already serious
vulnerabilities that in many instances prevent the telecommunications sector from delivering
services to the public that are resilient to extreme events. If the sector could be made more
resilient to the current climate, then the incremental threat from climate change is likely to be
more manageable.
Recommendation 1.

Agencies and authorities, including municipalities,
with jurisdiction over communication infrastructure,
should prepare detailed inventories of
telecommunications facilities, networks, and
corridors; prioritize critical infrastructure; and
complete climate vulnerability assessments of
critical infrastructure and corridors within their
jurisdictions.

All agencies and authorities, including municipalities, with jurisdiction over communication
infrastructure, should prepare inventories of existing and proposed critical infrastructure and
infrastructure corridors to assess their vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. Inventories
should encompass the wide variety of elements and technology included in New York State’s
telecommunications sector, including cable television, Internet, network services,
telecommunications, and medical and emergency services. The inventory should identify the
most critical systems and facilities.
The inventories should be used to conduct vulnerability assessments for critical infrastructure.
These assessments should rely on State-accepted climate change projections and consider how
these projections may impact each communication facility and component over time.
Assessments should also include detailed financial and social impact analyses that account for
interdependencies within the sector and between the communications and energy sector. This
information should be incorporated into long-term planning, design, funding, and operation of
communication infrastructure at the State and local levels.
Development of inventories and vulnerability assessments must be coordinated across
jurisdictions to eliminate duplication of efforts and allow for prioritization of critical
infrastructure at the State level. While the costs of these assessments and actions to reduce the
vulnerabilities to communication infrastructure could be significant in the near term, they may be
dwarfed by the potential costs related their failure as the result of a changing climate.
Specific Actions

11-58

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A.

Agencies and authorities with jurisdiction over telecommunications
infrastructure in New York State should identify and inventory existing and
proposed communication components, facilities, networks, and corridors;
and prioritize infrastructure that is essential to support critical state and
local functions such as emergency preparedness and response capabilities.
The purpose of these inventories is to identify all communications infrastructure and
prioritize infrastructure that is vital to the health, safety, and welfare of the people in the
state. The inventory process must be coordinated among responsible agencies to eliminate
duplication of effort and allow for prioritization of infrastructure statewide. Prioritization of
infrastructure should be based on critical movement of data volume, type and, number of
users, and the ability to interconnect regions within both New York State and adjacent
states. Information should be provided to all communication agencies to assist in inventory
preparation.
Potential Cost
Estimates to prepare baseline inventories differ according to municipality or agency
jurisdictional size, resources, and communication infrastructure.
Timeframe for Implementation
The dependency of the state and its residents on telecommunications infrastructure
necessitates that an effort to inventory critical infrastructure should be undertaken in the
near term.

B.

Agencies and authorities should conduct vulnerability assessments using
New York State-accepted climate change projections to assess the impact of
projected climate change on priority communication infrastructure.
Vulnerability assessments should be conducted using state-accepted projections for climate
change such as those developed through the NYSERDA-sponsored ClimAID project.
Vulnerability assessments should include detailed financial and social impact analyses
including interdependencies of facilities and communication infrastructure.
Potential Cost
Regionally downscaled climate projections have been developed as part of the ClimAID
project. Statewide, this effort is broadly estimated to require a staff time effort in the
several millions of dollars. Some cost will be associated with updating climate projections
on a regular basis.
Timeframe for Implementation
The vulnerability assessments should be undertaken in the near term and build on the
inventory. The vulnerability assessment should be updated on a periodic basis to
incorporate revised climate projections.

11-59

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Environmental Justice Considerations
Key community-level infrastructure may be at risk from the effects of climate change, which
could especially affect underserved EJ communities. Accessibility is a critical concern when
planning evacuation and emergency procedures. New York State should give special
considerations to those communities dependant on landline communication due to lack of access
to wireless technology. Future prioritization of adaptation strategies and funding should
coordinate with local community resiliency plans and incorporate impacts to all communities,
especially EJ communities.
Recommendation 2. Incorporate state endorsed climate change projections into
all relevant planning, design, funding, and operational
decision making within New York State’s
telecommunication and information infrastructure sector.
When facilities such as communication networks are designed, planners project data-transfer
volume so that the design will be adequate for future needs. Similarly, projections are available
for future climate conditions. Climate change poses structural as well as operational hazards to
the state’s communication infrastructure. The growth of the telecommunication networks and
data-transfer volume and the variability of climate change result in highly dynamic conditions
for the communication sector. The level of dynamism in the sector can be expected to increase in
the future.
A coordinated interagency effort should begin now to develop and implement specific design
policies to incorporate projected effects of climate change into the design of facilities as
appropriate for their expected design life. In this way the risks to communication infrastructure
and users, and the costs of premature replacement, may be reduced or avoided.
Specific Actions
A.

State agencies responsible for the management of communication
infrastructure should develop specific design and operational guidance
based on climate change projections and incorporate it into communication
projects and investments.
The projects being designed and built today will face significant climate-related changes in
conditions during their design lives. A well-designed facility, built with provision for those
anticipated future conditions, offers major savings over one that will quickly become
obsolete and require replacement. Examples of specific actions include avoiding
installation of fiber optic cables in areas that are at high risk of flooding or sea level rise,
and ensuring that communication centers that are in zones at high risk of flooding and sea
level rise are identified and their relocation opportunities evaluated.
Potential Cost
Tens of thousands of dollars in staff time to develop needed guidance and criteria based on
state-accepted climate projections.
11-60

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Timeframe for Implementation
A significant opportunity exists to incorporate the most recent regional projections for
climate change based on the best available science into state agency decision-making
processes.
B.

Direct funding as available for adaptive changes to existing critical
communication networks used for emergency preparedness and response
that are at greatest risk from climate impacts.
There are critical communication networks that are a major component of emergency
preparedness plans (evacuation networks) and emergency response plans (relief supply
networks and access to recovery responders and equipment). If these networks are not
changed to make them more resilient to future extreme weather events projected by climate
change forecasts, emergency preparedness and response plans could be adversely impacted.
Potential Cost
No estimated cost for addressing this recommendation has been developed at this time. A
realistic cost cannot be prepared until the potential impacts and adaptive changes have been
identified.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near term (1-3 years): New York State is increasingly vulnerable to large storm events in
coastal areas that can cause service disruptions and threaten public safety.
Environmental Justice Considerations
The specific impact on EJ communities is not known at this time. As the critical
communication networks serve both EJ communities and non-EJ communities alike, it is
anticipated that this recommendation will allow more resilient emergency evacuation
networks and resilient response to weather-related emergencies to EJ communities.

C.

Develop models, guidance, standards, and financial support where possible
to help local governments implement adaptive measures for priority
communication infrastructure.
New York State design standards and guidance currently provide the framework for design
for county and municipal communication agencies across the state and for much private
development as well. Local agencies do not have the resources to develop specific criteria
of their own, and local standards and guidance are most often modeled on those of county
or State entities.
Potential Cost
Tens of thousands of dollars in staff time to produce guidance for local officials.

11-61

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Timeframe for Implementation
As soon as possible.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Specific impacts are not known at this time; however, increased resiliency of the
communication sectors could positively affect all state residents.
Recommendation 3. Where feasible and cost effective, reduce vulnerability of
telecommunication infrastructure to extreme weather
events through efforts to increase redundancy, shift toward
a more distributed network, and reduce the
interdependency of communication infrastructure and
between communication and energy infrastructure.
Specific Actions
A.

Foster a shift toward a more distributed network of communication
infrastructure, including expansion of wireless services.
This will ensure that critical operational elements will not be lost if a specific location is
impacted by an extreme event (e.g., flooding). Grouping different types of critical
infrastructure, such as ducts and wiring, in one location or facility can increase
vulnerability. By increasing the geographic diversity of communication centers, there is
less chance that multiple networks will fail at the same time. For example, redundant
switching nodes could be developed in several locations to ensure system operation should
one node go out of service. Diversity may also be increased by having communication
services use fiber optic rings in the local loop or set up alternative switching when a central
communications center fails.
Potential Cost
Significant investment in some areas. Incremental costs associated with planned capital
investments for system upgrades.
Timeframe for Implementation
As soon as possible.

B.

Planning for investments in communications infrastructure and for changes
in operations should support, and be coordinated with, adaptation and
operations of other sectors, particularly the energy sector (e.g., smart grid).
Potential Cost

11-62

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Large-scale investment— in the many millions of dollars; may be integrated into capital
investment cycle.
Timeframe for Implementation
Coordination activities should begin as soon as possible.
C.

Ensure system redundancies for communications infrastructure, including
communication towers, at high risk of flooding and high winds.
Potential Cost
Large-scale investment—can be integrated into capital investment cycle.
Timeframe for Implementation
As soon as feasible in coordination with capital investment cycles.

Environmental Justice Considerations
Siting of additional communication infrastructure should take into account EJ considerations.
Recommendation 4. Improve the dialogue on climate resiliency between state
agencies and private telecommunications service providers
and provide increased accountability for service
disruptions
Specific Action
A.

To provide increased accountability carriers and other communication
service providers should be required to report compliance with the Federal
Communications Commission’s standards
A significant challenge of the privatized sector is that reports of service outages to federal
and State regulators are not accessible to the public and are not uniformly mandatory across
the different types of services. In addition, service provider networks are not required to
report on their vulnerability to extreme events or the quality of their service. It is
recommended that reliability, survivability, and diversity be promoted according to FCC’s
Network Reliability and Interoperability Councils. Better reporting could be achieved by
requiring service providers to file regular reports with the Public Service Commission. It
may be necessary to improve reporting mechanisms and other areas of dialogue in this
industry to ensure resiliency of this sector.
Potential Cost
Many tens of thousands of dollars of personnel hours

11-63

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Timeframe for Implementation
As soon as reasonable.
Environmental Justice Considerations
No immediate, identified issues.

Transportation
Vision Statement
Advance transportation and land-use choices that increase the resilience of the state’s
transportation system to climate change; address specific regional vulnerabilities and those in
common, including known infrastructure deficiencies; and be consistent with the state’s
commitment to smart growth land use, recognizing that all decisions must seek to safeguard and
improve the safety and mobility of people, and goods and services with regard to social equity.
Background
New York State is home to a 113,000-mile network of interstate and State highways, including
16,000 bridges, a 4,600-mile rail network, which includes the largest mass transit system in the
U.S., some 500 public and private aviation facilities, more than 130 public transit operators, four
port authorities, and numerous private ports. Transportation contributes about 10 percent of the
state's economy—about $100 billion annually.
The highest concentration of transportation infrastructure is generally located in regions that are
population centers and vital drivers of the global, national and, state economies. Threats to these
dense metropolitan transportation systems (especially New York City) would have far-reaching
impacts.
Ground transportation systems (roads and rails) in coastal population centers are often placed
underground in tunnels very close to or below sea level. Since transportation is a networked
system, delays, failures, and catastrophic failures in one system can affect other systems.
Transportation occurs by different modes: land, air, and water. On land, it can be divided into
road, rail, and pipeline. The goods of transport are people and freight (the latter including raw
materials, supplies, finished products, and waste). In urban concentrations, mass transit systems
serve the commuting populations going to and from daily work, school, shopping, etc. In
suburban and rural areas, largely private vehicular transportation on roads and highways
dominates but also reaches the central business districts of cities. Long-distance and interstate
traffic on the roads is complemented by railway, water, and air transport.
Climate Impacts
11-64

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The impacts of climate change have significant consequences for the transportation sector. Over
the next few decades, heat waves, heavy precipitation events, and windstorms are likely to
dominate the causes for moderate, more frequent transportation problems such as flooded streets
and delays in mass transit. By 2050 at the latest, sea level rise and storm surge will become more
significant threats. By later this century, this threat will be so severe that major adaptations will
have to be in place, not only in the coastal zone, but all the way to cities including Troy and
Albany as sea level rise and storm surge propagate up the tide-controlled Hudson River. Lowlying transportation systems such as subways and tunnels, especially in coastal and near-coastal
areas, are at particular risk of flooding as a result of sea level rise and heavy-precipitation events.
Materials used in transportation infrastructure, such as asphalt and train rails, are vulnerable to
increased temperatures and frequency of extreme heat events. Air conditioning requirements in
buses, trucks, and trains, and ventilation requirements for tunnels will increase. Runways will
require lengthening in some locations since hotter air provides less lift, necessitating higher
speeds for takeoff.
The Great Lakes may see a shorter season of winter ice cover, leading to a longer shipping
season. However, reduced ice cover is also likely to mean an increase in lake effect snow events,
which cause various transportation problems.
Air- and land-based transportation systems are vulnerable to ice and snowstorms, although
requirements for salting and snow removal may decrease as snow tends to turn more often into
rain. Freeze/thaw cycles that disturb roadbeds may increase as winter temperatures rise. New
York State has the most days per year of freezing rain in the nation. This affects air and ground
transportation directly, and indirectly through electric and communication outages.
Recommendation 1.

Encourage all State, regional, and local transportation
agencies and authorities, including municipalities with
jurisdiction over transportation infrastructure, to prepare
detailed inventories and climate vulnerability
assessments of critical transportation infrastructure and
corridors within their jurisdictions.

All State, regional, and local transportation agencies and authorities, including municipalities,
with jurisdiction over transportation infrastructure should prepare inventories assessing the
vulnerability of critical transportation infrastructure and corridors from the effects of climate
change using best available, State-endorsed climate change projections. These vulnerability
assessments should include a baseline inventory of all transportation infrastructure and consider
how projected climate change would affect each facility. Inventories should include detailed
financial and social impact analyses. While the costs of new assessments and reducing the
vulnerabilities of the state’s transportation systems could be significant in the near term, such
costs are expected to be dwarfed by a failure to address the changing climate.
Specific Actions

11-65

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A.

Key transportation corridors, designated according to the critical movement
of people and/or freight and their importance to intra- and interstate travel,
should be provided to transportation agencies.
As a necessary step prior to preparing inventories, New York State should identify key
transportation corridors (see also recommendations 5 and 6), including both highway and
non-highway routes (examples of such routes are existing coastal evacuation routes).
Designation of key corridors should be based on critical movement of both people and
freight and the ability to interconnect regions within New York State and adjacent states.
Information should be provided to all transportation agencies to assist in inventory
preparation.
Potential Cost
Statewide, this effort may potentially cost $5-15 million. Included in this estimate are paid
hours of staff currently in state or agency service and consultant staff.
Timeframe for Implementation
This effort is estimated to take 12-18 months and would occur concurrently with work
under Recommendation 1.B.

B.

New York State should endorse a coordinated set of climate change
projections and provide these to State transportation agencies, regional and
local planning agencies and authorities, local municipalities, and other
transportation stakeholders such as privately owned railroads, airports and
marine shipping operators.
To ensure consistency of these transportation inventories, New York State should endorse
projections for climate change variables and impacts such as sea level rise, heat indices,
precipitation rates, in particular rainfall intensities, and extreme-storm events.
Refinement of the model projections and regular updates should be conducted.
Potential Cost
The majority of the climate projection work is complete. Refinement of models and
updates will be relatively low cost.
Timeframe for Implementation
This effort would be an ongoing exercise.

C.

Integrate climate change into vulnerability assessments, which should
include a baseline inventory of existing and proposed transportation
infrastructure and analyses of potential financial and social impacts based
on climate projections endorsed by New York State.
Using climate change projections and key corridor definitions, all State transportation
agencies, regional and local planning agencies and authorities, and local municipalities
should assess the vulnerability of all transportation infrastructure and corridors within their

11-66

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

jurisdiction from the effects of climate change, including consideration of how climate
change projections would affect each facility in given timeframes. Inventories should
include financial and social impact analyses. Each individual agency, authority, and
municipality should consider all New York State identified key transportation corridors,
including interdependencies of adjacent agencies facilities. This underscores the need for
statewide agency collaboration and communication during the development of each
inventory
Potential Cost
Estimates to prepare baseline vulnerability inventories differ depending on
municipality/agency jurisdictional size, resources, and transportation infrastructure.
Statewide, this effort is broadly estimated to cost up to $15 million dollars
Timeframe for Implementation
Baseline Vulnerability Inventories: This effort is estimated to take12-18 months and would
occur following efforts under 1-A and 1-B.
D.

To facilitate investment decisions evaluate which freight and passenger
transport systems are most resilient to climate change.
New York State should determine which transportation modes, structures, and facilities are
the most resilient to climate change using the inventory created under this recommendation
and the long-term vision for transportation from Recommendation 4. Various metrics, such
as dollar-value-risk per person served and tons of CO2 per passenger miles traveled would
be applied to projects so that they can be evaluated consistently across the state. Results of
this effort would be used in recommending priorities for infrastructure investment. New
York State should prioritize infrastructure investments that support the Climate Action Plan
adaptation-planning processes and greenhouse gas reduction efforts.
Potential Cost
Estimates to accomplish the administrative planning associated with this task range from
$1-$5 million. This estimate is garnered from similar state agency costs and is largely
based on staff time and does not include actual engineering implementation costs that
cannot yet be estimated.
Timeframe for Implementation
This effort is estimated to take 12-18 months and would closely follow work completed
under recommendations 1-A and B but would occur prior to work under Recommendation
6-B. Work under Recommendation 5 would be used in Recommendation 1-C.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Vulnerability assessments should take into account all potential climate change impacts on this
sector. In particular, rising sea levels, more frequent and severe riverine flooding, higher
temperatures, and generally increasing variability of weather should be considered.

11-67

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Environmental Justice Considerations
Key community-level infrastructure may be at risk from the effects of climate change, which
could especially affect underserved communities. New York State should give special
considerations to those communities dependant on mass transit due to lack of access to cars.
Accessibility is a critical problem when planning evacuation and emergency routes. Future
prioritization of adaptation strategies and funding should coordinate with local community
resiliency plans, and incorporate impacts to all communities, especially environmental justice
communities.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Vulnerability inventories would help identify both existing and future infrastructure problems
and needs, especially in areas where aging infrastructure may already be at risk even without
future climate change. New York State can use these assessments in prioritization of capital
dollars. Building resiliency and efficiency into the state’s transportation system in order to better
adapt to climate change will also dramatically reduce GHG emissions, having a significant effect
on climate change mitigation. Costs could include intensified land uses in certain areas, capital
outlays, and political ramifications.
Recommendation 2.

Prioritize transportation infrastructure that is essential for
emergency preparedness and response capabilities.

Protecting critical transportation routes, such as those that are a major component of emergency
preparedness plans (evacuation routes) and emergency response plans (relief supply routes and
access to recovery responders and equipment), from climate-related impacts should be a priority
for New York State. If these routes are not altered or protected so that they are more climate
resilient, emergency preparedness and response plans could be adversely impacted.
Specific Action
A.

Direct funding, as available, for adaptive changes to critical transportation
routes used for emergency preparedness and response that are at greatest
risk from climate impacts.
New York State should direct funding for adaptive changes to critical transportation routes
used for emergency preparedness and response that are at greatest risk from climate change
impacts. There are critical transportation routes that are a major component of emergencypreparedness plans (evacuation routes) and emergency-response plans (relief supply routes
and access to recovery responders and equipment). If these routes are not changed to make
them more resilient to future extreme weather events projected by climate change forecasts,
emergency preparedness and response plans could be adversely impacted by future weather
events.
Potential Cost

11-68

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

No estimated cost for addressing this recommendation has been developed at this time. A
realistic cost cannot be prepared until the potential impacts and adaptive changes have been
identified.
Timeframe for Implementation
Near-term (1-3 years). New York State is increasingly vulnerable to climate change,
especially large storm events in coastal areas.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Disruption of emergency preparedness plans and response due to climate change impacts on
transportation facilities.
Environmental Justice Considerations
The specific impact on environmental justice communities is not known at this time. As the
critical transportation routes serve both EJ communities and non-EJ communities alike, it is
anticipated that this recommendation would allow more resilient emergency-evacuation routes
and resilient response to weather-related emergencies in EJ communities.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
This proposal would assist in reducing the backlog of maintenance work on key transportation
routes.
Recommendation 3.

Incorporate State-endorsed climate change projections
into all relevant planning, design, and operational
decision making within New York State’s transportation
sector.

When facilities such as highways are designed, planners project future traffic levels so that the
design will be adequate for future needs. Similarly, projections are available for future climate
conditions. Most significant of these for the transportation sector are rising sea levels and
increased flooding due to increased runoff from increasingly intense storms and rainfall. Unlike
traffic congestion, these changes pose structural as well as operational hazards to the state’s
infrastructure. Yet transportation agencies currently design their projects, not for anticipated
future conditions, but for the conditions of the past, even though those conditions have
undergone documented change and are predicted to continue to change in the future.
A coordinated interagency effort should begin now to develop and implement specific design
policies to incorporate projected effects of climate change into the design of facilities as
appropriate for their expected design life. Efforts should be made to reduce runoff from existing
sources to offset projected increases. In this way the risks to infrastructure and users and the
costs of premature replacement can be reduced or avoided.
Specific Actions

11-69

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A.

To the extent feasible, State transportation agencies should develop specific
design criteria and operational guidance based on climate change
projections, to be incorporated into current and future transportation
projects and investments.
Transportation infrastructure projects such as highway and rail embankments, bridges and
culverts, and yard facilities, typically have design lives of 50 years or more. In many cases,
the expectation is that the life of the project will then be further extended by rehabilitation.
The projects being designed and built today will face significant climate-related changes in
conditions during their design lives. A well designed facility, built with provision for those
anticipated future conditions, offers major savings over one that will quickly become
obsolete and require replacement.
Potential Cost
Tens of thousands of dollars in staff time. This figure does not include actual engineering
implementation costs that cannot yet be estimated.
Timeframe for Implementation
As soon as possible, since some transportation infrastructure projects are currently being
designed and, once constructed, will last for decades. Unless these projects account for
future climate conditions, they may be at risk from future climate impacts.

B.

Stormwater management techniques and approaches should be
incorporated wherever possible into existing contributors and across all
sectors— private, commercial, municipal, etc.
Greater stormwater runoff control is necessary to reduce pressures, especially on urban
drainage systems. Stormwater is currently regulated for new projects, but contributions
from existing, unmanaged sources will continue to increase unless those sources can be
retrofitted to reduce runoff. This effort should include an assessment of opportunities to
create or maintain open spaces with permeable surfaces, to lessen the degree that storm
surges will sweep toxic substances inland.
Potential Cost
Incremental increase to large expenditure for retrofitting existing runoff sources, depending
on how aggressive action is targeted.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation should begin as soon as possible, when necessary staff resources are
available.

C.

Develop models, guidance, standards, and financial support where possible
to help local governments implement adaptive measures for priority
transportation infrastructure.

11-70

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York State design standards and guidance currently provide the framework for design
for county and municipal transportation agencies across the state and for much private
development as well. Local agencies do not have the resources to develop specific criteria
of their own.
Potential Cost
Tens of thousands of dollars in staff time. This figure does not include actual engineering
implementation costs that cannot yet be estimated.
Timeframe for Implementation
Implementation should begin as soon as possible, when necessary staff resources are
available.
Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Planning should take into account all impacts of climate change on this sector, in particular sea
level rise, increasing rainfall and storm intensities, more frequent and severe flooding on rivers
and streams.
Environmental Justice Considerations
Infrastructure improvements should take into consideration environmental justice issues and seek
collaboration at the local level.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Undesirable consequences of designing for future increases in sea level, storm surge, and flood
discharges may be environmental effects. Higher embankments have wider footprints and, in
low-lying areas, may encroach more into wetlands. Regulatory agencies may be reluctant to
issue permits for structures to accommodate future conditions. Culverts that are oversized for
today’s conditions may spread lower flows too thin for fish passage. Care to mitigate these
problems as much as possible would be necessary.
Recommendation 4.

The New York State Transportation Master Plan should
consider and incorporate State-endorsed climate
projections.

The Transportation Master Plan projects trends in usage of personal vehicles, non-vehicular
travel, public transportation, and freight movement to 2030, and seeks to guide transportation
planning and investment to meet those needs. It does address the need to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, thus helping to mitigate their effect on climate change, but it does not address the
changes that will occur, even if all the mitigation goals are achieved. These changes will reshape
demographic, economic, and travel trends by the end of the century and beyond. Planning for
long-lived infrastructure must include those factors that will shape the needs and use of that
infrastructure beyond the near term.

11-71

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Specific Action
A.

Policy direction for the siting, design, operation, and maintenance of key
transportation infrastructure elements should include climate change
projections for the entire proposed useful life of those elements.
The current Transportation Master Plan attempts to steer the course of transportation
planning to meet the expected needs of the state to 2030. However, the effects of climate
change are expected to increase over periods well in excess of this planning horizon. At the
same time, the typical life cycles of many transportation infrastructure elements are also
well in excess of a 20-year planning window. Efficient and effective transportation
planning and resource allocation must consider the full life cycle of these elements.
Potential Cost
The decision to develop a long-range Transportation Master Plan will in itself have
minimal cost. The implementation of such a plan is likely to involve major and continuing
capital outlays. Relocation of major transportation facilities, or raising them above
expected flood levels, will require a tremendous increase in funding, even while existing
systems must be maintained as new ones are developed to replace them. Each project that
is undertaken on vulnerable facilities without such planning is one that will suffer
premature obsolescence and require more costly replacement or retrofitting as the effects of
climate change are felt.
Timeframe for Implementation
The State should take immediate action to develop and implement long-range planning that
incorporates the effects of climate change. The long life cycles of transportation
infrastructure elements guarantee that they will be affected.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
All climate-change impacts to this sector should be considered, in particular rising sea levels,
more frequent and severe riverine flooding, higher temperatures, and generally increasing
variability of weather.
Environmental Justice Considerations
EJ considerations and input from EJ communities should be included in siting and design efforts.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Adoption of a truly long-range Transportation Master Plan could spur economic development, as
businesses see that preparations are being made for a long-term stable system to meet their
transportation needs. A responsible transportation plan could influence development and landuse decisions that would reduce the overall vulnerability of the state to climate change. In the
nearer term, the large capital outlays needed to develop this new transportation system may have
a dampening effect on the state’s economy and will certainly face significant political challenges.

11-72

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recommendation 5.

Transportation investments in New York State must be
consistent with smart growth/transit-oriented
development principles.

“Sprawl” refers to dispersed, homogeneous, and automobile-dependent land use patterns.
Current policies and planning practices did not intend to encourage sprawl but have contributed
to dispersed developmental patterns in many areas of the state. These developments favor
automobile use over walking and transit, resulting in limited travel options. Smart growth
encourages more efficient land-use patterns and transit-oriented development, and intelligent
land-use choices, such as not building critical infrastructure in a potentially vulnerable location.
Smart-growth principles discourage development of remote properties or large swaths of
previously undeveloped land. Natural systems, such as wetlands, forests, and barrier islands,
provide services such as flood protection, storm buffering, and water infiltration that would be
prohibitively expensive to replicate with human-built systems. In addition, smart growth would
encourage infill and transit-oriented developments. This type of growth and development would
provide two adaptation benefits: preservation of natural systems that provide adaptation services
and less infrastructure exposed to climate impacts. Increased travel options will provide
transportation system redundancy that can be utilized if certain components of the transportation
network were to fail due to weather extremes.
Transportation and land use must be planned together. The effective integration of transportation
and smart growth helps ensure success in other climate adaptation and mitigation measures
related to ecological corridors, agriculture and food security, watershed management, water
access and distribution, etc.
Specific Actions
A.

Infrastructure investments should be assessed for their ability to implement
the Transportation and Land Use Technical Work Group long-term vision for
transportation, reducing vulnerability to climate impacts while improving
travel choices and transportation network efficiency.
New York State should develop strategic approaches to lower the severity of climate
impacts and reduce system vulnerability to climate change impacts. State efforts to
incorporate compact land-use patterns and transit-oriented development (TOD) into growth
strategies and master plans should continue.
Where Recommendation 1D considers different types of infrastructure, this
recommendation considers the location of that infrastructure.
Effective implementation of smart-growth policies would help focus climate change
adaptation efforts on population centers and critical transportation routes, while helping to
reduce future climate risk through intelligent and directed land use and transportation
investments.

11-73

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Increased travel options that result from compact development and better planning will
provide choices and alternatives that can be used if certain components of the state’s
transportation network were to suffer damage or failure as a result of climate change
impacts.
Potential Cost
The Governor’s Smart Growth Cabinet should remain operational. Capital expenditures
will be necessary to provide attractive incentives to local communities promoting smart
growth.
Incorporating smart-growth/TOD principles into agency decision making and local
planning efforts would have minimal direct costs. However, resulting decisions likely will
necessitate higher implementation costs. It is critical to note that the costs resulting from
no-action (i.e., business as usual) transportation and land-use planning would likely be
much higher. Land-use patterns would continue to be unsustainable, the State would not be
able to minimize critical points of failure and the transportation system would remain
vulnerable to climate change.
Infrastructure investments are always costly, for both new infrastructure and existing
infrastructure upgrades. Using the inventory developed under Recommendation 1, this
recommendation aims to make spending more efficient in the long term in two primary
ways:
•

Directing funds away from new infrastructure with high climate risk and toward
infrastructure with low climate risk and high adaptive capacity;

•

Directing funds toward existing infrastructure that is deemed critical to adaptation
capacity.

Timeframe for Implementation
This action should be implemented as soon as possible. Transportation, land-use, and
planning decisions being made today will influence growth and development for the next
several decades. New York State should start now to effect significant change in
development patterns and transportation infrastructure in order to adequately adapt to
climate change impacts.
B.

Infrastructure investments should be designed and constructed to protect
and preserve natural resources and ecosystems that provide essential
climate-adaptation services or benefits in addition to meeting transportation
needs.
Ecosystems provide critical and varied services, which are typically unrecognized and
under-valued but must be preserved. Natural systems, such as wetlands, forests, and barrier
beaches, provide services such as flood protection, storm buffering, and water infiltration
that would be prohibitively expensive to replicate with human-built systems. Smart growth
would discourage development of remote properties or large swaths of previously

11-74

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

undeveloped land, allowing natural systems to provide climate-adaptation services and
reducing exposure of infrastructure to climate impacts.
Potential Cost
Municipalities may require additional staff or incur costs by hiring consultants to
accomplish ecosystem evaluations. State agencies will require staff hours to provide
guidance. Administrative planning costs, based on staff hours, are estimated to be under
$1million statewide, annually.
Timeframe for Implementation
Transportation, land-use, and planning decisions being made today will influence growth
and development for the next several decades. New York State should start as soon as
possible to effect any significant change in development patterns and transportation
infrastructure to adequately adapt to climate change impacts.
C.

Incorporate redundancy and travel choices into the transportation system to
adapt to climate change impacts that may affect certain components of the
transportation network.
Serious and sustained financial choices and investments that increase investment in transit
(or shared low-carbon and zero-carbon modes) and existing infrastructure are needed to
build redundancy and provide travel choices in the transportation network. Planning and
building for a greater emphasis on shared modes of transportation will build efficiency and
resiliency into transportation systems, reducing vulnerability to climate change impacts.
Potential Cost
The cost of this action is not yet quantified and will depend on the specific policies
employed. Costs may be in the form of tax incentives for developers or grants for local
governments.
Timeframe for Implementation
New York State should start as soon as possible to effect any significant change in
development patterns and transportation infrastructure to adequately adapt to climate
change impacts.

Impacts/Vulnerabilities Addressed
Significant shifts in population and business may occur in response to the increase in flooding
and coastal inundation, resulting in new or altered transportation needs. Any component of the
transportation system that exists in close proximity to water or in low-lying areas will be
vulnerable to damage or diminished function as a result of climate change.
Environmental Justice Considerations

11-75

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Economically disadvantaged citizens need transportation choices and typically rely on public
transportation. Implementing this recommendation and expanding transit options throughout the
state would benefit these groups. It has been shown that coordinated and well-planned transitoriented development typically improves economic conditions and raises property values.
However desirable this may be, sensitivity to the risk of pricing out poorer residents that might
no longer be able to afford to live in these communities is necessary.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Co-benefits and costs are similar to EJ considerations. Seniors will also benefit from having
additional transportation choices. The most significant co-benefit of this recommendation is that
inverting mode-split and building resiliency and efficiency into the transportation system will
also dramatically reduce GHG emissions, having a significant effect on climate change
mitigation. Costs could include intensified land uses in certain areas, capital outlays, and political
ramifications.

Water Resources
Vision Statement
As water is vital to New York’s economic and environmental future, the State must pursue
actions that will maintain this rich resource in the face of climate change and increase resiliency
to the effects of climate change.
Background
New York State has an abundance of water resources. Despite having only 0.3 percent of the
world’s population, the state is bordered by lakes containing almost two percent of the world’s
fresh surface water: Lake Erie; Lake Ontario, and Lake Champlain. Central New York is home
to the Finger Lakes, which are the largest of the state’s 8,000 lakes as well as some of the largest
inland water bodies in the United States. The state has several high yielding groundwater
aquifers, particularly those of Long Island. It has an average rainfall of almost 40 inches, which
readily supplies numerous small municipal reservoirs as well as the extensive New York City
reservoir system located in the Catskill Mountains and lower Hudson River Valley.
Water resources are managed by a diverse array of large and small agencies, governments, and
institutions, with little statewide coordination. In 2000, New York State’s 19 million residents
consumed approximately 2,200 million gallons per day of fresh surface water and 890 million
gallons per day of fresh groundwater for public water-supply, irrigation and industrial uses. Of
this nearly 3,100 million gallons per day of consumption, only about 10 percent was for
industrial and agricultural use. This water comes from a diverse range of sources, each with
different levels of vulnerability to climate change.
New York State’s water and wastewater treatment infrastructure is in dire need of repair and
upgrade. A needs survey conducted by DEC in cooperation with the New York State

11-76

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Environmental Facilities Corporation (EFC) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) determined that $36 billion of water treatment improvements and $40 billion of
wastewater treatment improvements are necessary in New York State. The anticipated added
challenges associated with a changing climate will only exacerbate the situation.
Although New York is a water-rich state, it must continue to strengthen its capabilities to better
understand and manage its water resources. This is especially true given the growing demand for
water, including water for human consumption and energy production. As other parts of the
country experience large changes in drought frequency and intensity, New York’s water
resources may become a defining economic asset resulting in the migration of people and
businesses into the state. This may bring some economic benefits but will also present new
challenges as pressure on water resources increases. This potential has been recognized in the
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Compact. New York State’s water
budget should be assessed to better understand the availability, limitations, and allocations of
water and how that budget intersects with economic development, population growth, and
ecological health. This would also allow for better planning of water resources for competing
uses, including agricultural, industrial, ecosystem, and human uses.
Climate Impacts
Although there are several water-quality concerns directly linked to average air temperatures, in
general, hydrologic processes are dependent on multiple interacting climate factors. In addition
to temperature, possible future changes in timing and quantity of snow, rainfall, and evaporation
will all have impacts on the state’s water resources.
Rising air temperatures intensify the water cycle by driving increased evaporation and
precipitation. The resulting altered patterns of precipitation include more rain falling in heavy
events, often with longer dry periods in between. Such changes can have a variety of effects on
water resources.
•

The frequency of heavy downpours has increased over the past 50 years. This trend is
projected to continue, causing an increase in localized flash flooding in urban areas and hilly
regions.

•

Flooding has the potential to increase pollutants in the water supply and inundate wastewater
treatment plants and other vulnerable development within floodplains.

•

Less frequent summer rainfall is expected to result in additional and possibly longer summer
dry periods, affecting water supply systems with limited storage.

•

Reduced summer flows on large rivers and lowered groundwater tables could lead to
conflicts among competing water users.

•

Increasing water temperatures in rivers and streams will affect aquatic heath and reduce the
capacity of streams to assimilate effluent from wastewater treatment plants.

11-77

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Because New York is already experiencing water-resource challenges, the recommendations
provided here represent actions that will enhance New York’s water resources legacy. The
anticipated effects of climate change add urgency to implementing these recommendations;
however, these actions would also serve to improve water resources in the state independent of
climate change.
Recommendation 1.

Enact into law Governor's Program Bill #51-Water
Withdrawal Regulation (S.8280-A/A.11436-B) to authorize
implementation of a comprehensive statewide water
management program to better regulate the use and
consumption of the state's water resources.

This legislation directs DEC to implement a statewide permitting program for significant water
withdrawals; generally, systems with a capacity of equal to or greater than 100,000 gallons per
day would be regulated. Currently, water uses are managed by a piecemeal regulatory scheme;
on Long Island, groundwater withdrawals are subject to a DEC permit, and in the Delaware and
Susquehanna river basins, water withdrawals are regulated by the applicable interstate river basin
commission. Elsewhere, only public-water supplies are regulated. This legislation would provide
a rational and more consistent statewide approach. This legislation would provide DEC with
more comprehensive information on water uses across the state and allow DEC to better manage
New York State's water resources, which will become increasingly important as water
availability changes with a changing climate. Additionally, this legislation would allow DEC to
meet one of its obligations under the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources
Compact. Under the Compact, DEC must implement a regulatory program for all water
withdrawals in New York's portion of the Great Lakes Basin by December 2013. Without this
new program, New York State would continue to lack the necessary data to fully understand the
statewide level of water demand for water supply; commercial, industrial, and agricultural uses;
and the state’s ability to meet future demand in a changing climate.
Potential Cost
DEC staff would be required to promulgate regulations and manage the new permitting program.
Timing of Implementation
The statewide permitting program would be implemented upon adoption of regulations by DEC,
which would require passage of the legislation.
Recommendation 2.

Build greater resilience to projected climate change
impacts into drinking-water and wastewater infrastructure
systems.

New York State communities should prepare for increased frequency and intensity of flooding
and short-term drought due to climate change. Infrastructure must be adaptable and designed to
be resilient to a changing climate to avoid service disruption and costly damage, particularly to

11-78

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

drinking-water and wastewater infrastructure, which can have dramatic impacts to public health,
ecosystems, and local economies. Real-time monitoring systems should be used to evaluate
vulnerability of facilities and determine strategic upgrades and replacement of existing
infrastructure. Planning and design standards for new and, where feasible, upgrades to existing
water infrastructure should emphasize the use of smaller and more distributed systems that foster
groundwater recharge, system redundancies for critical populations, and systems that are
adaptable to and operable under a wide range of flood and drought conditions to reduce
vulnerability of human and natural systems to the effects of climate change.
Specific Actions
A.

The State and all other governmental bodies with jurisdiction over drinking
and wastewater infrastructure should, as part of their asset management
strategies, prepare detailed inventories of critical water infrastructure within
their jurisdictions and conduct climate vulnerability assessments that
consider changing climate conditions and potential climate impacts over the
full intended service lives of the identified infrastructure.
Potential Cost
The costs of modifying planning and permitting processes to accommodate new risk
assessment processes to evaluate infrastructure decisions are considerable. However,
accurate information is required for planning, especially for new infrastructure projects that
will cost many millions or even billions of dollars. The costs of no action could be
enormous. Disruptions to critical infrastructure can cause the loss of essential services,
public-health impacts, and hardship to local residents; compromise economic activity; and
entail costly repair and reconstruction.
Timing of Implementation
Near-term. As potential impacts are determined and adaptation actions are prioritized,
water managers can implement certain no-regrets actions; that is, climate change
considerations can add momentum and potentially expedite initiatives that have already
been identified as priorities. By factoring climate projections into infrastructure investment
decision making now, better choices will be made regarding how to deal with aging
infrastructure and how to make existing and new infrastructure climate resilient in the
future. By wisely incorporating climate-change impacts into infrastructure decision making
now, authorities can avoid costly adaptation efforts later.
Environmental Justice
Implementation of this strategy will increase the resiliency of critical infrastructure
throughout New York State, providing a benefit to all. However, this strategy may have a
particular environmental justice benefit by focusing attention on neglected infrastructure in
vulnerable urban communities with more limited adaptive capacity. In addition, because
many water-treatment facilities and other water infrastructure are located in EJ

11-79

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

communities, the proposed vulnerability assessments will identify particular problems and
challenges before they become acute, thus helping to mitigate negative impacts on host
communities.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
By increasing the resiliency of infrastructure, service disruptions will be reduced, limiting
the health consequences that may arise from disruption of critical services, e.g., wastewater
treatment or public transportation. Through better design of wastewater treatment plants,
release of untreated waste into water bodies due to infrastructure flooding can be reduced,
eliminating a potential source of environmental pollution. A flexible system can maximize
operational approaches to adaptation such as green infrastructure that can produce a
spectrum of co-benefits, including air-quality improvements and energy savings. Such a
system can also potentially result in the design and implementation of smaller,
infrastructure improvements that have lower cost and impact, consume less energy, and
reduce hydrological impacts, but still effectively meet needs. Co-benefits of infrastructurecapital upgrades could include additional features to increase water-supply storage or flood
prevention.
B.

Relevant State and local agencies should update permit and design
standards for drinking-water and wastewater infrastructure to factor in
projected climate impacts, particularly precipitation-related events such as
more intense rainfall events, reduced winter snow cover, and increased
frequency of short-term droughts.
Potential Cost
An update to the hydrologic data that inform infrastructure design standards (TP 40) is
currently funded and underway; however, resources will have to be dedicated to
appropriately integrate the updated data into agency design standards.
Timing of Implementation
Updated hydrologic data should be incorporated into design standards by relevant agencies
immediately upon completion. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service has
funded the Northeast Regional Climate Center to provide updates to current rainfall
frequency estimates. An assessment of ongoing programs and activities would inform
investment in additional data collection and research.
Environmental Justice
This action would provide greater protection to the most vulnerable communities by
reducing flooding of critical infrastructure in low-lying areas and ensuring the sustained
quality of drinking water.

11-80

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recommendation 3.

Adopt statewide and region-wide comprehensive
sustainable water-resources-management strategies that
consider climate change to preserve water quality and
water quantity for human and natural communities, and
encourage watershed-wide collaboration.

The natural hydrologic cycle is shaped by and adapted to accommodate a wide range of
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions while being resilient to damage. Where State polices can
mimic the efficiency of natural processes they will enhance the state’s ability to adapt to climate
change. Storm-water, wastewater, and water-supply permit guidance should reflect this goal.
Sound watershed management is a key component of sustainable water policy. A comprehensive
sustainable water-resources strategy would fully recognize groundwater and surface water as a
single, integrated resource that is essential to the ecological integrity and economic vitality of the
state. Watersheds do not function based on political boundaries, and impacts to water quality and
quantity are cross-jurisdictional. Inter-municipal and inter-agency collaboration to manage water
resources is essential. In addition, climate impacts to water resources and management strategies
will vary across the state and region due to varying levels of urbanization and infrastructure
investment, economic factors and planning priorities, and the water needs of natural systems. For
this reason many water issues are best addressed on a watershed or sub-watershed level and
regional and intermunicipal watershed plans are needed. Where watersheds cross state
boundaries, region-wide approaches should be developed.
Planning at this scale should include the following:
•
•
•
•

Regional water budgets to ensure that the quality and quantity of surface water and
groundwater are conserved and protected, particularly for critical waters;
Regional conservation of wetlands and critical fish and wildlife habitats;
Identification of regionally important projects needed to adapt to impending impacts of
climate change and sea level rise, including protection or management of water supply, water
quality, living resources or aquatic resources;
Climate impacts on the Great Lakes, resulting in changing lake conditions and lake levels
and related water-management issues.

Specific Actions
A.

All water-related permit programs and policies should minimize alterations
and disruptions to the natural hydrologic cycle to the extent possible.
Regulatory agencies should implement this recommendation at multiple
scales, including site-level planning and construction, as well as more
regional watershed scales.
Technical guidance and design standards should be created and incorporated in stormwater, wastewater, and water-supply permit guidance, and permit reviews and approvals.
This guidance and design standards should strive to maximize the ability of infrastructure
and to mimic the hydrologic cycle through the following:

11-81

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

•
•
•

•

Couple water-supply withdrawals and wastewater infrastructure to limit water transfer
between watersheds to ensure that used water is returned to its donor source, reducing
infrastructure and energy costs, helping to meet the needs of aquatic life, and providing
for renewal of ground and surface-water resources;
Require the reuse of wastewater and gray water in new development;
Develop and enforce a zero-runoff storm water policy for new construction and maximize
infiltration of storm water onsite at existing developed sites;
Provide stronger protection for the preservation of natural hydrologic pathways by
minimizing land disturbance, avoiding sensitive areas (e.g., steep slopes, recharge areas
sustaining groundwater dependent ecosystems, wetlands, and stream corridors), avoiding
soil compaction, and reducing impervious surface area;
Require the use of resilient (e.g., drought-tolerant) native tree cover and plantings, and
the removal of invasive species where landscaping is done.
Potential Cost
Although revising policy to address the need to mimic natural hydrology wherever possible
may have minimal financial impact on state agencies, it is a paradigm shift in thinking and
may require considerable costs to local project sponsors to meet new requirements. Federal
and state funding agencies involved with water projects, such as EFC, DEC, DOH and EPA
should require these types of recommended actions.
Timing of Implementation
A phased implementation approach could be taken over the next decade to
comprehensively weave these philosophies into water policy, funding, and programs.
Environmental Justice
Without careful planning, there is the potential for some decisions to affect such
communities disproportionately, for example, by resulting in decreased property values or
reduced opportunities for economic development. Agency decisions should include robust
public participation, with enhanced efforts for public involvement in areas of
environmental justice concern.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Co-benefits of minimizing disruption of the natural hydrologic cycle include improved
water quality, integration of many environmental program goals, improved flood-water
attenuation, improved groundwater recharge, protection of river corridors, improved instream health, and reduced stream sedimentation.

B.

Create mechanisms to foster development and State approval of regional
intermunicipal watershed-management plans that address expected climate
change impacts and to protect and improve the quality, quantity, and
ecological function of surface and groundwater resources, while balancing
human health, safety, and socio-economic factors.

11-82

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Watershed management plans should be developed at the watershed or sub-watershed level
by regional, State, and local officials; they should be officially endorsed and adopted by
local governments and approved by relevant State agencies. State funding for water
infrastructure should be conditioned upon completion of intermunicipal watershed
management plans. These plans should include vulnerability assessments to inform
planning efforts that consider factors such as water availability, flooding, and water quality.
Vulnerability assessments done on a more localized basis should incorporate projected
regional impacts, which are critical for effective State-level planning and protection of New
York State’s water resources.
Local and regional watershed planning will also address knowledge and management gaps
related to groundwater systems, such as the extent, quality, and quantity of groundwater
systems, and the role of groundwater in supporting ecological systems as the climate
changes. Rural residents rely primarily on groundwater for drinking water and other
domestic use. Climate change has the potential to negatively affect groundwater recharge;
new development should be limited in areas where groundwater resources are already
stressed. While the protection of groundwater may be regulated for human uses, current
measures do not consider groundwater requirements for the maintenance of ecosystem
integrity. This consideration is necessary for the protection of ecosystems. Projections of
future water availability, human use, and ecosystem requirements should be updated
regularly as new climate and water-use information is developed.
Potential Cost
Research leading to the characterization of groundwater resources has traditionally been
conducted by the USGS with resources to meet local match requirements provided by
cooperating agencies. TEPA also provides grants to the National Rural Water Association
for groundwater assessments for towns on a case by case basis. Additional state resources
for mapping and assessment of groundwater sources could improve planning decisions and
ensure sufficient drinking-water resources are available for new development. The
preparation of watershed-management plans has been funded in part by the New York State
Department of State under Title 11 of the Environmental Protection Fund Local Waterfront
Revitalization; and DEC, with CWA Section 319 funding, and grants under the Hudson
River Estuary Program. Technical assistance in the preparation of watershed management
plans could be provided outside of the State grant-assistance context, albeit at a lesser level,
with the need for geographic targeting by limited agency staff.
Timing of Implementation
The preparation of intermunicipal watershed-management plans is ongoing in New York
State. Incorporation of climate change adaptation can begin immediately. The mechanism
for formal state approval of intermunicipal watershed-management plans could be
established within a year.
Environmental Justice

11-83

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Water-quality testing occurs for public water supplies; however, the same scrutiny is not
afforded to private water supplies, such as private wells. Watershed-management planning
could focus on surface waters, groundwater, or both, including water for human uses (e.g.,
consumption and recreation that supports local economies), as well for sustaining waterdependent ecosystems. For those communities that have difficulty providing matching
funds for State grants, a lesser local match may be needed to encourage participation in
watershed-management planning.
Recommendation 4.

Allow “room for rivers.” Acknowledge the dynamic nature
of rivers on the landscape and strive to reduce risk to
critical infrastructure and human development as the risk
of flooding increases with climate change.

While a patchwork of interrelated river-corridor, wetland, and floodplain programs exists at the
federal, State, and local levels, no comprehensive river-corridor program exists. Agencies with
jurisdiction over streams, rivers, and their channels, corridors and floodplains should create
policies and regulatory approaches to protect the dynamic nature of river corridors and strive to
reduce risk to communities through non-structural measures like land-use planning and the
elevation and relocation of highly vulnerable structures.
Specific Actions
A.

Coordinate with key federal and local stakeholders such as the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), U.S. Department of Agriculture,
and county soil and water conservation districts to identify and map areas of
greatest current risk from riverine flooding and erosion due to movement of
rivers across the landscape.
Flood-mapping efforts must be modernized to be an effective tool in emergency planning.
Flood maps should be completed and updated using climate change projections and flood
studies and made electronically accessible to local governments. In partnership with federal
agencies, multi-layered, geographic-information-system mapping should be used to
identify, classify, and map high-risk areas. Critical data include high-resolution elevation
and bathymetry; spatial information for natural, built, and human resources; socioeconomic data; sites that, if flooded, could contribute to toxic contamination; and
development models that include build-out scenarios. DEC’s floodplain-management
program currently has only indirect enforcement capability. Legislative reform is needed to
ensure wise management of floodplains.

B.

Work with federal agencies to reduce new development in areas at high risk
of riverine flooding and undertake long-term managed relocation or elevation
of existing structures in these areas. Restructure disaster-recovery policies
to ensure that redevelopment efforts strive to reduce long-term risk.
New York should eliminate incentives for development in high-risk floodplain areas.
Federal disaster-recovery policies should be reformed so that reconstruction of damaged
homes and infrastructure incorporates current standards and knowledge of flood risks due

11-84

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

to climate change, rather than simply funding replacement-in-kind of damaged structures
and systems.
Potential Cost
FEMA, in partnership with DEC, is mapping areas at greatest risk for riverine flooding in New
York. However, the considerable costs (tens of millions of dollars) associated with conducting
flood studies and collecting the high-resolution elevation data necessary to generate accurate
maps statewide has left many areas of the state still without accurate maps. Additional resources
to conduct flood studies and collect high-resolution elevation data using LiDAR (Light Detection
and Ranging) technology would allow for complete and accurate mapping of areas at greatest
risk. In the absence of resources to complete the mapping, in the near term incentives could be
provided to local governments to regulate floodplains and to limit development along stream and
river corridors at minimal cost. New York State could also institute a setback regulation for river
and stream corridors through State law; however, the mapping effort described above would
have to be completed at considerable cost to enable enforcement of this regulation.
As the risk of large flood events increases so does the cost of State response and assistance
during and after flood events. It may soon become more cost effective to map and regulate areas
at greatest risk of flooding to reduce vulnerability. Significant resources will also be needed to
support elevation and/or relocation of structures in high-risk areas.
Timing of Implementation
Implementing a program to reduce the vulnerability of structures and facilities in areas at high
risk of flooding should begin soon, as this effort would take many years of planning due to its
complexity, the need for the creation of an advisory committee, and perhaps the eventual
creation of a State law to reduce the vulnerability of structures, homes, and facilities to flooding.
Environmental Justice
Stricter management of floodplains can depress property values in areas no longer deemed
developable. Any program to move people out of these regions or discourage development in
floodplains would require adequate mechanism for compensation and reestablishment of
households outside of the floodplain.
Co-benefits and Unintended Consequences
Enhanced protection of riparian corridors offers many co-benefits, integrating many DEC and
environmental program goals, including enhancement of riparian areas as greenhouse gas sinks,
providing upland wildlife habitat, protecting water quality, improving flood-water attenuation,
increasing biodiversity, and enhancing public access and scenic beauty.
Recommendation 5.

Incorporate water-related climate projections into State
and local emergency-management planning.

Specific Actions

11-85

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

A.

State emergency-management and local hazard-mitigation plans should
incorporate the best available projections of climate-related impacts, such as
increased frequency of extreme rainfall, coastal storms, temperature
extremes, and short-term droughts.
Expected increases in the frequency of extreme climate events should be factored into
emergency planning, response, and recovery capacity. Floods tend to be relatively
localized. Droughts may affect the whole state at once, but their significance will vary
depending on local resilience (e.g., some groundwater-fed water supplies and those
supplied by the Great Lakes may not be as significantly affected). Mitigation will
necessarily include improving infrastructure to optimize system redundancy and flexibility.

B.

Establish appropriate legal mandates, secure stable funding, and develop
guidance for participatory vulnerability assessments and adaptationplanning processes at the local and regional levels.
While climate change is global, its impacts will be felt on a local level. Flooding is
expected to increase in many areas of the state; the location, extent, and severity of
flooding may be very different from that currently experienced. Drought will also have
locally and regionally disparate effects. Hundreds of communities within New York State
will be affected by climate change; appropriate resources, including funding and guidance,
are necessary for communities to plan for the mitigation of their particular risks.

Potential Cost
The development of State guidance for local governments to help them conduct vulnerability
assessments that include the best available climate information should be of relatively low cost.
Costs associated with assessments and planning will require staff time at the local level as well
as some funding for coordination efforts at the local and regional levels, and guidance and tools
should be designed to minimize these costs.
Timing of Implementation
Climate projections should be incorporated into emergency-response plans immediately.
Vulnerability assessments and specific adaptation-planning efforts should begin following the
development of guidance and tools for local assessments.
Environmental Justice
Some low-income communities and communities of color are particularly vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, and may lack the resilience necessary to effectively adapt to changing
climate and recover from impacts. Implementing guidance and planning efforts, especially at the
local level, will require the incorporation of approaches specific to the needs of these
communities (e.g., employing a multilingual approach that incorporates cultural differences).

11-86

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 12
Multi-Sector Policies and Issues
A number of issues and policies were identified by members of the Technical Work
Groups as having cross-sectoral impacts or considerations. This chapter of the Climate
Action Council (Council) Interim Report summarizes the environmental justice concerns
and considerations raised by environmental and community-based representatives; nearand long-term workforce training requirements for a clean energy economy; marketing,
education, and outreach; and a subgroup report that addressed the impacts and strategies
related to the transition to electric vehicles.

Environmental Justice Considerations and Concerns Related to
the Climate Action Plan Process and to Policy Options
Development
The transition to a low-carbon economy and the projected consequences of climate
change will have disparate impacts across the different communities (urban, suburban,
and rural), sectors and demographic groups of New York State. From the very beginning
of the Climate Action Plan process, the Council made assessing how any proposed
climate change mitigation and adaptation policies would affect the most vulnerable New
Yorkers a priority. Communities and households struggling with poverty, unemployment,
health problems, political disenfranchisement and other challenges will often lack an
adequate understanding of the climate-related risks they face and/or the necessary
resources to adapt effectively to rapidly accelerating climate change.
To ensure that concerns and issues of importance to New York State’s most vulnerable
communities were adequately addressed in the process, the Council made a determined
effort to reach out to and integrate input from a spectrum of community-based or focused
organizations and environmental justice (EJ) groups. From the very beginning,
individuals who represented these viewpoints and who could also bring to bear different
regional perspectives were invited to join the Technical Work Groups that formed the
backbone of the Climate Action Planning effort. Additional EJ and community-based or
focused representatives were later added to each Technical Work Group to further
strengthen the community perspective. Key EJ stakeholders were also asked to join the
Integration Advisory Panel, a body charged with considering cross-cutting and multisectoral issues that emerged during the process.
In addition to this representation on the Technical Work Groups, the Council partnered
with the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation’s (DEC’s) Office
of Environmental Justice to implement an unprecedented outreach effort focused on
community-based organizations and EJ stakeholders across the state. This effort included
organizing two statewide videoconferences, hosting a series of EJ Coordination and
Advisory teleconferences at critical points in the process, and circulating survey
instruments on the proposed mitigation and adaptation policies to a wide variety of
stakeholders.

12-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The videoconferences, held in March and May, were broadcast from DEC’s headquarters
in Albany to the agency’s regional offices in Buffalo, Syracuse, and New York City and
were open to the public. The EJ Coordination and Advisory teleconferences afforded a
broader group of stakeholders an opportunity to learn about the Climate Action Plan
process and offer their input and advice about key issues to the EJ and community-based
or focused representatives serving on the Technical Work Groups. Finally, the two
surveys that were distributed across the state afforded stakeholders an opportunity to
submit their views about the potential negative and positive aspects of the mitigation and
adaptation policies under consideration. The results of these surveys were consolidated
and distributed to the membership of the Technical Work Groups and made available to
the general public online.
Holistic Approach to Environmental Justice and Climate Change Policy
In addition to the extensive outreach, coordination, and input-gathering effort described
above, EJ concerns were incorporated into the analytical effort to identify and design
potential policies at a fundamental level. The full description of each proposed policy
(see online appendices) features a discussion of any significant EJ considerations that
came out of the Technical Work Group deliberations or that were identified as a result of
stakeholder input or further staff analysis. The short policy descriptions contained in the
main body of the Climate Action Plan also highlight any EJ concerns under the “Special
Considerations” section. The explicit integration of EJ concerns in the Climate Action
Plan’s deliberative and analytical processes reflects a commitment by New York State to
approach these critical environmental policy areas in a holistic fashion. Accordingly,
many of the proposed policies that emerged from the different Technical Work Groups
have explicit or implicit benefits for EJ communities, including reductions in air
pollution, additional resources for community development, and the upgrading or phasing
out of aging infrastructure and facilities.
There are many examples of how the proposed Climate Action Plan policies will benefit
EJ communities in each of the sectors. In policy option PSD-1, which is focused on siting
power generation, the Council explicitly acknowledges the role of EJ communities and
the need to take into consideration the cumulative impacts of various environmental
burdens as part of the siting process, and implementation of PSD-8, which addresses
Existing Fossil Fuel Plants Policies, would result in improved efficiency and the
reduction of emissions in neighborhoods that host power plants. Community and EJ
stakeholders strongly endorsed the smart growth principles and initiatives featured in
several of the policies such as TLU-10, which called for supporting the establishment of
Priority Growth Centers, or TLU-11’s call for more Transit-Oriented Development.
Finally, many stakeholders expressed support for the focus on workforce development
and green collar jobs found in many of the policies, indicating that this was an important
issue for their communities as New York begins to move to a low-carbon economy.
While many of the proposed policies have specific EJ implications, over the course of the
Climate Action Plan process, several overarching concerns about the potential shift to a
low-carbon economy and New York State’s efforts to adapt to climate change emerged.
These included the need to increase attention and devote resources to facilitating
meaningful public participation and community engagement, the importance of
12-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

preserving and expanding procedural safeguards in official decision-making processes
such as permitting and siting, and the application of fair share principles with respect to
the distribution of burdens and amenities.
Effective Community Engagement and Public Participation
Research shows that most Americans do not feel a personal connection to climate
change-related issues. They are aware of it, they may even rank it as a concern, but
according to a 2008 Pew Research Center for People and the Press, they do not perceive
it as a near-term priority on par with economic concerns. 1 In fact, despite increasingly
forceful calls from the scientific community for urgent action, climate change has slipped
to the bottom of the list of American priorities. Given the additional socioeconomic
stresses they face, this dynamic is likely to be even stronger in low-income communities
and communities of color.
One of the key ingredients found in communities across the world that have successfully
engaged on climate change-related issues is the presence of strong and sustained local
leadership.1 Community and EJ stakeholders engaged in the Climate Action Plan process
repeatedly stressed the need to incorporate adequate public awareness-raising and
community engagement measures into the Climate Action Plan. They stressed that
without sustained local dialogues to educate community members and build support for
the various policies, the desired paradigm shift to a low-carbon economy would be much
more difficult. Already, because of past difficulties, misunderstandings, and procedural
missteps, many EJ leaders are wary of official decision-making and planning processes
that they feel have served them poorly in the past. Explicitly acknowledging and
addressing such problems and shortcomings was identified as a critical component of
developing and implementing the Climate Action Plan.
Communicating effectively about climate change is a formidable challenge. Efforts to
convince the public of the urgency of the problem and translate climate change-related
risks into a near-term danger on par with other imminent societal and personal threats
have not been successful. Community and EJ stakeholders discussed the reality that
awareness-raising and public education activities around climate change often have been
piecemeal and sporadic, and have lacked the kind of targeted, New York-specific context
to make them as effective as possible. Given the relatively low-level of awareness and
understanding of the risks and hazards associated with most climate shocks in EJ
communities, stakeholders identified a need for more coordinated, statewide awarenessraising activities that include tools and guidance to help communities frame climaterelated risks within a local context.
Informed and aware households and communities represent an invaluable asset to State
and local authorities with respect to climate change. Community and EJ stakeholders
indicated that making use of this asset fully would require consultation, participation,
assessment, and planning at levels lower than municipal government. Thus, they argued
that adequate resources and technical assistance devoted to community capacity building
1

Psychology of Climate Change Communications, Columbia University Center for Research into
Environmental Decisions. 2009.
12-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

should be an integral part of New York State’s Climate Action Plan, but they pointed out
that State programs have not always provided resources for this kind of effort.
For example, stakeholders repeatedly cited the expiration of the Intervenor Fund
established under Article X of the Public Service Law governing the construction and
operation of electric generating facilities with capacities of 80 megawatts or more as a
great model mechanism for community-level capacity building. The Intervenor Fund
channeled resources to localities and community-based organizations to help defray the
costs of technical experts and consultants. Article X expired in 2003. While revival of
this mechanism is being considered as part of the Power Supply and Delivery (PSD)
Technical Work Group’s efforts, it has potential applicability beyond the siting of
proposed power generation facilities.
Permitting, Siting, and Environmental Impact Assessment
Community and EJ stakeholders raised concerns about the implications of some of the
proposed policy approaches for hard-won procedural safeguards designed to ensure
adequate access to official decision making in areas such as permitting, the siting of
facilities and infrastructure, and conducting environmental impact assessments.
Specifically they cited language regarding the need to "overcome barriers" as troubling.
They contended that “EJ communities have long been victimized by proposals that evade
zoning and siting law review” and that carving out exceptions in order to advance climate
change-related goals would be strongly opposed. As an example, they pointed to a
specific controversy that occurred in New York City in 2000, when the New York Power
Authority (NYPA) met with determined resistance to a plan to site natural gas-fired
turbines exclusively in EJ communities. A lawsuit and citywide protests ensued, resulting
in a court order directing NYPA to prepare an environmental impact statement.
Implementation of many of the policies proposed for inclusion in the Climate Action Plan
by the different Technical Work Groups could have implications for siting and
environmental impact assessment. For example, implementation of PSD-3, which is
focused on increasing development and dissemination of energy storage technologies,
should take account of the implications of siting such facilities in EJ communities where
power generation facilities are already clustered. Similarly, in considering PSD-9, which
is focused on Technology, Research, Development, and Deployment, stakeholders cited
the need to apply the precautionary principle to forestall unforeseen long-term health
impacts in cases where relatively new and untested technologies were deployed in
overburdened communities.
As part of the Climate Action Plan process, EJ stakeholders have emphasized the
importance of assessing the cumulative risks and impacts of different types of stressors,
facilities and infrastructure on the health and quality of life of communities. The term
“cumulative risks and impacts” refers to a combination of factors that result in certain
communities or sub-populations being more susceptible to environmental stressors of
varying kinds, including being more exposed to environmental toxins, or having
compromised ability to cope with and/or recover from such exposure.1 Because of the
breadth and nature of the policies proposed for the Climate Action Plan, stakeholders
highlighted the potential for implementation to either increase cumulative impacts or
12-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

decrease them depending on the specific design of individual policies and the interactions
among several of them in a given community. The importance of adequately analyzing
the public health implications of the proposed policies was also emphasized.
Finally, timely access to information and transparency were advanced as critical issues
that cut across all the policy areas. The central importance to EJ communities of
processes that required formal public notice and participation procedures such as federal
and State permitting was repeatedly stressed by stakeholders.
Waterfront Facilities and Public Health
Throughout the community-focused and EJ coordination and advisory dialogue, various
concerns about the vulnerability of waterfront facilities, such as wastewater treatment
plants, petroleum/chemical bulk storage sites, and solid waste management facilities, and
the risks they represent to surrounding communities in the context of climate change
were raised by the stakeholders. In particular, the medium- and long-term contamination
consequences associated with coastal flooding proved a source of considerable concern.
The types of hazards associated with storm surge and other inundation events are
numerous. In addition to injury and death caused by the direct contact with flood waters,
such events can lead to a host of environmental health risks due to direct contamination
of homes and other buildings, contamination of drinking water sources with either
infectious or chemical material, and disruption of sewage systems and of solid waste
collection and disposal systems. Flooding could also potentially lead to the contamination
of water bodies such as reservoirs, ponds, and lakes. Typically, it is during the recovery
phase in the aftermath of an inundation event that these kinds of environmental impacts
become apparent.
The following critical knowledge gaps related to epidemiological risk factors and public
health interventions have been identified already in the literature on the public health
impacts of floods:
•

The mental health impacts of flooding, especially the long-term impacts, and their
principal causes, which have been inadequately researched even in high-income
settings;

•

The nature and magnitude of mortality risks in the period after flooding;

•

Quantification of the risks of infectious and vector-borne diseases following floods;

•

The effectiveness of warning systems and public health measures in reducing floodrelated health burdens;

•

The health-related costs of flooding that are often given little weight in decisions
about specific interventions;

12-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Quantification of the degree to which climate and land use change will contribute to
flood risk and associated health burdens in different settings. 2

Specifically, stakeholders indicated a need to analyze the potential health risks associated
with human exposure to toxins during and after storm surge events, particularly in areas
of high-population density. They advocated for the development of maps with overlays of
all industries and toxic materials associated with specific industrial processes in areas
vulnerable to storm surge and coastal flooding.
Fair Share of Burdens and Benefits
Equity concerns and ethical considerations have been increasingly applied to
international, national, state, and local efforts to address climate change, drawing on
some of the debates originating in the environmental justice movement. 3 Historically, a
fundamental principle of the EJ movement is that no population should be forced to bear
a disproportionate share of the environmental consequences resulting from industrial,
commercial, or municipal operations or from the execution of government programs and
policies.
Community and EJ stakeholders observed that achieving this ideal within the context of a
transition to a low-carbon economy and climate change means more than just treating
communities in an equitable manner. They pointed out that the reality that, by definition,
overburdened EJ communities are not starting at the same place as more affluent,
politically powerful communities and that balancing this legacy of environmental
pollution and burdens in the context of climate change would require a more nuanced
approach. Specifically, stakeholders argued that overburdened communities merited a
greater proportion of the beneficial demonstration projects, pilot programs, and
innovative policy initiatives being proposed for inclusion in the Climate Action Plan. In
addition, they contended that any efforts to streamline approval processes or remove
barriers to innovation or implementation must take into account existing burdens in and
potential detrimental impacts on vulnerable communities.

Near- and Long-Term Workforce Training and Development
Requirements for a Clean Energy Economy
The Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial (RCI) Technical Work Group
identified near-term workforce training and development as a priority policy option
within that sector during the Climate Action Plan process. However, this issue cuts across
all Technical Work Groups, as each sector of our economy seeks to implement new
technologies and practices for a clean energy economy and makes permanent changes in
the way we, as a state, use our resources. The existence of a suitably skilled workforce is
assumed in the quantification of all other policy options in this Interim Report. Specific
examples of training needs that would be necessary to implement the policy options
2

Ahern, Mike, Kovats, R. Sari, Wilkinson, Paul 2005. “Global Health Impacts of Floods: Epidemiologic
Evidence.” Epidemiologic Reviews. Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

3

Cutter, Susan. 1995. “Race, Class and Environmental Justice.” Progress in Human Geography 19:107118.

12-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

identified during the Climate Action Plan process were identified for all mitigation
Technical Work Groups and are incorporated into the Workforce Training and
Development Policy (RCI-6). (See Chapter 6 for the policy summary. The complete
Policy Options Document is available at www.nyclimatechange.us.)
Workforce training and development are primarily intended to improve productivity
(quality of production output) by improving the knowledge, skills and abilities of the
workforce. The Workforce Training and Development policy option examines the
following near-term workforce development strategies and programs:
•

Energy efficiency;

•

Site-based clean and renewable energy resources;

•

Power supply and demand;

•

Smart grid technologies;

•

Codes and standards;

•

Agriculture, forestry, and waste;

•

Transportation;

•

Manufacturing and other related areas.

Opportunities to prepare and expand upon current workforce training, continuing
education, credentialing, licensing, on-the-job training, recruitment and job placement
efforts are identified. Initiatives will focus on the following:
•

Mid-stream decision makers and building professionals in the residential,
multifamily, and commercial building sectors;

•

Industrial and power systems engineers and skilled technicians;

•

Manufacturing engineers and technicians;

•

Biorefinery, upstream, or feedstock production training related to biomass energy as
well as downstream training for conversion facility personnel;

•

Integrated farm management processes and systems;

•

Forest management focusing on upstream workers;

•

Waste reduction, recycling, and composting

Workforce training also was addressed by the Economic Development Subgroup (see the
Building Block #2 section of Chapter 13: Stimulating a Clean Energy Economy in New
York) but from a long-term perspective, focusing instead on developing strategies that
identify and respond to workforce development needs as they arise and on education and
training of future generations of workers that will be needed for the low-carbon economy
A skilled workforce must exist for companies to grow and locate in the State. In an
innovation-based economic model, a full spectrum of skill levels is needed. A dynamic
workforce development system designed to meet the needs of a low-carbon economy
12-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

must take a long view to develop the human capital needed to prepare New York and
capture the benefits of a clean economy. The K–12 system must educate children in math
and science more effectively, help them understand the need for environmental
sustainability and alternatives to a carbon-based economy, and prepare them for
entrepreneurship. The higher education system must continuously evolve to reflect the
needs of the changing economy through new curricula and through the establishment of
low-carbon economy-centered certifications and degree programs. Incumbent workers
must have access to workforce development programs to help them continuously upgrade
their skills to meet the needs of their employers. Finally, new energy service jobs,
combined with proper training, would create opportunities for professionals to remain
and work in New York and create pathways out of poverty, an equally important social
objective.
The Economic Development Subgroup identified elements of the workforce development
system necessary to evolve with the changing economy, key market barriers that must be
addressed by a comprehensive workforce investment strategy over the 2050 planning
horizon, and the need for public revenues for workforce development and training
programs.

Outreach, Education and Capacity Building for Acceptance and
Adoption of the Climate Action Plan and the Creation of a LowCarbon Economy
Many State agencies are active participants in the Climate Action Plan process, and it is
necessary that these agencies are fully committed to implementation of the Climate
Action Plan, achieving the goal of 80 by 50, and the creation of a low-carbon economy.
Government should not only lead by example but will be responsible for developing an
implementation strategy that is effective in meeting program goals and that guides the
transition to a low-carbon economy in a cost-effective, and politically and socially
acceptable manner.
The full engagement of State agencies and local governments should begin with an
internal outreach and education effort that promotes the Climate Action Plan and will be
pivotal in the development of programs, information, and incentives. Climate change
considerations should be part of routine government activities and decisions. Such an
effort will help communicate that the policies designed to achieve our greenhouse gas
(GHG) goals need not be burdensome but can lead to more efficient operations.
A parallel robust, well-funded, and effective external outreach, education, and awarenessraising effort should focus on the substantial economic, social, and environmental
benefits the Climate Action Plan will generate. A public campaign would be based on the
lessons of and responses to the government outreach and education plan. Without critical
support from the public, some officials charged with implementing aspects of the Climate
Action Plan may have little motivation or desire to devote capital resources and personal
energy required to achieve its ambitious goals. Implementation of many of the policy
options will prove more challenging without widespread support. Messaging should
emphasize budget control, safety and security, health, and smart investment approaches
12-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

that account for uncertainty such as sea level rise and the consequences and costs of no
action.

Summary of the Impacts and Strategies Related to the Transition
to High Penetration of Electric Vehicles: Conclusions of the
Electric Vehicle Subgroup
The full report of the Electric Vehicle Subgroup is attached to this Interim Report as
Appendix G.
Figure 12-1 presents on estimate of market penetration developed in a recent New
York plug-in hybrid electric vehicle study

Draft Report: Grid Impact of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles. Electric Power Research Institute. 2010.
NYSERDA Agreement 10995.

At present, the transportation sector produces 39.5% of New York State’s combustionbased inventory of GHG, with the gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicle sector being
responsible for the vast majority of those emissions. Plug-in electric vehicles (EVs), plugin hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), and fuel-cell vehicles (FCVs) powered by hydrogen
derived from electrolysis offer the potential to displace a significant portion of this
petroleum consumption by using electricity for all or portions of vehicle trips. If this
electricity had a low- or near-zero-carbon intensity, the carbon footprint from this
segment could be nearly eliminated. A cross-sectoral electric vehicle subgroup was
established to identify the impacts to multiple economic sectors of a transition to a high

12-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

penetration of grid-powered vehicles and to establish a consensus, where possible, on a
comprehensive, multisectoral strategy to achieve this penetration.
Impacts of High Penetration of Grid-Powered Vehicles on Several
Economic Sectors
The members of the subgroup identified many impacts of a transition to high penetration
of grid-powered vehicles on several economic sectors, as listed below:
Power Supply—Generation
• Through the mid-term (2025), the state has adequate generation capacity to
accommodate the maximum (30%) anticipated penetration of EVs and PHEVs.
•

Smart charging to minimize grid impacts will be necessary.

•

New York’s current off-peak generation mix provides PHEVs significant GHG
reductions as compared to conventional vehicles; however, the grid will be required
to be near carbon-free to maximize GHG reductions.

Transmission
• Through the mid-term (2025), the state’s transmission grid has adequate capacity to
accommodate the maximum (30%) anticipated penetration of EV and PHEVs with
smart charging.
Distribution
• Near- to mid-term: local distribution (transformer) upgrades are likely to be
necessary.
•

Longer term: large numbers of EVs requiring quick charge may require local storage.

•

Business models, polic,y and regulatory actions encouraging smart charging and
allowing third-party sale of electricity may be necessary.

Charging Infrastructure
• Building codes addressing Level II and Level III charging in new residential and
commercial garage construction will significantly reduce costs.
•

Building codes that address garaging hydrogen-fueled vehicles should be part of the
long-term solution.

•

Policy and regulations should encourage the development of a variety of business
models for charging or refueling (battery swap, etc.).

Vehicles
• PHEVs, EVs, and FCVs that have acceptable performance are a reality.
•

Vehicles that derive their fuel from the electric grid are likely to become a costeffective means of achieving carbon-free mobility.

•

In the near term, incentives will likely be necessary to induce adoption. Gas may have
to reach $4/gallon and research and development (R&D) will be needed to improve
12-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

performance and reduce cost before EVs and PHEVs are economically compelling
without incentives. 4
•

In the near- and mid-term, battery-powered vehicles will predominate. The
advantages of fuel cell vehicles having greater range, performance, and quick-fill
capacity may, when vehicle costs are reduced, lead commercial fleets initially and
later private vehicles to invest in localized hydrogen infrastructure based on
electrolysis from off-peak carbon-free grid power.

Identified Strategies to Facilitate Transition to High Penetration of GridPowered Vehicles
The members of the subgroup identified several strategies to facilitate transition to high
penetration of grid-powered vehicles:
•

Provide near- and long- term support of R&D for renewable technologies, methods to
reduce carbon from fossil sources and vehicle-to-grid technology, battery chemistry,
and innovative business models (battery leasing, battery change out, etc.). Increase
R&D for energy storage technologies that can accommodate large quantities of
excess power generated from renewable sources and base load nuclear power for ondemand and Level III quick-charge vehicle charging. Demonstrate technical options
for vehicle charging.

•

Develop technologies (energy storage, smart charging) and policies (EV electric
rates) that facilitate and promote vehicle charging at times when the carbon intensity
of the grid is lowest. Stationary electrical storage may be necessary to minimize
negative grid impacts and allow the utilization of excess renewable electricity
generated in off-peak times.

•

De-carbonize the electric grid to the greatest extent possible.

•

Develop, strengthen, and expand financial incentives and rate structures that will
encourage low- or zero-carbon generation and off-peak, valley-filling charging.
Establish an electricity rate structure with incentives for EV owners to charge during
off-peak hours with highest incentives during overnight hours. Rates should
encourage vehicle-charging load growth that is consistent with minimized negative
impact on the grid and that provides positive economic incentives to consumers.
PHEV-specific dynamic pricing may be one way to introduce dynamic pricing to
consumers. Financial incentives and disincentives for desired market transformation
and behavior change among consumers will be necessary to accelerate low-carbon
vehicle market penetration.

•

Adopt smart charging systems that recognize that grid emergencies, could mitigate
the extent and severity of emergencies, Explore financial incentives for providing
transmission level grid support. Techniques such as smart charging, load shifting, and
stationary storage all have the potential to mitigate most of the anticipated distribution
system problems for the next decade.

4

National Academies, Transitions to Alternative Transportation Technologies, 2010.

12-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Assess the feasibility and potential need for quick electric charge, hydrogen filling
stations, and hybrid bio-PHEV infrastructure to meet the variety of duty cycles, cost
constraints, and vehicle user needs. Continuous improvements in vehicle technology
will be needed together with significant long-term infrastructure investment. Public
policy should be technology neutral and, in the near term, focus on low-carbon
vehicle incentives such as feebates for low-carbon vehicles, and tax credits and buydowns for fueling infrastructure.

•

Develop and implement financial incentives and disincentives for desired market
transformation and behavior to accelerate low-carbon-vehicle market penetration.
Manufacturer competition may be the most cost-effective way to reduce vehicle cost,
with battery manufacturing capacity and robust demand being dominant factors. A
robust market can be encouraged through incentives, adequate charging
infrastructure, and education. Policy mechanisms like a low-carbon fuel standard,
vehicle purchase feebates, or other carbon pricing mechanism will be needed for
EVs/PHEVs to be economically competitive in the near term.

•

Infrastructure investment will also be a necessary element and may require
adjustments in public policy and public investment. Standardize physical
interconnections (plugs, voltages, etc.) and communications protocols of
infrastructure.

•

Revised tariffs would allow charging infrastructure providers to resell electricity they
purchase from utilities. Costs for infrastructure upgrades should not be borne by
individual customers. A preferred alternative is to use revenue derived from a broader
base to cover the cost of upgrades specific to the supply of electricity for plug-in
vehicle charging.

•

Promote the installation of advanced metering to enable consumers to benefit from
favorable electric rate structures.

•

Land use considerations include preferential parking, high-occupancy-vehicle lanes,
and lower tolls for low-carbon vehicles.

•

Support and develop awareness-raising and capacity-building efforts including
consumer education programs that make use of all appropriate media such as
television, newspaper, and the Internet. This effort should include public policy and
financial support such as tuition assistance for educational and workforce
development programs at appropriate institutions of higher learning.

•

Develop standards that are compatible with smart-grid and Level III charging and
building codes that require both residential and commercial new garage construction,
to provide circuitry that conforms will enable lower cost market penetration and safer
and more reliable service. Policy and regulations should encourage standardization of
vehicle charging interfaces at the regulated utility level and with vehicle
manufacturers.

12-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 13
Stimulating a Low-Carbon Energy Economy
in New York
Introduction
Economic growth and responsible stewardship of the environment must coexist and must be
designed to be complementary. The key is to invest in businesses and in environmental practices
that simultaneously promote job growth while helping society mitigate and adapt to climate
change. While some policy options discussed in this plan may impose costs on society in the
near term, many provide economic benefit today and even greater benefit in the future.
Developing New York’s clean energy economy 1 offers one of the most viable means of
stimulating environmentally sustainable economic activity in New York in the 21st century. New
York has a long history of progressive energy and environmental policy action, as discussed
elsewhere in this Interim Report, and such early action is the foundation upon which the State’s
80 by 50 planning process is being built. The State’s leadership in clean energy provides many
examples of the economic development and in-State job creation value of such investments (see
Table 13-1 at the end of this chapter).
Much has been written about the potential growth of the burgeoning clean energy economy, and
the competition for these emerging markets is global. President Obama has stated that “the
nation that leads the clean energy economy will lead the global economy.” China is aggressively
pursuing dominance in the supply of new clean energy products, 2 and Germany is establishing
itself as a leader in several efficiency industries. 3 In the U.S., the Pew Center on Global Climate
Change 4 reports that the clean energy economy is emerging as a vital component of America’s
new economic landscape; many states are trying to revitalize their economies on the prospect of
worldwide market expansion for clean energy products and services.
But not all regions will emerge as market leaders. The successful regions will be those which
build on strategic assets, which make investments of adequate scale and duration, and which
have broad business, political and public support for these ventures.

1

“Clean energy economy” in this section is the broad definition of all industries and sectors contributing to a lowcarbon economy. This includes energy efficiency, renewable energy, low-carbon transportation technologies and
systems, and lean manufacturing, similar to the definition used by the Pew Charitable Trusts in its report, The Clean
Energy Economy: Repowering Jobs, Businesses and Investments Across America. June 2009.

2

Center for American Progress. Out of the Running: How Germany, Spain, and China are Seizing the Energy
opportunity and why the United States Risks Getting Left Behind, March 2010. See also: Breakthrough Institute and
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, Rising Tigers, Sleeping Giants: Asian Nations Set to
Dominate the Clean Energy Race by Out-Investing the United States. November 2009.

3 The Economist. The Green Machine: A Second Wind for Germany. March 11, 2010.
4 The Pew Charitable Trusts. The Clean Energy Economy: Repowering Jobs, Businesses and Investments Across
America. June 2009.

13-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York is well positioned to compete in this economic race: New York has long been a leader
in energy technology innovation and commercialization, with a well established world-class
research infrastructure, and is home to a major financial and venture capital industry. New York
has a superior higher education system, the natural resources necessary to power a low-carbon
economy, and a productive and skilled labor force that can readily transition into new energy
industries and markets.
This chapter first details New York’s significant clean energy assets and then describes the
building blocks critical for nurturing our clean energy economy. Finally, this chapter presents
strategies designed to promote long-term and
sustained economic growth in New York related
to clean energy technologies and innovations for
the future low-carbon economy. These strategies
can make New York a regional, national, and
These strategies can make
international hub of clean technology industry and
New York a regional,
innovation— with the goal of creating good jobs
national and international
for New Yorkers.

hub of clean technology
industry and innovation for
the future low-carbon
economy – with the goal of
creating good jobs for New
Yorkers.

While other chapters of the Interim Report focus
on policy options to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and to adapt to a changing climate, this
chapter attempts to bridge climate policies with
strategies to foster clean energy business growth
and clean energy job creation. It does not attempt
to measure the economy-wide impacts of climate
policy, but work is underway to develop such
analyses. (These economic assessments, including
analysis of macroeconomic impacts of proposed policies, will be presented in the final Climate
Action Plan and will require re-evaluation in progressively greater detail throughout policy
development and implementation.)

New York Clean Energy Assets and Limitations
New York Clean Energy Assets
The unique regional differences in New York’s economy provide a wide variety of advantages
for the state. Upstate New York has strengths in innovation and high-tech industry, value-added
manufacturing, and large amounts of untapped renewable energy potential and natural resources.
Both Rochester and Albany rank among the top ten most patents per capita across the U.S. 5 and
the State ranks 2nd in total number of clean energy patents (see Figure 13-1). 6 New York City
and downstate regions complement upstate assets with large investment and financial services,
access to venture capital, and the country’s largest consumer market. The state routinely scores
well in national rankings of innovative, knowledge-based economies in the country, such as in
5

Greenberg, A.. The Knowledge Economy: America’s Most Innovative Cities. Forbes Magazine. May 24th, 2010.
http://www.forbes.com/2010/05/24/patents-funding-jobs-technology-innovative-cities.html.
6

Heslin, Rothenberg Farley & Mesiti, P.C. CleanTech Patent Index. 2009.

13-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

the Kauffman report, which ranks New York as 5th best prepared to transition into a new
knowledge based economy. 7

Types of Capital in New York State
•

Human capital: New York State boasts one of the most educated workforces in the country.
Overall, 31% of New Yorkers have a bachelor’s degree, and 14% hold a graduate degree.
New York’s workforce is the 4th most educated in the country, below only Massachusetts,
Maryland, and Connecticut. 8 Human capital is the most valuable asset in an innovation,
knowledge-based economy.

•

Financial capital: Despite an ailing economy, New York City remains the global financial
capital. The city is home to many Fortune-500 corporations and has one of the largest
banking centers. This immense source of financial capital, if targeted correctly, will be
pivotal in funding new technology and startup companies throughout the transition into a
clean energy economy.

•

Natural capital: New York State has vast assets in low-carbon natural resources that will
help fuel the clean energy economy including wind, solar, hydro, and biofuels. According to
the New York State Energy Plan, if fully developed, these renewable resources could meet
nearly 40 percent of New York’s projected primary energy needs in 2018 9 .

•

Manufacturing infrastructure: New York State has an extensive manufacturing
infrastructure (and associated labor force), particularly in the upstate region, that could be
transitioned into new growth markets in clean energy.

7

Atkinson and Andes, The 2008 State New Economy Index, Benchmarking Economic Transformation in the States,
Kauffman Foundation. November 2008.

8

The Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program, The State of Metropolitan America. 2010.

9

New York State Energy Planning Board, 2009 State Energy Plan. December 2009.

13-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 13-1. Clean-Energy Patents: Geographic Distribution 2002–2008

Source: Heslin, Rothenberg Farley & Mesiti, P.C.

Academic and Research Institutions
New York State is home to a large number of leading universities and research centers, including
two Ivy League universities, seven members of the Association of American Universities, over
20 major research institutions, and a wide breadth of smaller colleges. 10 New York State ranks
2nd in the country in number of doctoral scientists and currently enrolled graduate students and
3rd in the country in the number of doctoral engineers. 11 These institutions play a critical role in
the development of the state’s vital human capital assets, and we must ensure the state continues
to have the employment opportunities necessary to retain this talent.
However, these academic and research institutions provide more than just an educated
workforce: they conduct the initial research and development for new technologies that are
commercialized in the private sector. Recently, five New York research laboratories were
awarded multimillion-dollar Energy Frontier Research Centers grants by the U.S. Department of
Energy. These research centers, at SUNY Stony Brook, Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Columbia University, Cornell University, and General Electric Global Research, are working to

10

New York State Energy Planning Board. 2009 State Energy Plan,. December 2009.

11

New York City Investment Fund. Cleantech: A New Engine of Economic Growth for New York State. January
2007.

13-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

dramatically transform the new energy technologies available to the industry. The State helped
fund these New York proposals in order to leverage the sizable federal funds.
New York universities have also entered the emerging field of nanotechnology, which promises
advancement in clean energy technologies, including photovoltaics, battery storage, and other
renewables. The College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering of the University at Albany is
the first college in the world dedicated to the emerging disciplines of nanotechnology. The
college’s $6 billion-dollar complex already employs 2,500 scientists and has attracted 250
industry sponsorships. 12 The above section highlights only a few examples of research and
development being conducted at universities throughout the state.

Training Institutions
At the community college and local levels, New York State has recently developed an extensive
network of clean energy training programs at 32 facilities across the State. These programs have
conducted over 16,000 trainings of individuals in new energy efficiency and renewable energy
markets and are poised to continue to develop the workforce needed for critical components of a
low-carbon economy. [See Highlight Box]

Industry and Private Enterprise
Industry and private enterprise is the most important sector of the economy regarding job
growth. Fortunately, the state currently has 67,000 employees in the management, scientific, and
technical consulting services industry and 54,000 employees in the scientific research and
development sector. 13 These industries pay average salaries of $98,000 and $64,000
respectively, both well above the state average. 14 Although these jobs are only a small portion of
the innovation and clean energy economy, they are representative of the economic benefits
involved in a transition to a low-carbon economy. Furthermore, these sectors will transition
easily into the new economy and thus provide a strong base of human capital that can be
expanded on. When coupled with growth in value-added manufacturing, the potential for
economic growth and creation of jobs is dramatic.
Industries and private corporations throughout New York have already been successful in
creating or attracting clean energy businesses and jobs. The sector already boasts 3,300 clean
energy businesses employing over 34,000 people, making the State a national and international
leader in the sector. 15 These businesses include large corporations and small startups alike. For
example, General Electric recently opened its $45 million Renewable Energy Global
Headquarters in Schenectady, New York. Emphasizing smart growth principles, GE created 650
new jobs in the city, with the capacity for growth in the future. Another example of new
economic development is Global Foundries’ new semiconductor manufacturing facility in
12

College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering. University at Albany, http://cnse.albany.edu/

13

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis – regional Economic Accounts.
http://www.bea.gov/regional/index.htm#gsp
14

United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

15

The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Clean Energy Economy: Repowering Jobs, Businesses and Investments Across
America, June 2009.

13-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Saratoga County, currently the largest economic development project in the country. 16 This
facility is expected to bring over a thousand jobs to the local economy.
Over the last decade, New York has lost 40 percent of its manufacturing jobs, well above the
national average. 17 The transition to a clean energy economy could provide value-added
manufacturing jobs to a region with a surplus of skilled workers with manufacturing experience
and underutilized industrial sites, particularly in upstate New York. GE and Global Foundries are
only examples of the many existing and potential economic development opportunities available
to the state. Recognizing that other states have faced manufacturing job losses and will seek to
lure manufacturing plants to their borders, the more quickly New York is able to form the culture
of innovation that can create new energy businesses, the more likely that capital, talent, and other
businesses will find New York an attractive place to locate.

Public Institutions and Government
Another set of assets New York has to help catalyze economic development through clean
energy and climate policy are its public institutions and units of state and local government.
These institutions can together bridge academic, private, and public research and development
programs by streamlining government incentives and funding while fostering a culture of
cooperation within the clean energy sector. An economic transition on the scale required for
achievement of the 80 by 50 goal will require substantial and coordinated public planning and
guidance.

Specific Clean Energy Core Competencies in New York
The New York Academy of Sciences recently conducted an assessment of areas of economic
growth potential in New York. 18 It identified four economic growth areas and enabling
technology core competencies in New York: advanced materials, biotechnology, information
technology, and clean technology. The Academy further identified six areas within clean
technology with the greatest economic promise for the state: photovoltaics, energy storage, fuel
cells, bioenergy, smart electric grid, and integrated building technologies (Figure 13-2). These
innovation assets align with the technologies needed for a low-carbon future.

16

Saratoga Technology + Energy Park. http://step.nyserda.org/index.html.

17

New York City Investment Fund. Cleantech: A New Engine of Economic Growth for New York State. January
2007.
18

New York Academy of Sciences. Innovation & Clean Technology in New York State: A New Economic
Engine,.August 2010.

13-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 13-2. Clean Energy Innovation Assets in New York

Source: New York Academy of Sciences

New York Clean Energy Limitations

Social Capital and Integration Networking
While New York has significant assets, they are not fully integrated with each other and with the
transition to a cleaner economy. As a result, developments in one sector of the economy can
sometimes have difficulty translating into other areas. For instance, while New York leads the
nation in research and development, only 4 percent of academic research in New York is funded
from industry. 19 This is below the national average and demonstrates the potential for more
university-industry collaboration. While New York is home to more than 20 major research
institutions, and its universities place it 2nd among the states in attracting federal research and
development (R&D) funding, these universities lag behind in incubating new companies.
The growth of an innovation economy requires many connections among many participants,
much like a natural ecosystem. Key participants include university researchers, technology
developers, sources of capital, entrepreneurs and executives, service providers, business
advisors, and others with a stake in commercializing new energy technologies. Better networks
in New York would accelerate technology commercialization by promoting the early formation
of multifaceted teams to bring new technology to market and by reducing the time and costs
involved in identifying and engaging suitable commercialization resources such as capital, key
19

The Pew Charitable Trusts. The Clean Energy Economy: Repowering Jobs, Businesses and Investments Across
America. June 2009.

13-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

personnel, complementary capabilities, and strategic partners. Some promising public and
private sector activities are underway to address this gap. 20

Venture Capital
Despite the large financial industry in New York City, one of the problems arising from the lack
of integration networking is inadequate venture capital investments. Venture capital is a critical
component for an economic transition of this magnitude. These investments are necessary to
move products and technologies from the research and development phase into demonstration
and commercialization. As Figure 13-3 demonstrates, New York venture capital investments lag
behind other traditional high-tech centers of innovation and entrepreneurial. If this pattern
continues, New York will risk losing advances in research and development to startups in other
parts of the country.

Regulatory and Tax Structure
New York must ensure that its tax system, fee structure, and regulatory environment all
encourage rather than discourage economic activity in targeted industries. The cost of doing
business is a primary factor in firms’ location decisions, and the entire range of State policies and
laws can affect a business’s costs— from fees to licensing requirements to property taxes to tax
treatment of investment income. The State must undertake a comprehensive analysis of all
impediments to clean energy job and business growth in order to identify barriers and suggest
policy and statutory solutions.

Legislative and Regulatory Uncertainty
Uncertainty and risk associated with a developing economy can slow the generation of new
companies, the entry of entrepreneurs into the market, and the flow of investor capital. The
current legislative and regulatory uncertainty regarding climate policy, both at the federal and
state levels, may be a barrier to entry or expansion for firms and individuals. Regulatory and
legislative actors can help by building future certainty regarding laws, goals, and responsibilities
throughout the state. This was a clear recommendation offered by a number of investors in the
clean energy sector, convened as part of the Climate Action Plan process. New York State has
the opportunity to obviate much of this concern by clearly integrating into all its policies the core
values of wise use of energy and the in-state production of abundant clean energy.

20

See Upstate Venture Connect. www.uvc.org

13-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 13-3. Venture Capital

Policy Options to Drive Clean-Energy Economic Growth in New York
Figure 13-4 illustrates the major building blocks of an
innovation-based clean energy economy:
•

Robust market demand for clean energy products and
services,

•

Skilled clean energy workforce and dynamic
workforce development system,

•

Vibrant technology innovation and
commercialization ecosystem,

•

Focused and sustained economic development
strategies to support clean energy,

•

Fully engaged private and public sector.

Each of these elements is critical, along with the
fundamental access to capital.

13-9

A portfolio of policies
strategically designed to
support these critical
elements would maximize
economic development
potential in New York and,
if properly executed, would
turn climate policy into an
engine for economic
growth.

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Figure 13-4. Building Blocks of a Clean Energy-Innovation Economy

Robust Market Demand
for Clean Energy Products
and Services

Fully Engaged Private
and Public Sector

Focused and Sustained
Economic Development
Strategies to Support
Clean Energy

Clean
Energy‐
Innovation
Economy

Skilled Clean Energy
Workforce and Dynamic
Workforce Development
System - Across Full
Spectrum of Skill Levels

Vibrant Technology
Innovation and
Commercialization
Ecosystem

Access to Capital
Building Block #1: Creating Robust Market Demand for Clean Energy Products
and Services
Strong market demand must exist in order for companies to make investments in facilities,
manufacturing, services infrastructure, and R&D. Demand can be created through a variety of
policies at the international, national and state levels. Such policies include market-pull policies
(e.g., the Renewable Portfolio Standard, or RPS), financial incentives/disincentives (e.g., a
carbon tax), regulations and/or codes, procurement guidelines, and a variety of other mechanisms
addressed through this Interim Report. Market demand is the foundation for advancing a clean
energy economy.
The greenhouse gas mitigation policy options presented throughout this Interim Report would
stimulate local demand for clean energy technologies and services (see Chapters 5 through 8)
and thereby lay the foundation for a clean energy economy in New York. While policies that
drive larger markets (i.e., national and regional policies) will mobilize more private capital and
will do so more quickly, history has demonstrated that State policies can move markets in the
clean energy arena and create local economic growth. 21 , 22 Just as we have seen several European
nations surpass the U.S. in the commercial development of solar and biomass technologies

21

New York Renewable Portfolio Standard Evaluation Report. March 31, 2009.

22

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Renewable Portfolio Standard in the United States: A Status Report with
Data Through 2007. April 2010.

13-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

because of public policy support and a motivated customer base, New York's climate policies
have the potential to significantly stimulate the local clean energy economy.
It is important to note, however, that not all clean energy/climate policies will necessarily create
local jobs. For example, a Renewable Portfolio Standard that is met through the acquisition of
out-of-state renewable energy credits is not likely to directly create jobs in New York, although it
will bolster overall demand for renewable energy products. Energy efficiency policies, on the
other hand, have the dual benefit of not only being the most cost-effective greenhouse gas
mitigation options but of also providing substantial local benefits in the form of installation and
service jobs. This in part has been a strong driver behind policies such as the Green Jobs Green
NY legislation. From the perspective of supporting new technology firms, Columbia University's
Amar Bhide has identified “venturesome consumption” as a key driver for value-creating
innovation for venture-backed firms and notes that local markets enable the growth of new
technology firms. 23
One of the key issues for any state or region in designing such policies is the timing and level of
financial incentive. Regions and states that move out ahead of other areas with more aggressive
policies will capture the attention of investors and companies looking to grow in clean energy.
On the other hand, the policy design must avoid over-incentivizing and creating markets that are
not sustainable. Policymakers must carefully weigh the costs incurred by the consumer in
subsidizing a low-carbon technology vs. the benefits in terms of stimulating local jobs,
environmental protection, etc. In considering this for electric energy efficiency and renewable
resource policies, the price suppression benefits should be factored into the analysis, given that
investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy can have the effect of lowering the net
cost of electricity to all consumers. [See Table 13-1]. All of these factors must be carefully
considered in designing policies that stimulate market demand.
Building Block #2: Designing a Dynamic Workforce Development System
A skilled workforce must exist in order for companies to grow and locate in the State. In an
innovation-based economic model, a full spectrum of skill levels is needed— from the technician
servicing customers’ repair and installation needs to the chief executive officer needed to attract
investment and run a company. A dynamic workforce development system meeting the needs of
a clean energy economy must take a long view to develop the human capital needed to prepare
New York and capture the benefits of a clean economy. The K-16 system must educate New
Yorkers in math and science, help them understand the need for environmental sustainability and
alternatives to a carbon-based economy, and prepare them for entrepreneurship. The higher
education system must continuously evolve to reflect the needs of the changing economy
through curriculum modifications and through certifications or degree programs. Incumbent
workers must have continuous access to education and training to upgrade their skills throughout
their working career in order to meet the changing needs of their employers. Finally, nurturing
the entire spectrum of skill levels will keep professionals living and working in New York while
creating pathways out of poverty to raise the standard of living for our most vulnerable
populations.
23

Bhide, A. The Venturesome Economy: How Innovation Sustains Prosperity in a More Connected World.
Princeton University Press. 2008.

13-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapters 6 and 12 of the Interim Report identify a range of specific workforce development
needs largely associated with requirements for
installing and servicing new energy technologies and
ensuring that we have skilled labor all along the supply
chain. This Clean Energy Economy Chapter looks
The State must invest
more broadly at the educational and workforce
in a dynamic workforce
development needs over the long term and identifies
development system
ways to grow the human capital needed to move New
that can position its
York State toward a low-carbon future.

workforce for jobs in

Because we cannot predict the technologies in future
growth markets.
demand, we must develop the means to identify and
respond to workforce development needs as they arise.
Robust information sharing among the stakeholders
involved in K-16 education, higher education, worker training, and industry 24 is necessary to
create a workforce development system that is not only comprehensive along the entire spectrum
of skill levels but is also dynamic enough to nimbly adjust curricula and trainings as technologies
and employer needs evolve. This information-sharing must be incorporated into a continuous
feedback loop among constituents— businesses, employees, and educators. As needs,
technologies and gaps evolve, the workforce development system must be designed to also
evolve.
Such a system includes three essential elements:
•

Labor market characterization: Assessing, projecting, and monitoring market demand and
describing the labor market characteristics of the state’s high-priority clean energy sectors,
including staffing patterns, skill requirements, earnings, career ladder opportunities,
occupational trends and labor supply, and demand assessment. Widespread deployment of
new technologies is not possible without trained a installation and service workforce.

•

Program development: Designing programs to meet supply and demand. Must identify
needed skills and expertise, map gaps in available workforce skills, inventory, and design
training programs/apprenticeships. Must meet needs of all participants (workers, employers)
by addressing barriers to training and employment and engaging economically disadvantaged
communities.

•

Coordination: Full spectrum of training activities (public sector, private sector) to leverage
resources, to market opportunities, and to establish certifications and standards. Note that
“clean energy jobs are not unique to the clean energy industry, and require the same range of
education, skills and earnings as jobs in other energy sectors and jobs in the construction and
manufacturing industries.” 25

These strategic elements are neither driven by the market nor sustainable in the market without
public support, and a workforce with the requisite skills to properly analyze, design, install, and
24

ARRA New York State Department of Labor grant for green-business survey.

25

New York State Department of Labor. New York State’s Clean Energy Industry: Labor Market and Workforce
Intelligence. May 2009.

13-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

maintain industrial and technological advances will not evolve as quickly as needed without
public investment. Intervention will continue to be particularly vital for reaching traditionally
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged communities and populations.
The past several years have seen a precipitous decline in federal support for state-administered
workforce development programs. New York State has not supplemented the decreased federal
dollars. To ensure adequacy of resources, policymakers will need to dedicate revenues for
workforce development. Allocating a portion of Climate Action Plan public investments to
workforce development can help ensure the ability of the workforce development system to
change with the needs of employers and the labor force, particularly by supporting the critical
incorporation of real-time labor market and workforce intelligence into program and curriculum
development.
The methodological basis for public workforce investment strategy over the 2050 planning
horizon is not likely to change from that of today. This includes addressing the following:
•

Barriers and bottlenecks that prevent the market from producing the requisite workforce
development activities necessary to achieve the goals of the Climate Action Plan;

•

Breadth of services: K-16, continuing education for adults, continuous access (both
availability and cost) for skills upgrades;

•

Comprehensively cataloging job and training opportunities; existence of gaps will justify and
help direct use of public funds;

•

Evaluation, measurement, and verification of the benefits of public investment in workforce
development to support the Climate Action Plan; must set clear, relevant, and achievable
goals.

Key market barriers that must be addressed by a comprehensive public workforce investment
strategy over the 2050 planning horizon are likely the same as we face today:
•

Matching outcomes to investments: The objective of clean energy workforce development
programs is to improve worker proficiency in knowledge, skills, and abilities required of the
jobs to manufacture, install, operate, and maintain the technology advances in clean energy.
These goals cannot be measured by simple metrics, such as job placement rates or wage
increases, but must instead be measured by more difficult metrics that would assess
participants’ increased skills or knowledge. The positive productivity effects of workforce
development investments are conclusively documented in the literature, and this remains
critically important in valuing the effectiveness of workforce development programs.

•

Loss of income while participating in training: For many individuals, the immediate need to
work to cover basic needs far exceeds the delayed greater income potential from not working
and participating in training. Therefore, public workforce development investments must
include sufficient funding for needs-related payments to encourage individuals to participate
in training.

•

Loss of business productivity while training employees: Some worker skills can be acquired
only through on-the-job training, which can be costly to the business through lost
productivity of its existing staff. Support for incumbent worker training and on-the-job

13-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

training through compensation for lost productivity is an important component of a
workforce development portfolio.
•

Need for employment-related supports: Remediation of employment barriers, such as
transportation, child care, costs of tuition and materials, will remain an integral part of
successful workforce development investments targeted at entry-level positions.

•

Need for training capacity: Training infrastructure includes curriculum development, school
startup and accreditations, and worker certification. It also includes the cost to properly equip
workers with the requisite tools necessary for the job. Public workforce investments must
provide support for capacity building to advance skills proficiency in installation work,
operation work, and maintenance work in the clean energy industry.

•

Need for marketing and outreach: The need to publicize the availability of training programs
is particularly relevant in economically disadvantaged communities. Public workforce
investments should include sufficient funding to promote clean energy training initiatives and
opportunities, focusing initially on low-income residential building performance and urban
ecology.

Building Block #3. Catalyzing a Technology Innovation and Commercialization
Ecosystem
The challenges of 80 by 50 will not be solved with today’s technology. 26 Experts across the
globe are recommending substantial and sustained investment in energy and environmental
technology R&D on top of new approaches to technology commercialization. 27 It is well
documented that technology innovation is responsible for over half the U.S. annual GDP
growth. 28 A full ecosystem comprised of inventors, entrepreneurs, financiers, and market experts
will together spur creation of new clean energy companies that will take the necessary risks
needed to produce new products and services. New York has the key ingredients for a robust jobcreating energy-technology innovation system 29 ,.With greater alignment of policies, New York
could reap substantial economic gains related to emerging clean energy growth markets.
New York has a long history of supporting innovation in energy technology—dating back to the
days of Edison and the demonstration of the world’s first electrical grid, the world’s first
electrically illuminated city, and one of the largest renewable energy-hydropower developments
in the early 20th century. From an organizational standpoint, the New York State Legislature had
the foresight in the 1970s to create an institution to focus exclusively on innovation in energy
technology and, specifically low-carbon energy technology, through the creation of the New
York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA). But meeting a challenge
26

Edmonds, Jae and Gerry Stokes. Launching a Technological Revolution in Climate Policy for the 21st Century:
Meeting the Long-Term Challenge of Global Warming. Edited by David Michel. Center for Transatlantic Relations.
2003.
27

International Energy Agency. Global Gaps in Clean Energy RD&D, 2010. See also Bill Gates: Gates Path to an
Energy Revolution. New York Times,. August 24, 2010.

28

Robert Sokolow, Nobel-Prize winning economist on innovation and growth economics. See also American
Council on Economic Competitiveness.
29

New York Academy of Sciences. Innovation and Clean Technology in New York State. 2010.

13-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

as transformative as 80 by 50 goes beyond a single organization’s mission. Such a challenge will
only be met through concerted and coordinated policy, program, procurement, and investment
practices in all agencies of State government. And most importantly, such a challenge will only
be met if we can unleash the creativity of private enterprise, where products will ultimately be
introduced into markets.
The current global level of investment in energy technology innovation is nowhere near adequate
to solve the energy-climate challenge, nor is it commensurate with the economic opportunities
associated with new emerging growth markets. 30 However, there are signs of change. Large
corporations are increasing their investments and partnerships in clean energy technology. Startup companies are emerging with greater frequency in the clean energy business space. Venture
capital investment in clean energy is at a record-high level nationally. And in the past few years,
there has been a higher level of federal funding available for energy R&D relative to the past two
decades.
The challenge to New York is to seize these economic opportunities, revitalizing and
diversifying the State’s economy— both by creating an environment that stimulates new highgrowth start-ups and by encouraging continued investment in innovation and commercialization
at larger, more established businesses that have the capital and human resources needed to make
major improvements in technology.
Research and development is a critical component in an innovation system, but creating a vibrant
technology innovation and commercialization ecosystem requires more than R&D. The State
must actively promote innovation and entrepreneurship to bring the fruits of R&D investments to
the market and to realize local economic benefits. The recommendations presented herein build
on NYSERDA’s three decades of experience in working with New York businesses to
commercialize new energy technology and are supplemented with recommendations from
stakeholders and several recent reports on actions needed to stimulate innovation in New York,
including the Task Force on Diversifying the New York State Economy through Industry-Higher
Education Partnerships (IHETF) 31 , the Public Policy Institute of the New York State Business
Council, 32 Center for an Urban Future, 33 the New York City Investment Fund, 34 and several
review papers by the New York Academy of Sciences.

30

United Nations Foundation, Scientific Research Society. Confronting Climate Change. February 2007.

31

Task Force on Diversifying the New York State Economy through Industry-Higher Education Partnerships, Final
Report. December 2009.
32

Public Policy Institute. Transcending the Hamster Cage: Unfettering New York’s Static Innovation Economy.
January 2010.
33

Center for Urban Future. Building New York City’s Innovation Economy. September 2009.

34

New York City Investment Fund. Cleantech: A New Engine of Economic Growth for New York State. January
2007.

13-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

The creation of new ventures, in particular high-growth ventures, is critical both to the State's
climate strategy and to its economic development goals. Startup companies account for the bulk
of job creation and economic growth. From 1980 to 2005, nearly all net job creation in the U.S.
came from companies less than five years old. 35
Even though jobs are constantly being created
and destroyed by businesses of all ages, highThe State must actively
growth startups compensate for job losses by
promote innovation and
firms that close, even during recession. 36

commercialization and
entrepreneurship to bring the
fruits of R&D investments to
the market and to realize
local economic benefits.

However the focus cannot be solely on directing
State funding to capital for startup companies in
the hopes of encouraging their formation and
helping to sustain them through lean and
dangerous early days. This strategy must be
preceded by other policies that set the stage: For
example, policies to enhance the entrepreneurial
climate by providing entrepreneurial training
and expanding access to technology are valuable strategies in their own right and often a
necessary precursor for direct funding programs to be successful. 37 Examples of these corollary
policies follow:
•

•

To convert New York's research capacity to sustainable economic impact, the IHETF Final
Report wisely calls for a statewide culture that emphasizes commercialization, and
recommends a number of steps to foster this culture:
○

Changing practices at universities to emphasize entrepreneurship and technology
commercialization;,

○

Calling on industry to engage universities strategically and to sponsor relevant research,

○

Increased availability of capital for seed stage companies and the creation of support
structures that help entrepreneurs start up and grow,

○

Adoption of an economic development policy that emphasizes business creation and
talent retention, rather than industry attraction,

○

Networking universities and their industry counterparts together.

The current State Energy Plan also calls for policies and programs in line with the IHETF
Report that create an environment encouraging innovation at each stage of the clean energy
product and business cycle: from research, development, and entrepreneurship through valueadded manufacturing. Continuing development of policies that foster the innovation
ecosystem for clean energy technologies and supporting public-private partnerships to lower

35

Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, Jobs Created From Business Startups in the United States, Kauffman
Foundation, January 2009. http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedFiles/BDS_Jobs_Created_011209b.pdf)
36

Horrell and Litan, After Inception: How Enduring is Job Creation by Startups?, Kauffman Foundation, July 2010.
http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedFiles/firm-formation-inception-8-2-10.pdf)
37

Lerner, J., Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital Have
Failed and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press, 2009.

13-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

the risk of investing in new energy technologies, are essential elements of a prosperous lowcarbon future.
•

In addition to creating an environment conducive to high-growth startups in clean energy,
State policies and programs must further capitalize on the tremendous assets associated with
the many large corporate R&D centers in New York, such as GE, IBM, and General Motors,
all of which are making major investments in clean energy technology and markets. From an
economic development standpoint, one of the key challenges in working with multinational
firms is that the economic activity and commercialization activity cannot be constrained to
any one state—these are highly competitive global operations. One successful new publicprivate partnership model that appears to provide value for large clean energy businesses as
well as small startups is the New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium
(NY-BEST). Under this collaborative effort, interdisciplinary industry and academic teams
have been established to advance energy storage technology, with the public funding going to
expand access to university talent in New York State needed by the industrial partner. This
effort at networking helps to retain the economic activity in New York by building linkages
and, as an example, has proved to be successful in helping to expand GE’s battery business in
New York State.

•

Lastly, New York needs improved linkages between its technology and investment capital.
The New York City Investment Fund, in its report Cleantech: A New Engine of Economic
Growth for New York State suggests that the State could work with regional business
organizations to establish periodic forums in which the venture community is exposed to
technology developed at academic and industrial research facilities in New York.

Together, these and other measures applied to clean energy technologies can promote the
innovation ecosystem with many connections among its participants— university researchers,
technology developers, sources of capital, entrepreneurs and executives, service providers,
business advisors, and others with a stake in commercializing new energy technologies. Such an
ecosystem will accelerate technology commercialization by promoting the early formation of
multifaceted teams to bring new technology to market and by reducing the time and costs
involved in identifying and engaging suitable commercialization resources such as capital, key
personnel, complementary capabilities, and strategic partners.
Looking beyond State policy, New York should advocate for national policies that play to New
York’s strengths in energy innovation (see also Chapter 14). For example, the federal R&D tax
credit has again expired. New York should consider pushing for an aggressive and permanent
federal R&D tax credit, which would benefit many industrial energy R&D activities in the State.
Of paramount importance, New York State should advocate for substantial and sustained federal
investment in energy R&D, without which progress toward a low-carbon future will be
extremely slow. New York should also continue to encourage the U.S. Department of Energy to
embrace new models for energy technology innovation, including those that are far more
decentralized than the energy research models of the past few decades. These models can help
support regional energy innovation consortia that can accelerate the pace of energy technology
development and commercialization.

13-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Building Block #4. Focused and Sustained Economic Development Strategies
that Support Clean Energy
New York must embrace a model for economic development that builds on the state’s strengths
as a knowledge-based economy, with high-value-added manufacturing capabilities, recognizing
that the state will struggle to compete in low-cost commoditized markets. The State’s economic
development policies should support the retention of jobs and the creation of new businesses and
jobs in emerging high-growth markets, such as clean technology industries. The State’s
economic development policies must embrace the new emerging economy of the 21st century—
an economy whose growth is based on innovation, knowledge, and entrepreneurship.
To position New York as a leader in the clean economy, the State should integrate into its core
values the principles of wise use of energy and instate production of abundant clean energy.
Codifying these values through a multi-generational commitment will help sway decision makers
in commerce and investment to tie their futures to New York State. To build New York’s
prosperity in the emerging economy, policymakers should also link economic development
strategy with nurturing and growing the clean economy.
Economic development strategies for the short term are very different from strategies for the
long term. Decision makers today are called on to defend against poaching threats from other
states and nations, to mitigate community upheavals from facility closures, and to sway multistate businesses to consolidate operations in New York rather than in facilities elsewhere. Much
of the work of economic developers in New York is to support and protect our existing
commercial/industrial base.
Economic development strategies for the long term, however, are not tied to any specific
business or immediate need but are focused on creating the culture and infrastructure needed to
generate new economic activity: to grow the
workforce through cutting-edge K-16 schools
and workforce development programs, to grow
innovation through R&D investments and
To build New York’s
support of entrepreneurs, to grow firms and
prosperity in the emerging
businesses with technical assistance for
economy, policymakers
expansion and for access to new markets, to
grow investment by improving borrowers’
should link New York’s
access to capital, and to grow commerce
economic development
through market generation.

strategy with nurturing and
growing the clean energy
economy.

Beginning immediately, the State should
engage in the following activities:
•

More strategically allocate monies made
available each year for individual firm
incentives to focus on high-growth areas
such as clean energy. Relevant programs financed in New York State are administered by
several agencies, including but not limited to Empire State Development, Department of
Environmental Conservation, Department of State, Department of Labor, NYSERDA, and

13-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

New York State Foundation for Science, Technology and Innovation (NYSTAR). Strategic
allocation could be accomplished in part through the annual budgeting process.
•

Engage in a robust marketing campaign targeted to high-growth green firms, both startup
businesses and expanding manufacturers, and both home-grown and out-of-state firms.
Catalog and exploit our competitive advantages, including but not limited to
○

Hydro resources (good for water-intensive activities like food processing and
microprocessor fabrication facilities), multi-climate geography (test-bed for climatebased research);

○

Population/industrial center of massive eastern seaboard market;

○

Global financial center;

○

International connections (immigrant population, points-of-entry, United Nations, etc.);

○

Demographics (multilingual and highly educated populace, highly productive
workforce);

○

Transportation infrastructure.

•

Work more aggressively with existing New York scientists and researchers on
commercialization of promising technologies. [See Building Block #3 above and Chapter 10
on RD&D needs].

•

Change State procurement laws and practices both to strengthen New York State as a
purchaser and to increase demand for products manufactured in New York [related to
Building Block #1 above]. Specific actions could include the following:
○

Internalize true greenhouse gas costs of manufacture and transportation of purchased
goods in order to preference those whose production is most aligned with the goals of the
80 by 50;

○

Work with the federal government to ensure that multilateral and bilateral agreements
regarding energy and electricity procurement are aligned with climate change goals;

○

Consider revising the weighting on bids for RPS to increase the value of New York’s
economic benefits, giving greater priority for bids with relatively more New Yorkmanufactured materials equipment and services with positive employment impacts;

○

Strengthen goals for State agency purchasing. 38

The greater impact, however, will be structurally changing our economic infrastructure to align
our education and workforce development systems, our regulatory framework, and our tax
structure to encourage the growth and risk taking that will put New York on the top. Four critical
long-term strategies to create the culture and infrastructure are identified below:
Long-term strategy #1: Align workforce training, K-12, and higher education with goals of
clean energy.
•
38

Develop entrepreneurship and ecology curricula; expand training in, and networks of,
entrepreneurs (also noted in Building Block #3 above).
Current statements of goals are embodied in Executive Orders #4, #111, and #142.

13-19

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

•

Increase the focus on STEM subjects (science, technology, engineering, and math).

•

Incorporate the diversity of New York’s population in education and social programs.

•

Adopt proposals developed in the IHETF and within the State University of New York’s
(SUNY) “Power of SUNY” strategic plan.

Long-term strategy #2: Provide public clean energy R&D investments and encourage private
investments in R&D, innovation, and commercialization (related to Building Block #3 above).
•

Greater performance-based public support of university research centers, university-industry
partnerships, technology “de-risking” through public-private partnerships, and improved
transition to private ventures especially in emerging markets.

•

Create a State Venture Capital Investment Fund.

•

Allow SUNY to restructure, creating marquee university centers.

•

Enact a bond act to finance clean technology upgrades in New York’s infrastructure.

Long-term strategy #3: Grow commerce through generating and nurturing the market for clean
economy.
•

Encourage networks of investors; facilitate relationship building and startup mentoring.

•

Make New York State an early adopter of promising technologies.

•

Bolster export assistance for New York manufacturers.

•

Continuously upgrade transportation networks— air freight, rail cargo, and deep-water ports.

Long-term strategy #4: Create a tax and regulatory environment supportive of clean energy.
•

Consumer behavior: encourage certain purchases (electric vehicles, Energy Star products,
renewable energy fuels) and discourage certain purchases (high-GHG emitting fuels, old
cars).

•

Property-owner behavior: encourage green buildings (zoning, insurance benefits, and
consumer taxes on non-green materials) and discourage high-risk or sprawl construction
(zoning, higher fees to expand public services).

•

Investor behavior: reward profit associated with green businesses, share risk through
allowing tax write-offs of green-investment losses.

•

Licensing/certification: make New York State the leader in defining certain niche areas of
expertise in low-carbon clean energy markets (e.g., as has been done with the establishment
of the Building Performance Institute in New York).

A state’s financing structure can create an environment where technology firms are born and
grow and thrive in the private market without government intervention. While taxes and fees are
often considered simply a source of revenue, how they are structured can have significant
impacts on decision making and economic behavior. While a comprehensive analysis of the tax
and regulatory systems is beyond the scope of this paper, a temporary commission composed of

13-20

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

both industry and State agencies should be created to study and propose reforms that would
encourage business growth in New York's emerging clean energy economy.
Long-term strategy #5: As part of community revitalization, develop locations suitable for
clean energy businesses.
Building Block #5: Encouraging Full Private and Public Sector Engagement
Achieving a goal as transformational as 80 by 50 is possible only with the full and sustained
commitment of all levels of the public and private sectors. Success of the Climate Action Plan
and the requisite clean energy revolution”will ultimately depend on linkages and support from
the federal government, the State government, businesses and corporations, academic
institutions, not-for profits, and municipal governments— each of which plays an important role
in the transformation to a clean energy economy. And without support from the public at large,
policymakers in New York will struggle to advance and sustain the ambitious climate-energy
policies presented herein. In the current fiscal environment, these climate-energy policies will be
competing for resources with other important policy and near-term social needs.
To facilitate this full engagement, we must: (i) capitalize on the unique roles that each entity
plays in our society, (ii) engage a broad spectrum of society, and (iii) ensure that each entity is
fully aware of the challenge and empowered to act.
Roles: The public sector’s role in establishing a policy framework to internalize the price of
carbon and stimulate innovation will be absolutely critical. Other important public sector roles
such as supporting a robust educational system, sponsoring research whose benefits are either too
long-term or high-risk for any individual private entity, investing in existing and new low-carbon
infrastructure, and leading by example will be vital to this transformation. Businesses must be
willing to invest in opportunities that are climate friendly and reduce the energy requirements for
delivering the goods and service that they provide. Given a supportive policy climate, many
businesses appear poised to do this. 39 Private companies can advance a technology into a
commercial product, although some government risk sharing will be needed in the early stages of
development.
Substantial private capital will be needed to transform our energy system and make the necessary
physical investments. New forms of public-private partnerships will be needed to mobilize the
capital required to achieve this transformation. New financing models for consumers will be
needed to increase access to capital for energy efficiency and renewable energy investments.
New financing models for technology developers and project developers will be needed to bridge
the “valley-of-death. 40 New forms of loan guarantees will be needed to mitigate risk associated
with first-of-a-kind large-scale projects. Specific recommendations clarifying and illustrating the
roles of the many different participants in the emerging clean energy economy are described
throughout this Interim Report.
39

Jeff Immelt (General Electric) and John Doerr (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers). Washington Post. August 3,
2009.

40

Bloomberg New Energy Finance. Solutions to the Next Generation Clean Energy Project Financing Gap. June 21,
2010.

13-21

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Engaging a Broad Spectrum of Society: To
accelerate and sustain a transformational shift to a
clean energy economy in New York, a broad
Realizing a
spectrum of society will need to be engaged and
transformation as
benefits must accrue to a diverse cross-section of the
population. Jobs must be available for all skill levels,
significant as 80 by 50
from so-called green collar positions to corporate
will require the full and
positions. Ensuring this kind of broad and inclusive
sustained engagement of
engagement will require a range of policy
the public and private
mechanisms, from targeted workforce development
sector—at all levels.
initiatives to community-based approaches and
mechanisms for establishing effective training-tojobs networks/programs, such as the use of existing
local groups and institutions as informational and
organizational hubs. These types of community-based efforts can also help to ensure that green
jobs programs and initiatives take into consideration and build upon New York State’s rich
cultural and ethnic diversity.
Table 13-1 Economic Impacts of Clean Energy Investments
Energy Efficiency: An Investment in our Economy and the Environment
Energy efficiency investments have demonstrated a positive impact on the New York State economy. For the 11year period from 1999 through 2009, New York’s System Benefits Charge program has demonstrated that for
every dollar invested in energy efficiency, New York State realizes $4.7 in statewide economic and environmental
benefits. These benefits include the creation of 5,300 additional jobs in the New York economy. In addition, these
energy efficiency investments have increased personal income by $1.7 billion, and improved the overall New York
41
economy by increasing the gross state product by $2.4 billion.

Renewable Resources: Creating Local Jobs with Local Resources
A recent evaluation of the State’s Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) program shows that investments in
renewable energy technologies can provide positive economic benefits. This analysis concluded that the RPS
program resulted in creation of approximately 22,670 total job-years, including approximately 6,490 direct jobyears and 16,180 indirect job-years. 42 , 43 For every incentive dollar paid to support the construction of the new
renewable energy facilities, the State realized over $6 of total economic benefit. In addition to the jobs created, the
RPS program was also noted to reduce overall electricity costs for consumers, as well as result in economic
benefit from reduced pollution that would have been otherwise emitted from fossil fuel power plants.

41

NYSERDA. New York’s System Benefits Charge Programs Evaluation and Status Report, Quarterly Report to the
Public Service Commission, Quarter Ending March 31, 2010. Final Report. May 2010.
42

Three construction jobs that are in effect for one year are the equivalent of three job years. A single job that
persists for three years also represents three job years.
43

KEMA, Inc. and Regional Economic Development Research Group, Inc.. NYSERDA Main Tier RPS Economic
Benefits Report. November 14, 2008.

13-22

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy: Reducing the Price of Electricity
Analysis conducted for the 2009 State Energy Plan demonstrates that aggressive energy efficiency and renewable
energy policies can result in reductions in electricity prices for New York energy consumers. When looking at
energy efficiency, the State Energy Plan examined the impact to electricity prices if the current 15 by 15 policy goal
was achieved. That analysis demonstrated that the net retail price of electricity paid by consumers is expected to
be reduced by 0.4 to 0.9 cents per kilowatt hour, which would equal a total annual bill savings to ratepayers of
$600 million to $1.4 billion in the year 2015. This analysis accounts for both the expected increases in annual
customer bills to implement the program, as well as the expected decreases in annual customer bills due to the
reduction in wholesale electricity prices due to the reduced need for electricity, and the reduced need for power
generated by the most inefficient and expensive fossil fuel power plants and for importing electricity from outside
New York.
The 2009 State Energy Plan also conducted a similar analysis to measure the effect on electricity prices of the 30
by 15 renewable energy policy goal. The renewable energy analysis demonstrated that the net retail price of
electricity paid by consumers is expected to be reduced by 0.06 to 0.16 cents per kWh by 2018, which would equal
a total annual bill savings to ratepayers of $93 million to $262 million. Like the energy efficiency analysis, this study
accounts for both expected cost increases to implement the program, and the expected decreases in annual
customer bills due to reduced electricity prices and the reduced need for electricity from fossil fuel power plants
from imported electricity.

Energy Technology Development: An Investment in Economic Development
It is well documented that investments in technology innovation lead to economic growth. Evaluation of the System
Benefit Charge energy R&D portfolio has shown that for every one dollar co-invested with New York business
partners in energy product development, Gross State Product has increased by over four dollars. 44

Clean Energy Workforce Development:
Positioning New Yorkers for Jobs in a Low-Carbon Economy
New York State has been supporting energy efficiency and renewable energy workforce development and training
initiatives for approximately 10 years, and has created a network of over 32 clean energy training facilities across
the state. This includes the Center for Energy Efficiency and Building Science (CEEBS), headquartered at Hudson
Valley Community College, an expansive network of 18 locations that develop and deliver workforce development
building science training across the state. To date, over 5,150 students have been trained through CEEBS.
NYSERDA has also worked closely with groups such as the Building Performance Contractors Association, the
New York State Builders Association, the US Green Building Council, the Association for Energy Engineers, and
others to provide funding support for energy efficiency training to over 5,850 practitioners. Though this network,
partners have provided training in solar water heating, small and large wind, geothermal, fuel cells, PV, and
anaerobic digestion to 4,900 installers, designers, builders, and architects on renewable energy technologies.
Finally, NYSERDA is working with 25 new training partners to develop career pathways and other technical
training initiatives that target low-income applicants with a priority to serve unemployed and underemployed
individuals. Career pathway and technical training initiatives will train an additional 6,900 participants by June
2012.

44

NYSERDA New York’s Systems Benefits Charge Program Evaluation and Status Repor., Final Report. March
2010.

13-23

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 14
National and Regional Action and Coordination
Introduction
Successfully mitigating the impacts that climate change will have on New York’s people,
environment, and economy will require coordinated policy and action by all levels of U.S.
government—federal, State, and local. Given the global nature of the climate change challenge,
federal government action will be essential to successfully position the American economy in an
evolving international marketplace and to enable the United States to lead efforts to achieve a
global solution. In addition, strong federal action will create a fertile arena for development of
the new technologies that will be needed to achieve the scale of emission reductions needed.
Further, federal action will help to establish a level playing field in the domestic economy,
ensuring that all states have equal access to the opportunities that will arise from the growth of
the clean energy economy and share in bearing any costs to achieve the policy.
In the absence of comprehensive federal climate and clean energy policy, American states have
served the time honored role as the laboratories for climate change and clean energy policy
development. New York in particular has played a pivotal role among states in climate change
policy development and in recognizing that its domestic energy, environment, and economic
development interests can be successfully augmented through participation in regional efforts. A
regional platform with neighboring states can take advantage of access to larger markets for instate products and services. The broader supply chain created throughout the region also provides
for expanded opportunities for New York consumers. Further, the development of cooperative
regional programs offers real proof that success can be achieved on the sub-national level and
that certain strategies are perhaps best approached on this regional level, taking account of the
local natural and human resources and needs.
State actions are also best accomplished when coordinated with local government activities.
Local governments are beginning to assume critical roles in the implementation of various
climate strategies. Several county and municipal governments in New York have engaged in
climate action planning for their communities, while interest and participation in New York’s
Climate Smart Communities Program is consistently growing. Indeed, absent local government
coordination and cooperation, many of the recommendations and program implementation needs
in this statewide strategy could be frustrated. Finally, climate change is, at its core, a global issue
that will require the dedicated action and attention by all governments, industries, and citizens. It
is imperative over the long-term that the federal government identify and act upon the
environmental responsibilities and economic consequences of national climate change policy and
do so in a manner that can provide economic advantage. In the absence of an international treaty
agreement or U.S. national climate or energy policy, New York State action has and can continue
to demonstrate to both the federal government and the international community how creative and
effective strategies can be developed at the local level and are appropriately translated for
national and international application.
This chapter of the Climate Action Council Interim Report (Interim Report) identifies the
necessary policy and programmatic action needed at the federal level as well as the opportunities

14-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

posed by working on a regional platform with neighboring states to achieve New York’s climate
change goals. This discussion will address activities that New York has undertaken at the
national and regional level and will identify certain policy options identified through the Climate
Action Plan processes that will require development beyond the identified portfolio of statefocused policy options.

The Lay of the Land: Existing and Proposed National and Regional
Programs
New York is not preparing a climate plan in a vacuum. New York has been actively engaged in
working with regional partners and other national and sub-national jurisdictions in implementing
climate change and clean energy programs. Although President Obama supports clean energy
and climate protection, his administration has not been able to secure the support of Congress
and it faces constant criticism for advancing agency-level climate protection policies. Even in the
highly partisan political environment of Washington, DC, the Obama Administration is moving
ahead with a number of programs spread across numerous agencies to support development of a
low-carbon economy.
Climate Programs

Regional Partnerships
The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) is a prime example of an effective regional
program that can inform the development of a national policy. Recognizing that electricity flows
across state lines, the 10 RGGI states (Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont) developed a regional capand-invest program that limits power sector emissions across the region. Rather than getting
mired in the politics of handing out allowances to incumbent polluters, the RGGI states have
opted for distributing the allowances via an auction and the states are using the proceeds to
stimulate the clean energy economy. The RGGI states are now commencing a program review to
evaluate the program’s performance and determine what additional changes should be made to
improve the program. Similar regional programs are being developed by western states and
Canadian provinces (Arizona, British Columbia, California, Manitoba, Montana, New Mexico,
Ontario, Oregon, Quebec, Utah, and Washington, with other states, Canadian provinces, and
Mexican states as observers) and by midwestern states (Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Michigan,
Minnesota, Wisconsin are members, with additional observer states).
RGGI has advanced several key principles that provide a foundation for a national cap-andinvest program. First, allowances must be recognized as an authorization to pollute the public’s
atmosphere, and they should be given away to private parties only for truly compelling reasons.
The authorization to pollute also represents a very valuable resource that can be sold with the
proceeds used to fund efficiency and clean energy programs that reduce electricity bills. Second,
very strict criteria and standards for enforcing the integrity and genuineness of offsets is essential
to the success of the whole program. Offsets that do not fully offset a complete ton of carbon
dioxide would serve as counterfeit credits that threaten the integrity of an emission reduction
program. RGGI has done an excellent job of protecting offsets by assuring their legitimacy. Most
importantly, RGGI has demonstrated that properly designed market-based mechanisms for
emission reductions can be engines, not impediments, to economic growth.

14-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Given the success of their collaboration in the power sector, the RGGI states are also expanding
their efforts into the transportation area. Environmental, energy, and transportation agency heads
for the ten RGGI participating states, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the District of
Columbia have agreed to form the Transportation and Climate Initiative (TCI), and are
collaborating to develop regional strategies to reduce emissions from the transportation sector.
One of the first TCI initiatives is evaluation and development of infrastructure needs for a key
carbon reduction strategy—increasing the use of electric vehicles.
The Interim Report discusses several strategies that can be implemented on a regional level to
maximize the climate benefits and avoid emissions leakage and competitive disadvantages to instate industries. Among the strategies that are considered for regional implementation are a
regional cap-and-invest program that would build upon the strong RGGI foundation (PSD-6), a
regional low-carbon fuel standard (TLU-4), and regional pricing mechanisms for the
transportation sector (TLU-12). In addition, the interim report recognizes that other policies to be
implemented on a state level would benefit from regional implementation, including the lowcarbon portfolio standard (PSD-6).
Ultimately, strong regional programs present a powerful model and foundation for federal and
even international action. For example, regional cap-and-invest programs like RGGI and the
Western Climate Initiative can be linked to form the foundation of a national climate program
that would be implemented by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Clean
Air Act or legislated by Congress. By acting first to develop the regional templates, New York
and its regional partners are well-positioned to prosper under the eventual federal program. New
York and other RGGI and western states are also participating in the International Carbon Action
Partnership (ICAP), with a goal of developing the basis for an international market-based
approach to reducing carbon emissions. New York’s participation in ICAP helps to build support
for international climate efforts.

Federal Climate Legislation
Congress has tried repeatedly to enact climate legislation in recent years. Each of the proposed
bills was based on the common architecture of an economy-wide national cap-and-trade program
that would be administered at a federal level. Each of the bills would establish an emissions cap
that declines each year until the cap in 2050 is 17–20 percent of the initial cap. Each year,
allowances up to the level of the cap would be issued. In early years, most of those allowances
would be issued for free to various stakeholders while, in later years, most of the allowances
would be auctioned, with proceeds being used to support the goals of the program. Compliance
could also be achieved through offsets, which are emission reductions from outside the program,
either domestic or international. These bills also included various complementary programs,
including transportation measures and support for low-carbon technologies such as carbon
capture and sequestration and renewable energy. The bills usually recognized a role for the states
in achieving the climate goals, but many of them sought to preempt or displace state cap-andtrade programs, at least temporarily.
To date, these efforts have met with mixed success. In a close vote, split along party lines, the
House of Representatives in 2009 passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act, to
establish a national cap-and-trade program that would meet a target of reducing national
emissions 83 percent by 2050 from a 2005 baseline (essentially the same as the goal of Governor

14-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Paterson’s Executive Order 24). Senate efforts to enact similar legislation, however, have all
been unsuccessful.
It is unknown what form future federal legislative efforts will assume. When such legislation is
finally enacted, New York will need to reevaluate the strategies that are in place to address
climate change to identify those that should be altered or required to be discontinued as a result
of the federal legislation. A comprehensive federal climate program that is designed to achieve
the same level of reductions as New York’s climate plan will lessen the need for several of the
policy options identified in this Interim Report. Many of the strategies discussed in this Interim
Report, however, will continue to have significant value both in achieving climate goals and in
building a clean energy economy in New York and enabling New Yorkers to thrive in a climateconstrained world.

Regulation under the Clean Air Act
EPA has begun implementing regulations to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, based on
the Supreme Court’s decision in Massachusetts v. EPA that carbon dioxide and other GHGs are
air pollutants under the Clean Air Act. Earlier this year, EPA issued a determination that GHGs
endanger public health and the environment, setting the stage for a variety of regulatory
measures. First, EPA promulgated emission standards for automobiles and other light-duty
vehicles for 2012–2016, and the Obama Administration has announced that EPA will be
extending those standards to future years and heavy duty vehicles. Second, EPA has issued
regulations that would govern major new sources of GHG emissions, which will have to
implement the best available control technology for reducing such emissions.
In the absence of federal legislation, EPA can expand these efforts to include emission standards
for new and existing power plants and industrial sources. In the coming years, EPA may issue
new source standards under section 111 of the Clean Air Act for new cement plants, refineries
and utility boilers, among other source categories. When it issues such standards governing GHG
emissions from new sources, EPA is required to issue guidelines to the states for regulating such
emissions from existing sources. Such state standards could take the form of plant-specific
requirements or allowance-based programs if EPA determines that such market mechanisms
constitute the best emission reduction system that has been demonstrated. In addition, the Clean
Air Act provides states with the ability to implement programs to control such sources if it can
demonstrate that its approach would achieve greater emission reductions than implementation of
EPA’s guidelines.
New York supports EPA’s use of its recognized authority to complement and strengthen other
regulatory measures identified in this report. In the transportation sector, stronger emission
standards set by EPA are a critical tool for reducing GHG emissions because New York does not
have authority to set its own emission standards (although it can adopt standards set by
California). Regarding stationary sources, EPA programs that require all states to achieve
emission reductions from existing sources will not only reduce national emissions more than
New York can achieve acting alone or in partnership with other states, but they will also help to
level the playing field on which New York industries compete with those in other states.

14-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Federal Energy Programs

Energy Research and Development
Successful models of federally supported research and development activities include Energy
Frontier Research Centers (EFRCs), Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E),
and Energy Innovation Hubs. EFRCs target early stage research by leading researchers and are
funded over a multi-year period at $25 million per year, aiming to solve grand challenges in the
energy space. ARPA-E employs a more entrepreneurial funding model targeted at further
developing cutting-edge technologies that are often considered high-risk technologies. Energy
Innovation Hubs complement these two programs by supporting collaborative cross-disciplinary
teams in priority technology areas to help speed the commercialization of the technologies. In
addition to providing direct support for research and development activities, the federal
government can encourage private investment by providing tax credits for investments in energy
research and development.

Federal Subsidies and Other Measures to Support Energy Projects
The federal government—primarily the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)—devotes substantial
resources to the support of all types of energy projects, including renewable energy, nuclear
power, carbon capture and sequestration and even fossil fuel extraction. Examples include:
•

Production tax credits and investment tax credits constitute a primary means of federal
support for renewable energy projects, but the availability of such credits will expire in 2011
unless they are extended by Congress.

•

Loan guaranties for new nuclear plants; nuclear energy also benefits from the liability
framework provided by the Price-Anderson Act, pursuant to which the federal government
backstops the liability of plant owners for plant accidents.

•

DOE support for carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), including the FutureGen project,
which is intended to demonstrate the success of CCS at a commercial scale, and numerous
grants nationwide for CCS applications.

•

Support for fossil fuel extraction in the form of favorable tax treatment and access to federal
lands and waters at below market lease rates.

•

Tax credits for homeowners and businesses to purchase energy efficient products and
vehicles, and renewable systems (solar, wind, and geothermal).

The federal government’s loan guarantee and tax credit programs have been effective in
advancing new technologies in the marketplace. These programs are critical to helping mitigate
investment risk and spurring private financing of large-scale demonstrations and manufacturing
facilities of new technologies that would otherwise have been difficult to secure. Available tax
credits are helping homeowners and businesses overcome the cost barrier s to purchase of
efficiency and renewable technologies. Over the next few years, as the nation continues to
grapple with an underperforming economy, financing for large infrastructure projects and
investment in energy efficient and clean technologies is expected to remain tight, thereby making
these federal programs all the more necessary to bringing clean energy technologies to market.
Several of these tax credits are set to expire and Congress should look to extend those where the
market has not yet matured to the point where purchases are being made routinely by consumers

14-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Recommendations for National and Regional Efforts to Advance
New York’s 80 by 50 Goal
For some climate policies, it will be to New York’s advantage to be a first mover, taking
advantage of economic opportunities and enhancing quality of life. For other policies, meeting
the climate challenge requires more than action by New York alone. As reflected in many of the
policies in the Interim Report, New York will pursue regional partnerships that achieve more
change, in a more equitable manner, than New York acting alone. In the near future, however,
substantial emission reductions will be needed nationwide and internationally to mitigate the
profound damage from climate change. National efforts will not only help to achieve the climate
goals underlying this effort, but they will also enable New York businesses to compete on a level
playing field with their competitors in other states and nations. Therefore, the adoption of
comprehensive policies by the federal government is a high priority for New York.
Many of the measures identified in this interim report are also effective in reducing emissions
when implemented on a regional scale. Regional programs result in more emission reductions,
they help to maintain a level playing field, and they limit the emission leakage that can result
from some State programs. Leakage occurs when, as a result of a State program, some emitting
activity moves to other states or sectors that are not covered by the program at issue, sometimes
resulting in overall higher levels of carbon emissions. This unintended consequence of statebased or regional approaches can be effectively limited or eliminated when program
requirements are dispersed over the broadest possible universe of program participants.
Participation by New York in national and regional programs can result in greater reductions at a
lower marginal cost than programs implemented by a single state. New York should take
advantage of the financial resources offered by the federal government to support clean energy
deployment in New York, with its attendant economic benefits. New York should also seek to
leverage federal research and development investments to develop the technologies needed to
achieve the 80 by 50 goal. More detailed opportunities for such collaboration are described
below.
New York should seek the implementation of national or regional market
mechanisms to price carbon and reduce emissions.
Lack of specific action by the federal government has maintained the status of GHG emissions as
an economic and environmental externality to the economy. Externalities arise when market
actors who are responsible for a negative consequence, in this case the climate change resultant
from GHG emissions, are not provided sufficient information, incentive, or economic signal to
change behaviors to account for the externality. Thus, a fundamental goal of climate policy is to
establish an economic price on carbon emissions from all sectors as a means to internalize the
externality. Placing a price on carbon enables economic actors to assess market options based on
the going-forward cost they will incur as a result of their GHG emissions, and determine the
optimal activity to manage such costs. As a result, the environmental and climate damages
associated with GHG emissions will be fully incorporated into economic decision making.
Federal inaction to date has created a large degree of uncertainty regarding future carbon pricing,
resulting in a high-risk business environment and frustrating development of alternate
technologies. For example, GE's CEO Jeffrey Immelt, long a proponent of national climate

14-6

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

policy action, recently stated that, “the U.S. needs to establish a long-term price signal on carbon
emissions in order for companies to provide appropriate funding for innovation regardless of
fuel, as well as revive nuclear energy.” 1
Carbon pricing can take a variety of forms, including regulatory mechanisms, such as a carbon
tax, regulatory fees and permit requirements, or market-based mechanisms such as cap-and-trade
or cap-and-invest programs. Although these mechanisms differ in policy design and program
specifics, they all have the same effect of accounting for damages associated with GHG
emissions. Given the relative large contribution of carbon emissions from energy-using
activities, identifying and internalizing the cost of carbon in energy consumption should drive
increased energy efficiency and investment in lower-carbon emitting energy sources. As a result,
establishing a price on carbon will allow markets to contribute to solving the problem of GHG
emissions.
Market-based solutions are often preferred to regulatory solutions because they can be
economically efficient if properly designed. This efficiency maximizes net societal benefits by
decreasing emissions in the least-cost way. Rather than forcing emission reduction through
uniform technology mandates, market solutions allow market actors flexibility to select least-cost
methods of emission reduction. Not only do market mechanisms increase efficiency but placing a
price on emissions can also establish strong incentives for technological innovation. Marketbased solutions have been successful in several environmental programs, albeit at a smaller scale
than is needed to achieve climate mitigation goals, including chlorofluorocarbon trading for
stratospheric ozone protection, sulfur dioxide trading under the U.S. Clean Air Act to combat
acid rain, and nitrogen oxide trading to reduce smog in the eastern United States. Given the
broad impact of these environmental needs and the comparative wide-scale impact of carbon
emissions on climate change, use of market-based solutions has become a preferred option in the
climate policy dialogue.
New York and its interested stakeholders should continue to advocate for federal legislation that
helps to achieve climate goals, treats all states equitably, and establishes the strong federal-state
partnership that is needed to fully address climate change, ensuring that State efforts continue to
have value in the context of a national cap on emissions and that early adopter states/regions do
not get penalized under a federal program. Also important is to develop a national policy that
maintains the integrity of market signals by allocating allowances based on economic principles,
not political reasons.
Until a comprehensive federal program is in place, statewide and regional policies seeking to
develop price signals serve as important early steps in the process to establish national programs
and can provide the building blocks for such national efforts. When EPA evaluates how best to
use its authority under the Clean Air Act to regulate GHG emissions, it should seek to build on
the success of RGGI and the other regional programs. Coordinated regional programs can serve
as the foundation for a homogenous national carbon market that will create a more level playing
field for businesses and industry across the country. Coordinated regional policies can also
reduce the emission leakage that occurs if emission reductions in one area are offset by an
1

Albany Times-Union, U.S. energy policy is 'stupid,' Immelt says. Kim Chipman and Rachel Layne. Bloomberg
News. Sept. 24, 2010.
14-7

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

increase in emissions in another. In electricity and other markets, uneven application of carbon
price signals could create competitive disadvantage, raise prices for some consumers over others
and fail to fully achieve the desired GHG emissions reductions.
Ultimately, an international market-based approach to reducing GHG emissions will provide the
most cost-effective means of reducing emissions in an equitable manner. New York should
continue to work with other states, nations, and other sub-national entities to create the
foundation for an international carbon market. New York’s participation in ICAP is an effective
way to develop that common approaches and metrics that will be essential to the functioning of
an international carbon market.
Leveraging the opportunities available under federal programs can help create a
robust market demand for clean energy.
Federal policy plays an essential role in the development of clean energy in the United States and
in New York specifically. Federal programs can help create demand for clean energy and
facilitate the development of the supplies to meet the demand. Ultimately, a vigorous national
renewable electricity standard could be a strong driver of such development. In the nearer term,
New York should seek to leverage the opportunities that are provided by existing federal
programs such as the availability of investment tax credits and production tax credits.

National Renewable Electricity Standard
Like a national market-based GHG reduction program, a strong national renewable energy
standard will create strong market incentives for the development of clean energy resources,
leading to innovation and cost reduction. A national standard must build upon existing state
measures and should not be designed in an inflexible manner that prejudices New York and other
early movers. If structured appropriately, a national program for renewable energy purchase
requirements will help to level the playing field among the states. It should not be structured in a
way that creates economic disparities or favors the economic development needs of one state or
region over another.
Any national renewable electricity program that is predicated on the long-range transmission of
electricity must consider the technical feasibility of the transmission and distribution system to
deliver such energy without eroding local reliability rules and standards. Unintended
consequences that could frustrate climate initiatives should be avoided. For example, although
transmission upgrades can help provide a larger market for clean energy technologies and
services, they should not be allowed to interfere with expanded opportunity for renewable energy
businesses located in New York.

Continued Production and Investment Tax Credits
The availability of production and investment tax credits for renewable energy projects has been
a major stimulus for renewable energy development. At the same time, however, these programs
often serve to complicate the financing of renewable energy development by businesses that may
not have an existing tax liability to offset with the credits. Nevertheless, if an energy transaction
is properly designed to take advantage of the credits, it can lead to the deployment of renewable
energy in New York in support of the goals of this plan. New York agencies and authorities
should be mindful of the opportunities and limitations and support New York businesses is their
efforts to reap the benefits of these federal programs.
14-8

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

These credit programs are due to expire in 2011, absent an extension by Congress. Although
New York should advocate for the extension of such programs and it should also consider
accelerating the implementation of the current renewable portfolio standard to take advantage of
the credits while they still exist.
Federal Support for State and Local Weatherization and Efficiency Programs
U.S. Department of Energy programs such as the State Energy Program and Weatherization
Assistance Program provide states with annual funds to deploy commercially available
technologies into the marketplace. These programs experienced a large increase under the
Americian Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), and state programs were ramped- up
accordingly. A new Energy Efficiency Conservation Block grant program was introduced under
ARRA that provides states and local governments with funding for local projects. These types of
programs, which can be tailored by each state to address its own needs, are an important source
of ongoing base revenue. A mechanism to sustain federal funds for these critical programs at a
robust level post-ARRA should be pursued. Falling back to the low historical appropriation
levels does not allow New York and its local governments to take advantage of the infrastructure
that has been built for delivery of these federal programs.
National electricity transmission policy should facilitate achievement of New
York’s climate goals.
Considerable debate has resulted from the development of national energy policies that seek to
advance national program goals, for example national electric reliability standards or renewable
energy programs, but do so in a manner that takes away from traditional state powers and
authority. A more robust national transmission grid can help to achieve national climate goals in
the long run but the development of a national grid must proceed in a manner that does not
interfere with state climate goals and local renewable energy development.
One such controversy revolves around legislative proposals that would expand the authority of
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to override state authority to site
transmission lines where such lines are proposed in areas of designated national interest. The
Energy Policy Act of 2005 directed the Department of Energy to identify national interest
electric transmission corridors (NIETCs), wherein FERC received new authority to approve
transmission projects located within a designated NIETC that fail to receive state approval within
a one-year time period. Such new backstop approvals could potentially override state-based
decision-making, which is more accountable to local needs and concerns. While the NIETCs
were identified in the context of augmenting system reliability, recent legislative proposals
would expand this FERC backstop authority beyond the NIETC designation to include
transmission projects to support national renewable electricity standard objectives.
In addition, FERC decision-making on cost allocation for multi-state projects has centered on
what is known as the beneficiary pays principle. On a generalized basis, FERC will allocate the
costs of a transmission project among the universe of designated beneficiaries in proportion to an
administratively-determined benefit. In some cases, costs may be allocated among end-users,
who may benefit from new energy supply sources, and generators, who may benefit from access
to new markets. However, in many instances, FERC has designated the end-user as the sole
beneficiary, making it fully liable for the total costs of transmission projects.

14-9

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

This combination of expanded FERC backstop authority and a beneficiary pays policy could
have negative ramifications for New York and northeastern electric energy markets and
potentially frustrate renewable energy and climate policy objectives. Predicating a national
renewable energy policy on the long-range transmission of energy from certain qualifying
renewable resources (e.g., wind resources located in midwestern states) to remote load that must
meet the procurement requirements of the new program interferes with state sovereignty and can
stifle the development of renewable energy in the consuming markets. Thus, expansion of
regulatory decision-making at FERC to facilitate this outcome is likely to interfere with New
York’s own policy objectives to develop renewable energy resources and achieve in-state
economic development. Further, long-range transmission of remote energy resources may not be
delivered at an advantageous price and all potential costs of a renewable energy strategy should
be considered prior to development of a program platform that creates inequities. Finally, if done
too soon—before the renewable resources are developed in the midwestern states—the opening
of new transmission capacity from the Midwest to the Northeast may also open new markets for
highly carbon-intensive coal-based generation, thereby increasing emissions, frustrating
northeastern climate policies, and interfering with the goal of reducing the leakage of emissions
from RGGI and other climate programs in the northeast.
Federal agencies should cooperate to create and implement regulatory
frameworks that foster energy efficiency and distributed renewable energy.
Federal policies fundamentally affect climate action activities at state and local levels. Such
federal regulatory action must coordinate among the necessary federal agencies and entities to
ensure success of new program structures and retain existing state-based policies and authorities
as new national programs are created.
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing seeks to address and overcome the most
common obstacles inhibiting greater energy efficiency investment and retrofits. These include
the sizable upfront costs, lack of appropriate financing and lengthy payback periods that may
extend beyond the ownership of the home. Unlike a typical mortgage or loan, PACE loans are
provided by local governments and municipalities rather than banks and are designed to be paid
back to the local government through a property tax lien by a separate fee added to a home’s
property tax bill. As a result, the loan is tied to the property rather than the person who initially
took out the loan. When the property is sold, the remaining energy efficiency and retrofit
payments are then paid by the new owner. Furthermore, the payments are structured so that they
are less than the savings associated with decreased utility bills, thus representing a net increase in
disposable income.
PACE programs achieved considerable early success and adoption quickly spread across the
country. The program originated in the city of Berkeley, California in 2008 and, as of June 2,
2010, there were 23 states with PACE legislation or pre-existing authority and 5 states with
pending legislation. New York State has enacted a PACE financing program and several
municipalities are in the process of designing and implementing local initiatives. The Obama
administration supported the program as a key component of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the “Recovery through Retrofit” program that provides federal
funding for PACE programs.

14-10

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Despite this support, concerns with the interaction of PACE liens with more traditional home
mortgages have affected the confidence of federal lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to
advance this instrument. The mortgage companies’ federal regulator, the Federal Housing
Finance Agency (FHFA), has advised the mortgage lenders that they cannot lend to participants
in PACE financing programs nor can an existing homeowner with a Fannie/Freddie mortgage
join in a PACE program. With the two federally regulated companies owning about half of all
U.S. mortgages, industry practices will likely follow suit and put an end to PACE financing.
This recent development regarding PACE programs highlights the contrary policies currently
found at the federal level. Without a national energy policy applied across all sectors and
branches of government, there will continue to be confusion and counteractive policies in place.
Without an overarching federal policy in place, political and economic uncertainty will continue
to restrain programs and investments that promise considerable economic, environmental, and
social benefits. As New York has an interest in advancing the PACE program, the State should
advocate for resolution of the FHFA concerns in a manner that preserves the value of the PACE
program without negatively affecting the lending market.
New York should actively participate in national market transformation initiatives
To achieve the 80 by 50 goal, the most efficient products and supporting services must make
their way into the market. This is best accomplished through joint action by states and the federal
government to encourage the entire supply chain to produce, distribute, install, and service
equipment to the highest efficiency and quality standards. Efforts should focus on a continuing
process to assess the efficiency levels of products on the market and partnerships with industry to
ratchet up efficiency and incorporate new technology solutions as rapidly as possible. Companies
that sell and install such equipment must be trained and certified to ensure quality and certainty
that measures are achieving their efficiency potential. Organizations such as the Consortium for
Energy Efficiency, American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, and Alliance to Save
Energy and others work nationally to develop consensus around voluntary standards and market
transformation strategies designed to accelerate efficiency. It is vital that New York continue to
be a leader in this process and to push for introduction of advanced energy codes and product
standards that raise the floor on efficiency, complemented by an evolving set of strategies that
supports above-code actions. These types of market interventions must be sustained over the
long term to avoid backsliding, and to be able to incorporate new technologies that will emerge
in the future.
New York should take advantage of the federal government’s advanced energy
technology investment policy.
The significance of the 80 by 50 goal calls not only for accelerated deployment of the many
existing low-carbon energy technologies and products that are currently available today, but also
for the research and development of new energy technologies that can be deployed in the future
to help meet the climate change challenge. Specific research and development needs to achieve a
near-zero, low-carbon future are identified further in Chapter 10 of this Interim Report. The
development of new clean energy technologies requires a substantial and sustained commitment
from the federal government, similar to its level of research investment in other areas, such as
health care and defense.

14-11

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

In testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources in 2009, DOE
Secretary Steven Chu remarked on the importance of federally supported energy research and
development, saying “[w]e have many technologies in hand today to begin a transition to a lowcarbon economy, and we are accelerating that work through the Recovery Act. But, over the
long-term, we will need breakthroughs and better technologies to make the steep reductions in
GHG emissions we need.” 2 Secretary Chu went on to stress the importance of early stage
technology investment, saying “It is imperative that government provide R&D funding,
especially at the front end when private investments would not recoup the full value of the shared
social good or when a new technology would displace an embedded way of doing business.”
Providing such support is especially critical given the current economic climate, where private
companies are focusing their limited resources on shorter term, lower risk investments to
advance their current technologies. New York supports the recent expansion of federal funding
for energy technology research, development, demonstration and commercial deployment, and
should advocate for sustained increased levels of federal support to accelerate the development
of such technologies. New York should also seek to facilitate federal funding of research and
development in New York, enabling New York to benefit from the associated economic
opportunities for development of the clean energy economy.
Federal investment in, and support for, nuclear technology and carbon capture
and sequestration will help New York achieve its climate protection goals.
In the short term, low-carbon renewable technologies will play a major role in transformation of
New York’s energy sector. In the longer run, advances in low-carbon baseload power
technologies—such as carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) for fossil fuel-based technologies
and new nuclear power technologies—will help to achieve a diverse energy portfolio that fosters
carbon emission reductions in the long-term, while providing the needed levels of system
reliability. The further development and deployment of these baseload technologies will assist in
achieving the State’s 80 by 50 goals while also preserving system reliability. Given the
substantial financial commitment needed to advance the technology in these areas, the federal
government is best positioned to make the necessary investments. However, New York should
seek to take advantage of federal research dollars to fund research, development, and deployment
of these technologies in New York.

Nuclear Energy
The federal government plays an essential role in the development of nuclear energy. The U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has exclusive jurisdiction over the siting of new nuclear
plants. Moreover, the cost of new plants, the need for a permanent depository for radioactive
used fuel, and the international implications of potential nuclear proliferation are all issues
beyond the control of New York and other states. The strong federal role is also manifested by
the Price-Anderson Act, which provides a federal backstop for nuclear liability, by the federal
legislation that requires establishment of a permanent storage facility and by the substantial
federal loan guaranties for new nuclear power.
The longstanding issues surrounding the reprocessing or disposal of used nuclear fuel and the
decommissioning of nuclear units are particularly critical. New York awaits the results of the
2

Statement of Steven Chu, Secretary of Energy, Before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, United
States Senate. January 21, 2009. Hhttp://energy.senate.gov/public/_files/ChuTestimony.pdf
14-12

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

blue ribbon panel that is developing recommendations for dealing with high level radioactive
waste now that Yucca Mountain is no longer a viable alternative. The issue of waste disposal
must be addressed by the federal government before nuclear power is to play a role in a clean
energy economy.
The recent applications to the NRC for new reactor development have all been for large scale
units of several hundred megawatts. Many smaller scale reactors, however, are being developed
and several are in service outside of the United States. Designs such as the Westinghouse IRIS
unit feature enhanced safety, simplicity, and competitive economics and the GE-Hitachi PRISM
unit is a below grade unit that uses recycled spent fuel from other plants and features passive
cooling providing for greater safety and security. Commercial development of smaller units is
desirable from several aspects including greater market penetration by many more developers, as
the financial capital requirements are much lower and the ability to site units where most needed
for load and voltage support. Small nuclear units may also be received more favorably by local
communities because of the shorter construction time (less disruption), enhanced safety and
security features, and potentially less burden on emergency preparedness organizations. The
further development and deployment of this technology could be facilitated by federal economic
incentives and loan guarantees and by the pre-approval of reactor designs, allowing for the
expedited review of applications administered by the NRC.

Carbon Capture and Sequestration
The federal government supports the continued use of coal in the nation’s fuel mix because it is a
domestic fuel that limits reliance on foreign sources of energy. Coal mining is also a major
economic driver in the Appalachian states and the northern Rockies. However, coal-fired power
plants have carbon emissions that are more than double those of efficient natural gas-fired plants
of a similar capacity. In an economy that is based on the 80 by 50 goal, coal can only be
continued as a fuel if CCS is made commercially available. Therefore, the federal Department of
Energy has devoted substantial sums to developing CCS technology.
New York’s climate planning process recognizes that to continue generating electricity with
fossil fuels means that CCS technology may play a critical role. Eventual coupling of efficient
combined cycle natural gas technology with CCS will result in even lower emission rates than
coal with CCS and will reduce the attendant environmental concerns associated with coal-fired
generation, including emissions of mercury, sulfur dioxide, and other pollutants, and coal waste
ponds. Therefore, New York could seek to take advantage of the federal research and
development activities directed at CCS and will focus a portion of its own limited research and
development funding on New York-specific development activities, including assessment of
potential storage facilities and pilot projects involving gas-fired plants.
Regional and national transportation initiatives will be essential to achieving New
York’s climate goals.
The Transportation and Land Use (TLU) Technical Work Group has identified and discussed the
inherent value of national and regional action on transportation policy needs, identifying critical
work on several fronts. New York has already taken action on several of these initiatives, as
permitted within its state authorities and powers. Specific recommendations for national action
or expansion of regional activity are identified below.

14-13

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

More generally, New York should continue to engage federal agencies in developing national
transportation strategies that facilitate the transformation of the transportation sector nationally.
For example, New York has been and should continue to advocate for a change in existing
federal funding formulas to increase the direction of federal investment to low-GHG
transportation modes and raise the proportion of federal funds for transit, rail, and other modes
that reduce GHG emissions.

Vehicle Standards
As mentioned above, the EPA has issued GHG emission standards for model years 2012-16 and
has indicated an intention to strengthen these standards further in future years. Complementing
EPA action, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has issued corporate average fuel
economy standards (CAFE) that are commensurate with EPA’s GHG emission standards. Taking
into account the emissions inventory forecasts for activities covered by these regulations, everstronger GHG emissions and CAFE standards will be essential for New York to achieve its own
statewide emission reductions. New York should actively participate in actions by these federal
agencies to continuously advance standards that are consistent with the State’s 80 by 50
emissions reduction needs from this sector over time.
Recognizing that national standards are a floor for performance, New York should continue to
exercise its authority to work with California and other states to develop and adopt stricter
California standards, as necessary to achieve climate goals. For example, Governor Paterson was
recently joined by eight other governors (Maine, Massachusetts, Vermont, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Oregon, Washington, and New Mexico) in advocating for more aggressive vehicle
standards starting in 2016, when the current standards are fully implemented, thus setting the
stage for the next level of federal government action.

Low-Carbon Fuels
New York State is currently working with 10 other northeastern states to develop a regional
framework for a low-carbon fuel standard, which would set standards for the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels in the region and encourage the development and use of lower carbon fuels.
As with the RGGI program and other activities in the TCI program, development of a regionwide low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS) can serve as an example of how regional market
development can set the stage for national action. In addition to working on a regional platform,
New York should seek to transfer program successes to shape a national program. Because
transportation fuels markets are responsive to global market dynamics, a LCFS that is
implemented on a broader scale will have more of an effect on the broader market for fuels. A
national program would have to incorporate the concerns for sustainable biofuels that have been
raised by New York in the regional LCFS process.

Regional Transportation Pricing Strategies
As described in the TLU chapter, a number of transportation and land use initiatives that can be
adopted by New York would be more productive if implemented on a regional or national scale.
For example, a multi-state transportation cap-and-trade program could develop a credit-based
program wherein appropriate entities that provide transportation fuels to consumer markets
would be permitted to hold and trade credits for the GHG emissions represented from the fuels
they sell into the market. As with the RGGI program, such credits could be auctioned, with
revenue contributing to public transportation and transportation system efficiency improvements.
14-14

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Other identified policies worth pursing on a regional basis include collaboration on
implementing pay-as-you-drive insurance or other pricing mechanisms that encourage reductions
in vehicle miles traveled and that can be implemented in a manner to replace or supplement
gasoline taxes. New York should continue to examine and develop appropriate policies with
other regional partners.

Regional Rail Initiatives
By its nature, expansion of rail-based transportation options (both passenger and freight) should
be pursued on a regional and/or national level. On a regional level, New York should engage
neighboring states to plan and invest in infrastructure to support both high speed rail and freight
initiatives, both of which should be designed to shift passengers and goods from air and roads to
rail. New York should continue to work with its partners in the TCI to further develop a threeyear work plan for freight initiatives, including the development of long-term approaches to
move freight effectively and efficiently through the region while promoting economic growth,
enhancing communities, and addressing GHG emissions. With respect to high speed rail, New
York should continue to work with the Northeast Corridor Group to explore and develop options
for implementation of high speed rail technologies and service among northeastern states,
including intra-state New York services that link with regional services.
New York should advocate for strict national standards for new products and
sources of greenhouse gas emissions.
In many areas—appliances, vehicles, and new sources of air pollution— the baseline efficiency
or emission standards are set by the federal government. Recognizing that efficiency and
emission reductions are achieved most effectively when incorporated into initial designs, these
standards should be set at levels that will achieve the most substantial emission reductions from
the outset. For example, the Department of Energy should be encouraged to set the most
stringent efficiency standards for new appliances and electronic products and, as explained
above, EPA and the U.S. Department of Transportation should set vehicle and emission
standards respectively that support the national transition to a low-carbon transportation sector.
In many cases, more stringent state standards are preempted. Therefore, unless the federal
government ensures that new products are highly efficient, it may be difficult for New York to
meet its climate goals.
National education policy to foster innovation and technology is important to
achieving New York’s climate protection goals.
Integral to any economic policy that relies on innovation and technology advances in the energy
and climate sciences area is an education policy that fosters interest in and provides sufficient
opportunity and support for education programs in sciences, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) subjects.
Primary and secondary education opportunities have been given some modest support. The
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) has advocated for an
Educate to Innovate program, designed to provide support for these STEM education programs,
to increase and expand the country’s academic base, and to inspire young students to develop an
interest in technical studies. New York should support the current PCAST recommendations as
the baseline of support for primary and secondary education programs.
14-15

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Support for primary and secondary education is only one piece of a long-term education policy
that is needed to maintain the nation’s competitive position among emerging economies
throughout the world. Ensuring the strength of university programs and U.S. research institutions
in the STEM subjects, especially with respect to advanced energy technologies, is equally
fundamental to the development of a strategic American advantage in the clean energy and
climate change arena. Strong national policies in this area are likely to benefit New York, given
the concentration of existing academic and research institutions already thriving in the State. A
high level of this academic and research activity is needed to attract the private technology
development, and manufacturing opportunities that seek academic partnership to foster the
innovation needed for technology, product, and services development. Continued federal support
and focus on STEM research and advanced education will assist New York in maintaining this
high level of activity.
The federal government should foster infrastructure investments that advance
climate change program objectives.
A primary function of the federal government is to foster investment in essential infrastructure
systems that permit individual citizens to live in a healthy and modern environment. At various
times in the past, these massive investments have been focused on advancing technologies,
transportation options and human services— such as roads, bridges, railroads, water systems,
energy systems, housing, information, and telecommunications systems—to accommodate a
growing population and an expanding economy. From these infrastructure investments, private
industry was able to make investments for products and services, confident in the ability to move
goods to all parts of the country and for export. This infrastructure also provided a level of
economic efficiency that allowed the United States to gain economic advantage over most, if not
all, other nations. Indeed, the 20th century American economic miracle would not have been
possible without the developed infrastructure, in large part supported by the federal government.
While these 20th century investments have served their purpose, the nation is faced with new
infrastructure needs that will be critical for the economy of the 21st century. The systems that are
in place formed the foundation of an economy dependent upon carbon-based fuel resources.
Going forward, investments should be directed to systems that require a lower-intensity fuel
input or energy output. Major low-carbon infrastructure investments, such as high speed rail or
electric vehicle charging systems, will require a strong commitment going forward. The federal
government also has a significant role to play in the build-out of the nation’s electricity
infrastructure. Just as the government took the lead in investing in the interstate highway system,
it should seek to develop a more intelligent electricity grid that is capable of better transmitting
power from the source of generation to use, adapting to unexpected events, and incorporating
large amounts of renewable energy resources.
Given the long life of infrastructure, the federal government should now begin to account for the
carbon-reduction needs over the life of infrastructure investments. Continued commitments and
assistance from the federal government should be assessed through a lens that accounts for the
40-year need to de-carbonize the economy, and seeks out strategic opportunities. Such
assessments should develop a shadow price for carbon—in the absence of market or other price
signals—that would be used in analyzing costs and benefits of alternative policy and investment
options. In addition to changes in the decision making required for federal infrastructure

14-16

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

investment, the federal government should also initiate a process to reprioritize near-term project
and program activity throughout all administrative agencies of the government.
Federal and state policy should engage localities and communities as active
participants in achieving climate goals.
Many of the policies recommended for further consideration require the active participation of
local communities. Engagement of municipalities will be particularly critical given the local
government roles in transportation planning and land use decisions. In a home rule state such as
New York, with land use planning and control powers disbursed among more than 1600
municipalities, it can be difficult to develop regional solutions to sprawl and other smart growth
issues without community participation.
However, many local governments lack the financial means, mechanisms, personnel, or expertise
to undertake many climate actions. Federal and state programs, such as New York State's
Climate Smart Communities program, can encourage and facilitate local action by providing
funding, technical resources, practical assistance, and consistent tracking and reporting of
successes and barriers.
Local governments also serve critical liaison roles with community organization and action, thus
helping to expand citizen participation in the realization of climate strategies and goals. Local
government actions are amplified as they are often adopted by residents, businesses and other
organizations within a community, and local governments can be effective in actively
encouraging behavioral change in residents.
New York should support efforts to achieve an international solution to climate change.
Ultimately, a solution for climate change will require the participation of all of the world’s
community of nations. New York recognizes this truth and is committed to act. But climate
change will not be solved by the actions of New York and other nations acting alone. Therefore,
New York can play a critical role in providing an example of the policies that can be
implemented worldwide to mitigate climate change.
Although the development of an international solution can be a painstaking process that takes
decades of effort, New York should engage in efforts to achieve that goal. In addition to
supporting the federal government’s efforts to negotiate an international solution, New York can
advocate more directly by engaging other nations and international actors and educating them
about New York’s own experiences in mitigating climate change while building economic
opportunities.
New York and other states have already played an active role in supporting the federal
government’s efforts to obtain an international solution to climate change. State-level action is
even more critical now that Congress has abandoned any efforts to pass climate legislation.

Conclusion
Achieving a comprehensive solution to global climate change requires New York to collaborate
with regional partners and the federal government on emission reduction strategies, and to seek
action across the community of nations. Although comprehensive federal legislation is

14-17

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

preferable, until such legislation is in place, the federal government should seek to target its
broad suite of policies and programs towards the goal of reducing carbon emissions. Towards
that end, federal policies should promote low-carbon behavior, not the continued exploitation of,
and reliance upon, fossil fuels.

14-18

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

Chapter 15
Acronyms and Abbreviations
$/tCO2e

dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent

15 by 15

NYS energy agencies’ goal to implement energy efficiency programs reducing
electricity demand by 15% by the 2015.

30 by 15

NYS goal to increase the NYS market share of renewable energy to 30% by the 2015.

40 by 30

NYS benchmark to reduce GHG emissions by 40% below 1990 levels by 2030

45 by 15

NYS energy policy to meet 45 percent of New York’s electric energy needs from
energy efficiency and renewable energy by the year 2015

80 by 50
AARA

NYS goal to reduce GHG emissions by 80% of 1990 levels by 2050
American Recover and Reinvestment Act

ACE NY

Alliance for Clean Energy New York

ADP

Adaptation

AEO

Annual Energy Outlook (U.S. DOE‐EIA)

AFW

Agriculture, Forestry, and Waste Management

ARPA‐E

Advanced Research Projects Administration—Energy

ASHRAE

American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air‐Conditioning Engineers

B100

fuel blend of 100% biodiesel

B20

fuel blend of 20% biodiesel and 80% gasoline

BAU

business as usual

BBtu

billion British thermal units

BCF

billion cubic feet

BLS

US Dept. of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics

BMP

Best management practice

Btu

British thermal unit

CAES

Compressed‐air energy storage

CAFE

corporate average fuel economy standards

CAP

Climate Action Plan

CARB

California Air Resources Board

CARB

California Air Resources Board

CCS

carbon capture and storage

CEEBS

Center for Energy Efficiency and Building Science (CEEBS)

CFL

compact fluorescent light

CH4

methane

CHP

combined heat and power

15-1

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

ClimAID

Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in New
York State

CO2

carbon dioxide

CO2e

carbon dioxide equivalent

CRP

Conservation Reserve Program (USDA)

DEC

(New York State) Department of Environmental Conservation

DOE

[United States] Department of Energy

DOT

[U.S.] Department of Transportation

E10

fuel blend of 10% ethanol and 90% gasoline

E85

fuel blend of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline

EBM

Ecosystem‐based Management

EC

Elemental Carbon

EEPS

Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard

EFC

[New York State] Environmental Facilities Corporation

EFRCs

Energy Frontier Research Centers

EIA

Energy Information Administration (US DOE)

EISA

Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007

EJ

environmental justice

EMB

ecosystem‐based management

EMEP

[New York] Environmental Monitoring, Evaluation, and Protection Program

EO

Executive Order

EPA

[US] Environmental Protection Agency

EPRI

Electric Power Research Institute

EV

electric vehicle

FCV

fuel cell vehicle

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Authority

FERC

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

g

Gram

GCM

global climate model

GDP

gross domestic product

GGE

gallons of gasoline equivalent

GHG

greenhouse gas

GREET

Greenhouse [gases] Regulated Emissions and Energy [use in]Transportation [model]

GSP

gross state product

GWh

gigawatt‐hour (one million kilowatt‐hours)

GWP

Global Warming Potential

GWP

global warming potential

15-2

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

HadCM3

(UK Met Office) Hadley Centre Climate Model Version 3

HDPE

high‐density polyethylene

HDV

heavy‐duty vehicle

HERS

Home Energy Rating System

HFC

Hydrofluorocarbon

HVAC

heating, ventilating and air conditioning

I&F

inventory and forecast

IC

Internal Combustion

ICAP

International Carbon Action Partnership

ICC

International Code Council

IECC

International Energy Conservation Code

IGCC

integrated gasification combined cycle

IHETF

Industry‐Higher Education Partnerships

iLUC

Indirect land use change

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IPM

Integrated Pest Management

IPM

Integrated Planning Model®

ISC

Invasive Species Council

ISO

Independent System Operators

ISTF

Invasive Species Task Force

kg

kilogram

kgN

kilogram Nitrogen

kV

Kilovolt

kW

Kilowatt

kWh

kilowatt‐hour

LandGEM

Landfill Gas Emissions Model

lb

pound

lb

Pound

LCFS

low‐carbon fuel standard

LCPS

low‐carbon portfolio standard

LDPE

low‐density polyethylene

LDV

light‐duty vehicle

LED

light‐emitting diode

LEED

Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (Green Building Rating SystemTM)

LF

landfill

LFG

landfill gas

LFGcost

landfill gas cost model

15-3

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

LiDAR

light detection and ranging technology

LIPA

Long Island Power Authority

LSE

load‐serving entities

metric ton

1,000 kilograms or 22,051 pounds

mi

mile

MM

million

MMBtu

million British thermal units

MMt

million metric tons

MMtC

million metric tons of Carbon

MMtCO2

million metric tons of carbon dioxide

MMtCO2e

million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent

MSW

municipal solid waste

MTA

Metropolitan Transportation Authority

MW

megawatt (one thousand kilowatts)

MWh

megawatt‐hour (one thousand kilowatt‐hours)

N

nitrogen

N/A

not applicable

N2O

nitrous oxide

NAS

National Academy of Sciences

NASA

U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NGCC

natural gas combined cycle

NGCT

natural gas combustion turbine

NIETCs

national interest electric transmission corridors

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

NPCC

New York City Panel on Climate Change

NPV

net present value

NRC

[US] Nuclear Regulatory Commission

NREL

National Renewable Energy Laboratory (US DOE)

NY‐BEST

New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology Consortium

NYC

New York City

NYCDOT

New York City Department of Transportation

NYISO

New York Independent [Transmission] System Operator

NYOGLECC

New York Oceans and Great Lakes Ecosystem Conservation Council

NYPA

New York Power Authority

NYS

New York State

NYSDEC

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

15-4

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

NYSDPS

New York State Department of Public Service

NYSERDA

New York State Energy Research and Development Authority

NYSTAR

New York State Foundation for Science, Technology and Innovation

NYTO

New York Transmission Owners

O&M

operation and maintenance

OC

Organic Carbon

ODS

ozone‐depleting substance

PACE

Property Assessed Clean Energy

PANYNJ

Port Authority of New York and New Jersey

PAYD

Pay‐As‐You‐Drive

PCAST

President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology

PET

polyethylene terephthalate

PFC

perfluorocarbon

PHEV

plug‐in hybrid electric vehicle

PMEFC

proton‐membrane exchange fuel cell

PRISM

Partnerships for Regional Invasive Species Management

PSC

[New York] Public Service Commission

PSD

Power Supply and Delivery

PV

photovoltaic

R&D

research and development

RCI

Residential, Commercial/Institutional, and Industrial

RD&D

research, development, and demonstration

RDD&D

research, development, demonstration, and deployment

RGGI

Northeast Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative

RIT

Rochester Institute of Technology

RPS

Renewable Portfolio Standard

RTO

regional transmission organization

RTO

regional transmission organization

SBC

System Benefit Charge

SECCC

State Energy Conservation Construction Code

SEQRA

State Environmental Quality Review Act

SF6

sulfur hexafluoride

SLRTF

Sea Level Rise Task Force

SMES

superconducting magnetic energy storage

SMIA

Significant Maritime and Industrial Areas

SO2

sulfur dioxide

SO4

sulfate

15-5

New York State Climate Action Council
Interim Report 11-9-10

STEM

science, technology, engineering and math

SUNY

State University of New York

SWAP

State Wildlife Action Plan

t

Metric ton

T&D

Transmission and Distribution

tC

metric tons of carbon

TCI

Transportation and Climate Initiative

tCO2e

metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent

tCO2e/MWh

metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per megawatt‐hour

TDM

Travel Demand Management

TLU

Transportation and Land Use

TOD

Transit‐Oriented Development

TRB

Transportation Research Board

TSD

transit‐supportive development

TSM

transportation system management

TWG

Technical Work Group

UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

USDA

United States Department of Agriculture

USFS

United States Forest Service (USDA)

USGCRP

US Global Change Research Program

V2G

vehicle‐to‐grid

VMT

vehicle miles traveled

WRP

Waterfront Revitalization Programs

WW

wastewater

yr

year

ZNE

zero‐net energy

15-6

