Wisconsin’s Strategy for
Reducing Global Warming

Governor’s Task Force on Global Warming
Final Report to Governor Jim Doyle

July 2008

Task Force on Global Warming
Department of Natural Resources
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

________________________________________________________________________________
July 24, 2008
Governor Jim Doyle
115 East State Capitol
Madison, WI 53702
Dear Governor Doyle:
As Co-Chairs of the Governor’s Task Force on Global Warming, we are very pleased to
present you with the Task Force’s Final Report (the Report). This Report was approved today by the
diverse Task Force that you convened pursuant to Executive Order 191 (the Order). The Report
represents the recommendations of an overwhelming majority of the Task Force.
The Report addresses each of the assignments set forth in Executive Order 191 in ways that
will make Wisconsin a leader in addressing the significant challenges presented by climate change,
substantially reduce Wisconsin’s dependence on fossil fuel and advance the state’s energy
independence objectives. The Report recommends aggressive short and long-term goals for
reductions of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that are consistent with Wisconsin’s proportionate
share of the reductions needed worldwide to minimize the impacts of global warming. The goals are
(i) a reduction to 2005 emissions levels no later than 2014, (ii) a reduction of 22% below 2005 GHG
emissions levels by 2022, and (iii) a reduction of 75% from 2005 GHG emissions levels by 2050.
The Report makes over 50 viable and actionable policy recommendations in the utility,
transportation, agriculture and forestry and industry sectors, as well as a number of
recommendations in other areas, including a proposed federal or regional GHG Cap and Trade
Program. In accordance with the Order, many of the Task Force’s recommendations identify ways
to grow the state’s economy and create new jobs arising from the opportunities created by
addressing climate change. Careful attention also has been paid to mitigating the potential costs of
the recommended policies on consumers and Wisconsin’s industrial base.
In February of this year, the Task Force issued an Interim Report that included a number of
early action recommendations. Those recommendations are incorporated into this Final Report.
Early and prompt action to mitigate the impacts of climate change is essential for a number of
reasons. They include the fact that greenhouse gases emitted today will affect climate many years
into the future and the fact that early action will provide the time necessary for the development and
commercial implementation of the new, clean technologies and new low-carbon fuel sources
essential for the long term. Aggressive energy conservation and efficiency is the lowest-cost, most
_______________________________________________________________________________________
DNR
PSC
101 S. Webster Street
610 N. Whitney Way
P.O. Box 7921
P.O. Box 7854
Madison, WI 53707-7921
Madison, WI 53707-7854

effective early action strategy available. It will not only reduce emissions, but also reduce utility
bills for customers and defer the need for expensive, new power plants.
As Co-Chairs of the Task Force, we are very grateful for the confidence you have placed in
us to shepherd this important effort. Addressing the issue of climate change is one of the most
significant challenges that confronts Wisconsin, the nation and the world. Your strong leadership in
establishing the Task Force, and in moving to implement the Task Force’s recommendations, as has
already occurred with many of the Interim Report recommendations, is very greatly appreciated.
We pledge our support to help in whatever ways we can to enable Wisconsin to achieve the goals
recommended and implement the policies set forth in this Report through legislation, regulation and
voluntary action.
Finally, we wish to recognize the tremendous amount of work that has gone into this Report
by members of the Task Force, staffs of their organizations and others who served on the many
Task Force work groups, as well as the excellent state agency staff support, particularly from the
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin and the Department of Natural Resources, that has been
essential to the success of this effort. We are very pleased to report that throughout the process
there has been active public participation in our work through attendance at meetings and the
provision of numerous written and oral comments. The Report is the product of the work of a great
many individuals. We are particularly pleased to forward it to you with the overwhelming support
of Task Force members.
Sincerely,

Tia Nelson, Co-Chair


Roy Thilly, Co-Chair

FINAL REPORT
BY THE GOVERNOR’S TASK FORCE
ON GLOBAL WARMING

July 2008

Mission of the Task Force
The Global Warming Task Force was created by Governor Jim Doyle, pursuant to
Executive Order 191 on April 5, 2007. The assignments of the Task Force are to:
-- Present viable, actionable policy recommendations to the Governor to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Wisconsin and make Wisconsin a leader in
implementation of global warming solutions.
-- Advise the Governor on the ongoing opportunities to address global warming
locally, while growing our state’s economy, creating new jobs, and utilizing an
appropriate mix of fuels and technologies in Wisconsin’s energy and transportation
portfolios.
-- Identify specific short- and long-term goals for reductions in GHG emissions in
Wisconsin that are, at a minimum, consistent with Wisconsin’s proportionate share
of reductions that are needed to occur worldwide to minimize the impacts of global
warming.
This Final Report of the Task Force fulfills these duties.

i

Table of Contents

Executive Summary.........................................................................................................................1
Task Force Membership and Process.............................................................................................. 7
Principles and Premises Guiding the Task Force Recommendations............................................... 8
Dissents......................................................................................................................................... 10
Wisconsin GHG Inventory.............................................................................................................. 11
The Reference Case....................................................................................................................... 14
Modeling....................................................................................................................................... 17
Emission Reductions Goals............................................................................................................ 19
Summaries of Recommended Policies to Achieve Goals............................................................... 21

Additional Policies for Consideration............................................................................................38
APPENDIX A- List of Policy Recommendations.............................................................................. 39
APPENDIX B- Task Force Members and their Affiliations.............................................................. 43
APPENDIX C- Task Force Work Group Co-Chairs &
Formally-Appointed Group Members........................................................................................... 45
APPENDIX D- Summary Report of the Technical Advisory Group.................................................. 51
APPENDIX E- Task Force Recommended Policies........................................................................... 59
ii

Executive Summary

In February 2008, the Task Force issued an
Interim Report to the Governor describing its
work to date and making eleven important early
action recommendations. The Interim Report
was approved unanimously by the Task Force. As
a result of these recommendations, the Public
Service Commission of Wisconsin (PSC) and the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) have
initiated five proceedings to begin to implement
recommendations in the Interim Report.

recommendations, they have recognized the
importance of achieving broad consensus on
policies to address the serious issues raised by
climate change, effectively and promptly. The
three dissenting members of the Task Force
are unable to accept certain elements of the
compromise.

Goals
The Task Force recommends the following shortterm and long-term goals for reductions of GHG
emissions to achieve Wisconsin’s proportionate
share of reductions needed worldwide to
minimize the impacts of global warming:

This Final Report incorporates the
recommendations in the Interim Report. This
Final Report has been approved by the 29member Task Force with three dissenting
votes, as discussed later in this Report. Thus, it
represents the recommendations of the very
substantial majority of Task Force members.

•
•
•

A return to 2005 levels no later than 2014
A 22% reduction from 2005 levels by 2022
A 75% reduction from 2005 levels by 2050

The Task Force believes that these goals are
challenging, but achievable, provided that
there is the political will to act promptly on
recommended policies and individuals and
businesses, recognizing the gravity of the
challenge faced, take responsibility for voluntarily
reducing their GHG emissions.

Like the Interim Report, many of the policies in
the Final Report were developed by work groups
on a consensus basis, with no objections from
any Task Force members. However, there were
several important policies as to which divergent
views existed. These policies, among others,
included changes to the state’s renewable
portfolio standard for electric utilities, early
action requirements for utilities, modifications
to the state’s moratorium on the construction of
new nuclear power plants, a proposed cap and
trade system to regulate GHG emissions as well
as vehicle GHG emission standards. In order to
resolve differences on these issues, the Co-Chairs
of the Task Force developed a comprehensive
compromise proposal (the Strawman Proposal).
The Strawman Proposal was commented upon
and discussed by the Task Force, modified by
the Co-Chairs and voted on to complete the
Task Force’s work. Those members of the Task
Force voting in favor of the Strawman Proposal
are the same members who have approved
this Final Report. In doing so, despite concerns
by some related to one or more individual

Recommended Policies to Reduce GHG
Emissions and Make Wisconsin a
National Leader
The many policies recommended by the Task
Force are listed in Appendix A and set forth in
detail in Appendix E, including the policies in
the Interim Report. This report also contains a
brief summary of each policy, indicating whether
the policy is voluntary or requires regulatory or
legislative action. Key elements of the Task Force’s
recommendations are highlighted below.

1

Overarching Policies
Improved Data Collection and Ongoing GHG
Reduction Strategy, Evaluation, Development and
Oversight
As a result of the Task Force’s work, a number
of lessons have been learned related to the
data needed to accurately determine the state’s
GHG emissions by sector, measure progress
and model the probable impacts of actions to
reduce emissions. Appendix D to this Report is a
Summary Report from the Task Force’s Technical
Advisory Group (TAG) on its work. A more
detailed report will be posted on the Task Force’s
web site. These lessons need to be retained and
used to inform future work on climate change in
the state, the region and nationally.

behavior and choices will need to be made. It
advocates a broad-based marketing campaign
to educate the public and inspire behavioral
change. The policy notes that many individuals,
communities and businesses have a strong desire
to understand their GHG footprints and the
actions they can take to reduce those footprints.
The Initiative would provide expertise, training
and funding to enable effective action to be
taken. This policy also proposes that the Initiative
focus on job training and development, and
assistance to businesses, to take advantage of
opportunities provided by the need to transition
to a carbon-constrained economy.
Research and Development
The Task Force recommends substantial increases
in federal and state research and development
(R&D) for GHG reduction technologies and
climate change adaptation. In particular, this
recommendation addresses making Wisconsin
a leader in renewable resource R&D, as well as
focusing on carbon capture and sequestration
for new electric generation and other low or zero
carbon emitting resources.

As a result of the TAG’s work and the Strawman
Proposal, the Task Force’s recommendations
include steps the state should take to improve
GHG emissions and terrestrial sequestration data
and analyses in the future. To succeed, the state
will need to continuously evaluate additional
ways to reduce emissions. The recommendation
proposes that a single agency be designated to
take the lead in (i) continuing the work begun by
the Task Force, evaluating the effectiveness, costs
and benefits of existing policies and of proposed
new policies in order to meet the state’s goals,
(ii) overseeing improved data collection and (iii)
reporting on a regular basis to policymakers
and the public in a clear, understandable and
highly credible fashion on the state’s progress
in meeting goals. In addition, the net emission
reduction goals proposed in this Report should be
re-evaluated regularly based on current science,
progress and technology.

Utility-Related Policies, Including Residential
and Commercial Emissions
The utility sector, including emissions in the
residential and commercial sectors (primarily
driven by heating and other uses of natural
gas, oil and propane), is the largest contributor
to GHG emissions in Wisconsin. The policies
recommended for this sector will result in a
substantial reduction over time in the state’s
dependence on fossil fuels and, in particular,
on coal-fired generation that does not include
carbon capture and sequestration technology.

Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long-Term Greenhouse
Gas Emissions Reductions
An important recommendation entitled
“Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long-Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions
in Wisconsin,” first made in the Interim Report,
recognizes that for the state to be successful,
substantial changes in consumer and business

The Task Force’s proposed utility-related
policies fall into two areas. The first set is
recommendations to substantially increase
energy conservation and efficiency (C&E)
to minimize waste and help achieve energy
independence. C&E is the most effective,
least-costly early action that can be taken to

2

reduce GHG emissions. These policies propose
aggressive, new C&E targets and funding, stateof-the-art building codes, state leadership and
many other policies to save energy.

transportation, including development of the
infrastructure necessary for use of biofuels and
growth of biofuel feedstocks, with a particular
focus on non-food sources.

The second set of utility policies addresses the
need for research, development and deployment
of much cleaner electric generation technologies
in the future to meet the state’s electric
needs on a highly reliable basis. They include
recommendations to (i) substantially enhance
and accelerate deployment of renewable
resources, (ii) increase R&D related to renewable
resources and clean coal technologies, and (iii)
modify Wisconsin’s existing moratorium on new
nuclear power plants, once the Task Force’s C&E
and renewable policies are in place, so that this
option may be considered, among others, in the
effort to meet the state’s emissions reduction
goals over the long term, subject to a Public
Service Commission determination that such a
plant is safe, economic and in the public interest.
In addition, a number of enabling policies
are included, such as (i) a PSC proceeding to
examine current utility GHG reduction plans,
review alternatives and promote voluntary
action, (ii) transmission expansion to access
renewable and other resources, (iii) wind siting
reform, (iv) studies of the feasibility of Great
Lakes wind development and carbon capture
and sequestration, and (v) development of
Wisconsin’s biomass and biofuels potential.

The third set is directed at mass transit funding
and community development to reduce vehicle
miles driven, including options such as local mass
transit, intercity rail, walking and biking. These
policies seek to diversify mobility options for
individuals and businesses, thereby reducing fuel
use, emissions, and transportation costs.
Agriculture/Forestry
These sectors are unique in that they not only
produce GHG emissions, but also provide
terrestrial sinks to absorb and sequester carbon
dioxide (CO2), thus reducing Wisconsin’s
net GHG emissions. The policies proposed
advocate a number of voluntary programs,
with incentives, designed to decrease sector
emissions, particularly of methane, and to
increase the state’s terrestrial sequestration
capacity. Since the policies proposed are
voluntary and rely on financial incentives, the
Task Force also recommends that the state review
success in these sectors in 2012 and, if voluntary
measures are not producing needed results,
mandatory measures with appropriate funding be
considered.
Industy

Transportation

As in the Agriculture and Forestry sectors, the
policies recommended by the Task Force consist
of a series of voluntary programs, supported
by incentives, to reduce direct emissions from
industrial activities. In contrast to other sectors,
GHG emissions in the industrial sector have
been declining. Given this fact, cost competitive
concerns and recognition that industry will
experience an increase in energy prices as a
result of Task Force recommendations, voluntary
policies were viewed as appropriate. However,
as with Agriculture and Forestry sectors, the
Task Force recommends that in 2012 the state

The transportation sector is the second highest
contributor to Wisconsin’s GHG emissions.
The policies in this area are directed at three
strategies to reduce sector emissions. The first
focuses on reducing GHG emissions through
vehicle technologies. These policies address
vehicle emission standards, as well as truck idling,
promotion of plug-in and hybrid electric vehicles
and other matters.
The second set of policies focuses on reducing
the carbon content of the fuel used for

3

review the success of voluntary programs and, if
additional progress in reducing emissions is not
being made, consider mandatory measures, with
appropriate funding, to the extent that industrial
sources are not included in a Cap and Trade
Program by that time.

The technical analysis (modeling) done for the
Task Force indicates that, absent a Cap and Trade
Program, adoption of policies analyzed by the
Task Force would enable the state to achieve
only approximately half of its 2022 emissions
reduction goal. This indicates that the state will
not be able to reach that goal without a CO2
regulatory program to cap GHG emissions.

result could be that emitters pay the tax, continue
to emit and reductions are not achieved. Under a
Cap and Trade Program, a firm limit on emissions
is set (the cap) that declines over time, and
allowances are issued for sources to emit up to
the cap. The details of a Cap and Trade Program
are controversial and complex. Such a program
provides significantly more emissions reduction
certainty than a tax, but greater cost uncertainty.
This uncertainty was made clear by the great
difficulty experienced by the Task Force’s
consultants in modeling a regional Cap and
Trade Program and predicting allowance prices.
Modeling difficulties arose because of the many
assumptions that had to be made as to the design
of the program and what might occur in nearby
states as a result of emissions leakage.

The options are a carbon tax or a Cap and Trade
Program. While many economists support a
carbon tax, that alternative was not viewed as
politically viable and is opposed by a number
of members of the Task Force because it would
not provide emission reductions certainty. The

This Report expresses a strong preference in
favor of a broad-based, multi-sector, federal Cap
and Trade Program that is fair to Wisconsin as a
state highly dependent on fossil fuels today, with
an energy-intensive industrial base. Wisconsin
should actively participate in the design of

Carbon Tax/Cap and Trade Program

4

any federal program, seeking to maintain the
environmental integrity of the program, while
protecting the state’s economy and mitigating
costs for its consumers. The cap and trade
recommendation made in this Report addresses
these issues.

recommendation recognizes that members may
take different positions in federal and regional
forums on this matter based on a variety of
factors. The Task Force’s recommendation is
made to recognize and emphasize the importance
of cost mitigation and certainty of initial
allowance costs for Wisconsin regulated utilities
and industries, to stimulate debate on ways to
achieve the environmental certainty of a cap and
trade regime, and to provide funding for other
programs needed to meet emissions reduction
goals with greater certainty of initial allowance
prices. Policies are also proposed on use of
offsets and other cost containment measures in a
Cap and Trade Program as well as on participation
in voluntary GHG reduction programs.

At the same time, the Task Force recommends
that Wisconsin continue to actively participate
and provide leadership in the effort to develop
a regional Cap and Trade Program under
the umbrella of the Midwestern Governors
Association (MGA). The Task Force cannot predict
whether a federal or regional program will be
developed first. When a regional agreement
and a model rule are adopted through the MGA
process, the state should move promptly to
review, consider and take such action as it deems
appropriate on that agreement and rule.

Other Areas
Low-Income Cost Mitigation
A group was appointed to recommend ways to
mitigate potential adverse impacts for lowerincome individuals and families (in urban and
rural areas), associated with implementation
of Task Force policies. Mitigation measures
identified by this group have been incorporated
into a variety of the policies recommended. The
report to the Task Force of the low-income group
can be found on the Task Force’s web site http://
www.dnr.wi.gov/environmentprotect/gtfgw/. The
recommendations of this group were proposed
on a consensus basis.

Regardless of whether a Cap and Trade Program is
instituted at the federal or regional level, the Task
Force recommendations propose a number of
elements for such a program in order to mitigate
costs and protect the interests of the state,
while achieving the emission reductions goals.
The Task Force recommends a unique design for
the Cap and Trade Program during a transition
period to mitigate what may be substantial initial
costs for regulated utilities and their customers
and large industry as a result of uncertain GHG
emission allowance prices, particularly while
low-carbon technologies are under development.
The recommendation supports distribution of
a substantial majority of allowances during the
transition at a fixed per ton fee, rather than at
no cost, to industry and utilities to keep the
initial price of allowances affordable while
simultaneously providing substantial funding,
when combined with revenues from the
auctioning of remaining allowances, for a variety
of other GHG reduction programs, as well as
climate change adaptation strategies.

Co-generation
Because of the importance of the development
of highly efficient, combined heat and power
plants to provide steam to communities and/
or industries, as well as producing electricity, a
group was appointed to analyze technical and
other barriers to increasing such generation
within the state. The policy recommendations of
this group were developed on a consensus basis.
Water Conservation
Recognizing the connection between water and
energy conservation, a group was appointed
to propose policies to substantially increase

It should be noted that Task Force members
hold strong and divergent views on the auction
versus free allocation issue for allowances. The

5

water conservation in a variety of ways. The
recommendations of this group were proposed
on a consensus basis.
Waste Materials Recovery and Disposal
Another group was formed to recommend
policies to address waste recovery and disposal
issues. It identified significant GHG reduction
opportunities associated with recycling and other
alternatives to traditional waste disposal.

Development of Jobs and Business
Opportunities to Enhance Wisconsin’s
Economy
In developing its recommendations, each
Task Force work group was asked to identify
the business and job creation opportunities
presented by its proposed policies. The
recommendations in this Report deal with this
important objective in a variety of ways. For
instance, jobs and business opportunities will
be created through substantially increased
conservation and efficiency programs, including
housing retrofits and rehabilitation in lowerincome areas. Opportunities also will be
created through increased reliance on clean
and renewable energy resources, including (i)
development of the state’s biofuel and biomass
potential, (ii) manufacturing, construction
and maintenance needs related to new, clean
generation and (iii) R&D programs. To meet these
needs, job training and business development
programs will be required, as recommended by
the Task Force.

6

Task Force Membership and Process
The Task Force consists of a diverse membership
representing a cross-section of Wisconsin’s economy and its communities appointed pursuant to
Executive Order 191. A list of Task Force members
and their affiliations is set forth in Appendix B,
together with the individuals from state agencies
that support the Task Force.

Larsen of the World Resource Institute (WRI).
WRI has broad experience working with other
states, major corporations, other entities in the
United States, as well as internationally on climate change issues, analyses and strategies. ICF
Consulting was retained to prepare a Reference
Case to project Wisconsin emissions without the
policies recommended by the Task Force and
to model groups of proposed policies to obtain
indications of achievable emission reductions and
cost impacts.

In addition to Task Force members, a large number of additional individuals contributed substantially to the work of the Task Force. To develop its
policy recommendations, the Task Force created
six work groups to develop policy recommendations for the Task Force in the following areas:
•
Energy Conservation and Efficiency
•
Electric Generation and Supply
•
Transportation
•
Industry
•
Agriculture/Forestry
•
Carbon Tax and Cap and Trade
In addition, the following ad hoc work groups
were appointed during the Task Force process to
develop additional policies:
•
Sustainable communities and behavioral
change marketing
•
Low-income concerns
•
Co-generation
•
Waste materials recovery and disposal
•
Water conservation
The Task Force also created a Technical Advisory
Group (TAG) to work with staff from the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the Public
Service Commission of Wisconsin (PSC) and other
state agencies, as well as the consultants retained
by the Task Force to assist it. The TAG worked
tirelessly to be sure the data used for Task Force
purposes was reasonable and as Wisconsin-specific as possible. The modeling done for the Task
Force was carefully reviewed by the TAG so that
only reasonable results would be used by the Task
Force for the purpose of making policy recommendations.

Winrock International was engaged to evaluate
GHG emissions sources and sinks in the Forestry/
Agriculture sectors, a very important potential for
Wisconsin, given its substantial agricultural and
forest industries. Winrock is a leading authority
on methods for evaluating and quantifying GHG
benefits resulting from improvements in land
management practices.
Attached as Appendix C is a list of the Task Force
work group co-chairs and the formally- appointed
members of each work group, and the agency
staff that supported each work group. All meetings of the Task Force and the work groups were
open to the public. Work group meetings were
attended by a number of additional individuals
from the public and on behalf of interested Task
Force members.
Two public input sessions were held at four locations around the state to receive comments and
suggestions from the public. Many members of
the public commented on the Task Force’s work at
these sessions and throughout the process using
the Task Force’s web site http://www.dnr.wi.gov/
environmentprotect/gtfgw/. This web site contains a great deal of information concerning the
Task Force’s work, including its agendas, meetings notes, work group agendas, proposed policy
drafts, public comments and many documents
and studies provided to the Task Force members
during this process. The Task Force process has
been open, transparent and inclusive throughout.

The consultants employed on behalf of the Task
Force included Jonathan Pershing and John
7

Principles & Premises Guiding the Recommendations
This section provides context for the policies and
goals recommended by the Task Force in this
Report.

statewide campaign be launched as soon as
possible to raise public awareness of the need for
action, foster significant behavioral change and
provide individuals, farmers and businesses with
the expertise and tools necessary to reduce their
GHG footprints.

The charge of the Task Force in Executive Order
191 is to recommend policies that will enable
Wisconsin to do its part in reducing GHG
emissions to meet goals that are commensurate
with Wisconsin’s responsibility. The Task Force
was not asked by the Governor to debate the
science of climate change. Executive Order 191
accepts the substantial scientific consensus that
exists that climate change is occurring and human
activity, particularly the burning of fossil fuels, is a
major contributor to such change. The Task Force
also was not asked to evaluate whether the costs
of addressing climate change will be greater or
less than the benefits achieved. Many members
of the Task Force believe that the costs of not
addressing climate change substantially outweigh
the costs of reducing GHG emissions. Several
members of the Task Force disagree or would
proceed on a slower track. Under Executive Order
191, the Task Force is not charged with resolving
this debate. The issue before the Task Force is
how to reduce Wisconsin’s GHG emissions to
meet challenging goals in ways that best mitigate
costs, protect and enhance Wisconsin’s economy
and result in all sectors doing their share to
achieve the objectives of the Executive Order.

In order to be sure that its recommendations
are viable and actionable, the Task Force has
placed strong emphasis on cost mitigation.
Given current pressures on consumers,
utilities and industries because of significant
increases in fuel, commodity, construction and
other environmental compliance costs, and
the economic downturn that the country is
experiencing, the state needs to pay particular
attention to measures that will lessen the burden
of addressing climate change on consumers,
and on energy-intensive industries like paper
production that operate in highly competitive,
global environments, while providing essential
jobs and other benefits to their communities.
Substantially increased, cost-effective energy
conservation and efficiency (C&E), including
state-of-the-art energy efficiency building
codes and appliance efficiency standards are
proposed because these measures are the leastcost and most effective early action strategies
available in the utility sector and provide the
foundation for the success of many other Task
Force recommendations. Evidence indicates
that substantial gains in C&E remain to be
achieved and can be captured. C&E programs
can be ramped up quickly, with proven, available
technologies. They will not only reduce emissions,
but also reduce utility bills for customers in
a rising rate environment, defer the need for
expensive, new power plants and transmission
lines and create new “green collar” jobs.

This Report is a first step only. It will not solve
the climate change problem. The issues the
Task Force has addressed will be revisited and
new policies proposed on an almost continuous
basis. The Task Force’s objective is to propose a
series of meaningful policies that can promptly
begin the process of achieving GHG emission
reductions. This means developing policies that
have the broad support necessary for adoption
and implementation.

Similarly, the Task Force’s recommendations
recognize that development of a diverse portfolio
of renewable energy resources, including
distributed generation, provides the most
environmentally benign supply-side (generation)

In order for Wisconsin to be successful, it
will be essential that (i) the Task Force’s
recommendations be acted upon promptly and
required funding pursued, and (ii) the proposed,

8

option for the state and accordingly should be a
high priority.

reductions over the long term, reduce energy
costs for consumers and businesses, and provide
other environmental benefits. Some members
of the Task Force strongly believe that the goals
recommended in this Final Report will not be met
without more aggressive, mandatory early action
policies not recommended by this Report. Other
members disagree.

At the same time, the Task Force recognizes
it cannot predict with certainty the degree
of success that will be achieved by new C&E
measures and the deployment of additional
renewable resources, or the future growth in
electric demand that may result from changes
in the economy and other factors, such as
widespread deployment of plug-in hybrid vehicles
and electric vehicles. This is particularly true as
older, less efficient fossil fuel plants are retired.
For these reasons, recognizing that aggressive
C&E and increased reliance on renewable
resources should be the state’s top priorities,
other recommendations are aimed at providing
utilities with low-carbon, future baseload
generation options, with fuel diversity, to meet
the utilities’ ongoing legal obligation to maintain
an adequate and reliable electric system essential
for health and safety as well as Wisconsin’s
economy.
For the long-term, substantial R&D of lowcarbon technologies will be essential. The Task
Force’s recommendations do not try to pick
future technology winners, which would be
difficult and risky. Instead, increased R&D, at the
federal and state levels, are recommended for
renewable technologies, clean coal technologies
such as capture and sequestration of CO2,
and other strategies to reduce GHG emissions,
including demand-side measures. Funding for
R&D related to climate change adaptation also is
recommended.
The Task Force’s recommendations emphasize the
importance of early action to reduce emissions
for a number of reasons, as reflected in the
Interim Report. Early reductions are crucial to
the successful mitigation of climate change
and to meeting the emissions reduction goals
recommended by the Task Force, particularly
the 2014 stabilization goal. Early action should
provide flexibility for, and lower the costs and
burdens of, achieving additional emissions

9

Dissents

While unanimity was achieved in the Interim Report, three members of the Task Force dissented
as to the Final Report, either through the vote of
the Task Force member or his or her alternate.

The representative for Ariens, a lawn equipment
manufacturer, also dissented based on cost impacts, focusing on the Cap and Trade Program and
enhanced renewable portfolio standard recommendations.

The Task Force was informed by the General Motors representative that his dissent was based on
the Task Force recommendation that Wisconsin
adopt California’s vehicle emission standards
to reduce GHG emissions to a greater degree
than the current federal Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards. Opposition to the
California standards is a national policy of General Motors. Representatives of General Motors
were very active and productive participants on
the Task Force and co-chaired the Transportation
Work Group. GM indicated support for the remainder of the Task Force’s recommendations.
The representative of NewPage Corporation, one
of the state’s largest paper companies, also dissented. He explained that his company, and the
Wisconsin paper industry, is generally opposed to
a cap and trade system of regulation and was concerned with certain details in the Task Force’s cap
and trade recommendations. He explained that
the Wisconsin paper industry is experiencing a
substantial contraction and is in a fragile economic condition. For this reason, he could not support
policies that would directly, or indirectly through
higher energy prices, increase costs for the industry. Unfortunately, the Task Force was unable to
determine a means to meet the requirements of
Order 191 without some increase in energy prices
and other costs. As acknowledged by the representative of NewPage and others in the industrial
sector, the Task Force has made a concerted
effort in its recommendations to mitigate costs
for energy-intensive industry, but these efforts
proved insufficient to garner NewPage’s support.
NewPage representatives participated actively
and constructively on the Task Force and its work
groups.

10

Wisconsin GHG Inventory

Wisconsin GHG Emissions by Sector, 1990 and 2003

Source: WI DNR Inventory as compiled by WRI, 2007
Source: WI DNR Inventory as compiled by WRI, 2007

The Wisconsin GHG Inventory (the Inventory) is
the responsibility of the DNR under Executive
Order 191. It has been prepared by WRI under
the direction of the DNR and is being reported
directly to the Governor by the DNR at this time.
A copy of the Inventory is posted on the Task
Force’s web site.

equivalent (MtCO2e) in 1990 to 123.1 MtCO2e in
2003. Wisconsin’s emissions grew slightly faster
than national emissions over the same period (1.1
percent). Emissions increased in nearly all sectors led by electric power generation (2 percent
per year), the commercial sector (1.8 percent per
year), and transportation (1.3 percent per year).
In contrast, industrial emissions peaked in 2000
and have declined substantially in recent years2.
The relative contributions of each sector’s GHG
emissions in 1990 and 2003 are summarized
above by sector.

In accordance with Executive Order 191, the
Inventory contains a comprehensive assessment
of GHG emissions across the entire economy of
Wisconsin from 1990 through 20031. This time
frame reflects the broadest availability of complete and comparable data for the state. Total
state emissions during this period increased at
an annual average rate of 1.2 percent from 105.9
million metric tons of CO2

In 2003, Wisconsin’s 123 million metric tons of
GHGs made the state the 21st largest emitter
slightly behind Oklahoma and ahead of Minnesota (Table 1). Wisconsin generated just less
than 2 percent of total U.S. emissions in 2003,

1. For a more detailed assessment of GHG emissions in Wisconsin please see the full Inventory Report available at: http://
dnr.wi.gov/environmentprotect/gtfgw/documents.html
2. For additional in-depth analysis of Wisconsin GHG emissions with comparisons to other states in the Midwest region
see the WRI report Charting the Midwest available free at:
http://www.wri.org/publication/charting-the-midwest.html

11

relatively less than most other
Midwest states (shown in bold
in Table 1). Globally, if Wisconsin
were a country, it would rank as
the 42nd largest emitter in the
world, just behind Romania. Per
capita GHG emissions in Wisconsin were approximately equal to
23 metric tons of CO2 per person
in 2003 (23 MtCO2e). This figure
is roughly equal to the national
average.

Table1.StateGHGEmissionsin2003
Rank State
1
Texas
2
California
3
Pennsylvania
4
Ohio
5
Florida
6
Indiana
7
Illinois
8
NewYork
9
Michigan
10 Louisiana

20 Oklahoma
21 Wisconsin
22 Minnesota
23 Iowa
24 Colorado
25 Kansas

To supplement the Inventory,
Winrock International conducted an assessment of net
carbon emissions and removals
in Wisconsin forests for the Task
Force’s consideration3. Using
the most comprehensive data
and methods available Winrock
found that Wisconsin forest cover increased by between 210,000
and 980,000 acres from 1992 to 2001. Winrock
estimated annual average net carbon sequestration
(net removal of CO2 from the atmosphere) of approximately 8.2 million metric tons over the same
time period. The majority of carbon sequestration
took place in Wisconsin’s northern forests while
some areas of Southern Wisconsin were net sources
of CO2 resulting from land use change.


MtCO2e
782.3
452.9
301.0
298.9
271.3
269.3
268.5
243.7
211.7
209.5

%ofUS
11.6%
6.7%
4.5%
4.4%
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
3.6%
3.1%
3.1%

123.9
123.1
120.0
108.2
106.7
100.7

1.8%
1.8%
1.8%
1.6%
1.6%
1.5%

It is important to understand the nature of this
Inventory. It is a top-down survey of emissions by
sector using the U.S. module of WRI’s Climate Analysis Indicators Tool, which is based on federal data
primarily from the U.S. Energy Information Agency
and tools developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)4. For energy sectors (Electric
Generation, Transportation, Industrial, Residential
and Commercial) fossil fuel use data for each sector is multiplied by an appropriate emission factor
to generate GHG emissions estimates. A similar
approach incorporating other relevant activity data
and emission factors is used for remaining sectors.
These estimates yield a broad view of emissions and
trends across the state of Wisconsin similar to previous efforts undertaken by DNR, and the efforts of
other states and the EPA’s national inventory.
The Inventory does not provide detailed facility or
subsector emissions data. This makes it fundamentally different from data sources such as Wisconsin
DNR’s Air Emissions Inventory, the California Climate
Action Registry and the recently established Climate

To determine Wisconsin’s net contribution of GHG
emissions to the atmosphere WRI’s estimates of
GHG emissions were combined with Winrock’s assessment of forest carbon sequestration. Using this
method net GHG emissions from Wisconsin were
approximately 98 million metric tons in 1990 and
115 million metric tons in 2003.
3. http://dnr.wi.gov/environmentprotect/gtfgw/documents.
html.
4. For free access to GHG data for all 50 states as well as international data and background resources contained in the Climate Analysis Indicators Tool please visit: http://cait.wri.org/

12

Registry. These databases provide facility-level
emissions data based on reporting (whether voluntary or mandatory) by individual entities. The
Inventory developed by WRI for DNR is useful for
informing climate strategy and planning exercises
such as those being undertaken by the Task Force
as well as for tracking overall state GHG emissions performance. In fact, in no case has a state
taken action to address climate change without
first constructing an inventory to understand the
general state of emissions and subsequently gathered data of far higher resolution for sectors and
activities targeted by specific policies. However, it
is very important to recognize that the Inventory
is not sufficient, and should not be used, for any
future regulatory purpose.

13

The Reference Case

The Reference Case is a modeled projection of
how Wisconsin’s economy, energy use and GHG
emissions may develop in the future absent any
new GHG reduction policies. It is based on existing sources, current policies and trends, approved
new generation facilities within the state, and the
projected effects of the federal Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (Energy Act). The
Reference Case incorporates a macroeconomic
forecast of the state, supplied by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation using the REMI
(Regional Economics Models, Inc.) model to project the economic growth in various sectors5.

scenario to be used in evaluating and recommending policies to meet the requirements of
Executive Order 191.
It is essential to recognize the limits of the Reference Case. It has been prepared exclusively for
the use of the Task Force to evaluate potential
policies and recommendations in exercising its
informed judgment based upon the modeling
results, qualitative considerations and the expertise of Task Force members and consultants. The
Reference Case provides an underlying structure
against which to model proposed policies in
order to determine directionality and cause and
effect relationships of alternative policies. The
TAG worked very hard to be able to recommend
unanimously that the Reference Case is satisfactory for this purpose. The TAG also made it very
clear that, given imperfections and concerns
related to input data, the sensitivity of the results
to the many assumptions used and the complexity of the model itself, the Reference Case should

The Reference Case was used by the Task Force
to estimate and evaluate the combined impacts
of the policies developed by the workgroups on
GHG emissions, jobs and Wisconsin’s economy,
including energy costs. The Reference Case is
very sensitive to the assumptions used and is not
presented as an accurate prediction of the future.
Instead, it is presented as a reasonable projected

5. For a full assessment of methods, data and assumptions used in the Reference Case please see the TAG
report in Appendix D and the Assumptions Book available on the Task Force Modeling Page at http://www.
dnr.gov/environmentprotect/gtfgw/modeling.html

14

not be used for any purpose other than the Tasks
Force’s evaluation of the relative estimated costs,
benefits and emissions, energy and economic
impacts of potential policies. In particular, the
Reference Case should not be used for any regulatory purpose.
The Reference Case and a detailed accounting of
all underlying data sources and assumptions are
posted on the Task Force web site. The following
paragraphs provide a brief summary of the Reference Case. More detailed information can be
found in the Summary Report of the TAG in Appendix D and in the final report of the TAG’s work
to be posted on the Task Force’s web site.
The Reference Case projects statewide greenhouse gas emissions by sector from 2004 through
2024. Total statewide emissions during the
period are projected to increase at an annual
average rate of just under 1.0 percent, from 131.3
million MtCO2e in 2004 to 156.1 MtCO2e in 20246.
This is lower than the 1.2% annual average rate of
increase between 1990 and 2003 in the Wisconsin GHG Inventory.

•
		

Emissions from passenger transportation
are projected to decline over the period
from 21.6 MtCO2e in 2004 to 20.1 MtCO2e in 2024, due to increased choices for
transportation modes, increased vehicle
efficiency and increased use of bio-fuels
as mandated under the Energy Act.

•

Industrial emissions are projected to grow
at an annual average rate of 0.9 percent
in the pulp and paper and other energy
intensive industry sectors and by 1.8
percent in the other industry sector. The
most rapid growth occurs in the out-years,
which is largely driven by the macroeconomic data supplied by the REMI model.

GHG emissions are projected to increase in all sec
tors, except in the passenger transport sector.
•

Total GHG emissions in the electric power
sector are projected to increase by 1.4
percent per year, from 45.6 MtCO2e in
2004 to 60.6 MtCO2e in 2024. As shown
in the pie charts which follow, the relative
shares of generation output shift, with
natural gas and wind becoming relatively
larger shares and coal and nuclear, relatively smaller.

6. Note that values presented in this report are slightly different than those reported in the Interim Report. This is due
to additional analysis and refinement to the Reference Case
undertaken by the TAG.

15

•

The Reference Case includes an estimated
level of carbon sequestration from forested lands of an average 8.2 MtCO2e
per year, based on work prepared for the
Task Force by Winrock International. This
results in net emissions of 123.1 MtCO2e
in 2004 and 147.9 MtCO2e in 2024

•

The Reference Case does not include
estimates of carbon sequestration from
agricultural and other land types because
there is no historic data on the carbon
impact of these land uses and land use
changes.

16

Modeling

The TAG analyzed several potential policy
recommendations in multiple scenarios to assess
their impact on GHG emissions, energy use,
energy costs and the overall Wisconsin economy.
Two primary policy cases were modeled. One
case included most policies under consideration
by the Task Force while a second identical
scenario assumed higher energy prices. Other
scenarios were modeled to provide input to Task
Force deliberations, but are not reported here
due to considerable overlap with the primary
scenarios. In addition to the modeled policies,
estimates of additional reductions that could
be achieved by policies not characterized in the
model were compiled. For a complete list of
which policies were included in each policy case
please see the TAG report.

the future under a certain set of assumptions.
As such, results are highly sensitive to these
assumptions. The results are indicative of
what could be achieved if all of the policies
were adopted and implemented promptly
in Wisconsin, but they do not guarantee the
predicted outcome. All results reported below
should be viewed with these points in mind.
In Policy Case 1, total statewide emissions
during the period are projected to increase at
an annual average rate of 0.4 percent, from
131.3 million MtCO2e in 2004 to 140.4 MtCO2e
in 2024, excluding carbon sequestration. This
is significantly lower than the 1.0 percent
annual average rate of increase projected in the
Reference Case. When a conservative estimate
of the reductions that could be achieved through
the non-modeled policies is incorporated, net
emissions in 2014 could be as low as 127 MtCO2e
or roughly 2005 levels. The higher energy
price scenario (Policy Case 2) results in greater

The same cautions and caveats apply to the
results of the modeling of policy scenarios as
apply to the Reference Case. The scenarios
represent projections of what may happen in

Policy Case
1
GHG Emissions - Reference
Case
16 0,0 00

Agriculture &
Forest ry

14 0,0 00

Waste &
Wastewat er
Power Sector

12 0,0 00

Mt CO2e

10 0,0 00

Freight
Transport

1990 Emissi ons

Passenger
Transport

8 0,0 00

Other Industry
6 0,0 00

Other Energy
Intensive
Industry
Pulp & Paper

4 0,0 00

Commercial

2 0,0 00

Residential

2 00 5 20 0 6 20 07 2 0 08 2 00 9 2 01 0 20 1 1 20 12 2 0 13 2 01 4 2 01 5 2 01 6 2 01 7 20 18 20 19 2 02 0 2 02 1 20 2 2 20 23 20 24

17

1990
Emissions

emission reductions in early years, but by 2024
emissions are less than 1 MtCO2e lower than
Policy Case 1. In all cases, the model projects that
emissions drop lower than this level in the middle
of the period but begin to increase again around
2020, when the macroeconomic model forecasts
more robust economic growth.

Despite considerable effort, no modeling
cases including a Cap and Trade Program were
completed on a satisfactory basis for use by
the Task Force. This was largely due to the
complexities involved with modeling a regional
cap and trade policy in the timeframe available.
After reviewing preliminary results, the TAG
recommended that the Task Force not rely on
the cap and trade modeling, but instead take
into account the TAG’s observations and lessons
learned. The observations and lessons learned
are discussed in the TAG Summary Report
(Appendix D) and the more detailed final TAG
report to be posted on the Task Force’s web site.

The detailed Assumption Book developed by
the TAG and used for modeling is available on
the Task Force’s web site, as are the Policy Cases
described above. The TAG Summary Report
(Appendix D) discusses the modeling undertaken
for the Task Force. A more detailed final report of
the TAG’s work will be posted on the Task Force’s
web site.

18

Emission Reduction Goals
The emission reduction goals recommended by
the Task Force should apply to net GHG emissions
within the state of Wisconsin. Net GHG emissions
consist of total direct emissions of all six Kyoto
GHGs from all activities that take place within
the geographic boundaries of the state less net
carbon sequestration from Wisconsin’s forests,
prairies, soils and other activities. Consistent
with the Order, emissions that result from the
use within Wisconsin of electricity and other
products produced outside the state are not
included in the goals because of difficulties in
accounting for such emissions accurately and the
fact that such emissions should be covered by
the goals and regulations applicable in the state
where a source is located. 2005 Wisconsin net
emissions levels should serve as the baseline
from which goals and progress towards them
will be compared. In accordance with Executive
Order 191 the goals recommended below are
consistent with Wisconsin’s proportional share
of the global emission reductions necessary to
stabilize atmospheric concentrations of GHGs at
safe levels.

and sinks in Wisconsin. These needs are especially
critical for areas where data are currently sparse
such as net sequestration from soils and forests.
All GHG data should be made available and easily
accessible to the public.
In recommending these goals for Wisconsin, the
Task Force recognizes that its members have
diverse and strongly held views on the both the
adequacy and the achievability of the proposed
goals, and that positions taken by members
related to goals in the federal and MGA debates
will depend on a variety of factors. The goals
recommended by the Task Force are comparable
to those proposed in federal legislation as
well as commitments taken by other states
both in the Midwest and around the country.
The Task Force believes these goals present a
significant challenge for Wisconsin in meeting
the requirements of the Order, and are necessary
to address the seriousness of the problems
presented by climate change. These goals should
be regularly re-evaluated based on current
science, progress and technology. The objective
of members of the Task Force, the public and
the state should be to translate the Task Force’s
recommendations into action promptly to meet
or exceed the goals.

The Task Force recommends that Wisconsin net
GHG emissions should result in:
• A return to 2005 levels not later than 2014,
consistent with the range of information
provided by the TAG related to the higher
energy price scenario.
• A 22% reduction from 2005 levels (roughly
equivalent to 1990 levels) by 2022. This
recommendation allows 10 years after the
assumed implementation of a Cap and Trade
Program, as advocated in this Report.
• A 75% reduction from 2005 levels by 2050
(roughly equivalent to 70% below 1990 levels,
the mid-point of the range set forth in Order
191).
Establishing the 2005 baseline and measuring
progress in achieving emission reduction goals
will require robust, frequent and comprehensive
inventories and assessments of GHG emissions
19

Wisconsin Greenhouse Gas Emissions With and Without Recommendations

Million metric tons of net CO2e emissions

150

125
100

75
50

25
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Emissions without Task Force Recommendations
Task Force Recommendations without Cap and Trade
Task Force Recommendations without Cap and Trade assuming high fuel prices
Task Force Recommended Emissions Reduction Targets
60% below 1990 levels
80% below 1990 levels

Notes: Emissions without Task Force recommendations are net GHG emissions from within Wisconsin. Data sourced
from DNR Inventory, Winrock International and ICF International. Task Force recommendations without cap and trade
include all policies modeled by ICF International plus estimates of reductions achieved from other policies that were not
modeled (up to 5 million metric tons). Emission reduction target recommendations are: 2005 levels by 2014 (126 million
metric tons), 22% below 2005 levels by 2022 (98 million metric tons) and 75% below 2005 levels by 2050 (32 million
metric tons). 60 to 80% below 1990 levels bounds the range of emission reductions articulated in Executive Order 191.

20

Summaries of Recommended Policies
Set forth below are summaries of each of the
policies recommended by the Task Force, including those policies in the Interim Report. The summaries are very brief and do not capture many
important details of the policies recommended.
Each policy template is included in Appendix E.
To understand these policies and the agreements
reached by the Task Force members in making
these recommendations, it is critical that the policies themselves be read and analyzed.

businesses to reduce their GHG emissions
through a variety of strategies, as well as to
assist Wisconsin in growing its economy through
the business opportunities arising out of the
need to address climate change. The proposed
policy advocates efforts funded by both the
public and private sectors (including seeking
major foundation grants) to achieve long-term
reductions of emissions and promote energy
independence through voluntary action. The
Initiative would develop and implement programs
to: (i) encourage and enable individuals to reduce
their GHG emissions contributions, (ii) provide
expert assistance and support for communitywide programs to achieve energy independence
and reduce emissions and costs, (iii) provide
expertise and support to the state’s small and
medium-sized businesses, including farms, in
their voluntary efforts to reduce their carbon
footprints, and (iv) provide workforce training
and business development assistance to take
advantage of the opportunities arising out of the
need to transition to a low carbon economy.

Overarching Policies
Ensuring on-going GHG emission
reduction effectiveness
The Task Force recommends that a formal
mechanism be established to: (i) continuously
gather data and monitor progress toward
reaching the state’s emission reduction goals,
(ii) evaluate the effectiveness, costs and benefits
of existing policies and review and evaluate
potential new policies to reduce or sequester
GHG emissions in order to meet the state’s goals,
and (iii) provide clear, understandable, credible
and easily accessible information to the public
and policy makers about emissions and the state’s
progress in reaching its goals. Responsibility
for these tasks should be assigned to a single
agency that is granted the appropriate authority
to obtain specific data in a timely manner from
other state agencies and has dedicated staff
and adequate funding to support its work on a
permanent basis.

Many businesses, individuals and communities
desire to reduce their GHG emissions footprint
promptly. The proposed Initiative would provide
the support for them to do so and mount a
statewide campaign to motivate broad-based
changes in consumer and business behavior and
choices necessary to make effective many of the
policies the Task Force proposes.
Research and development funding
This policy recommends that Wisconsin advocate
for a dramatic increase in federal R&D spending
related to achieving substantial reductions in GHG
emissions. At the state level, R&D funding for
demand-side, renewable and other low carbon
technologies should be significantly increased to
enable Wisconsin to become a leader in these
areas. In addition, the state should support R&D
of carbon capture and storage technologies in
order to achieve, if feasible, rapid development

Comprehensive initiative to support
voluntary long term greenhouse gas
emissions reductions
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the state implement
the Wisconsin Voluntary Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Initiative under the auspices of the
Office of Energy Independence. The Initiative’s
purpose would be to motivate and enable
individuals, communities, farms and other
21

and deployment on a commercial basis of coal
plants with this technology. Finally, R&D funding
should be provided to enhance Wisconsin’s ability
to adapt to climate change, including funding
for the Wisconsin Initiative on Climate Change
Impacts, a partnership between the UW-Madison
and the Department of Natural Resources. The
PSC should permit reasonable spending on GHG
emission reduction-related R&D by utilities to be
recovered in rates.

Aligning public and private interests
for conservation and energy efficiency
(included in Interim Report)
In order to meet aggressive conservation
and efficiency goals, this policy recommends
that the PSC investigate and adopt innovative
utility ratemaking approaches that promote
conservation and efficiency programs by
removing the disincentives that exist under
current ratemaking policies for utilities to
implement their own programs and support
statewide programs, and provide in their place
positive incentives for utilities to aggressively
pursue conservation and efficiency opportunities.
The objective of these changes is to provide longterm customer benefits and maintain a healthy
economy. On April 3, 2008 the PSC opened
Docket 5-UI-114 to pursue this recommendation.

Conservation
And Energy Efficiency
Enhanced conservation and energy
efficiency program
(included in Interim Report)
This policy proposes a major increase in the
state’s energy efficiency and conservation
programs undertaken pursuant to Act 141. Rather
than focusing on a spending cap, the policy
recommends that the state adopt annual targets
for reducing electric load and natural gas use
through energy efficiency. The targets for 2009
would be to reduce electric load by 0.75% and
natural gas use by 0.5% from what they would
otherwise be without the energy efficiency and
conservation measures. The annual reduction
targets would increase gradually until they reach
2% for electric load and 1% for natural gas use in
2015 and each subsequent year. This policy sets
forth a number of actions to be considered by
the PSC in implementing the proposed increase
in programs under Act 141 in order to mitigate
cost impacts on customers, including energy
intensive industries, and maximize long-term cost
benefits. The Task Force believes that converting
to a savings goal rather than a spending target
is critical and that the recommended rampup in programs will create substantial new job
opportunities in the state. On April 3, 2008 the
PSC opened Docket 5-UI-115 to consider and
pursue this recommendation.

Improved and innovative rate designs
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the PSC investigate
and adopt innovative rate designs that provide
more accurate price signals to customers to
incent reductions of GHG emissions associated
with their energy consumption. On April 3, 2008
the PSC opened Docket 5-UI-116 to pursue this
recommendation.
Demand response and load management
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends a number of programs
by the PSC to encourage and enable customers to
reduce their contributions to utility peak demand
and to respond to price signals in ways that will
help shape utility load for a more efficient electric
system that reduces GHG emissions. On April 3,
2008 the PSC opened Docket 5-UI-116 to pursue
this recommendation.
Residential and commercial building codes
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that Wisconsin pass
legislation to incorporate the latest International

22

Energy Conservation Code (IECC) into Wisconsin’s
residential/multi-family and commercial energy
code within eighteen months of promulgation,
unless affirmative action is taken to customize
code provisions for Wisconsin needs within
that period. The policy is intended to ensure
that Wisconsin remains a national leader in this
area, given the very significant impact increasing
building efficiency will play in reducing long-term
GHG emissions.

State appliance efficiency standards
This policy proposes legislation to create state
appliance/equipment efficiency standards based
on a model bill developed by the Appliance
Standards Awareness Project and the American
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. The
legislation would encompass the following
products not covered by recently adopted federal
standards: new commercial and industrial boilers,
new residential furnaces and furnace fans, and
compact audio equipment. The state should
request a waiver of the existing federal standard
for commercial boilers and residential furnaces in
order to adopt higher standards.

An objective of this effort would be to achieve
net zero energy commercial buildings by 2030
and residential buildings by 2040. Building
energy efficient structures is much less costly
than retrofitting buildings. The policy contains
a second recommendation to establish a nearterm, voluntary, high performance, green building
code, with incentives, to help the state and others
achieve even greater GHG reductions from new
buildings.

Energy efficiency in schools
This policy calls for legislation changing the
school funding mechanisms to create incentives
for schools to implement energy efficiency
programs by enabling local schools to retain the
savings they achieve and by exempting energy
efficiency projects from the school spending
cap. Local school districts should be encouraged
and provided the resources and expertise to: (i)
identify the current GHG emission footprint of
the school district, (ii) establish GHG emission
reduction targets and develop plans to reduce
GHG emissions, (iii) utilize reduction actions as
an educational tool that benefits the students
and the community, and (iv) facilitate information
and resources for educational efforts through the
Department of Public Instruction.

State government as leader
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the state set a
strong example by taking a number of steps
to reduce its GHG emissions through energy
conservation, energy production, building
efficiency, transportation use, and purchasing
policies. The state as a whole, and its agencies
and universities, should track their GHG
emissions, establish specific reduction goals,
implement plans to meet those goals, and
demonstrate leadership across the state.

Non-regulated fuels efficiency and
conservation
Liquid propane gas (LPG) and fuel oil make up
17% of fossil fuel use in Wisconsin’s residential
sector and are also used in large quantities in
the commercial, industrial, and agricultural
sectors, but these fuels are not covered by the
existing Focus on Energy program. This policy
recommends legislation to provide for a fee on
non-regulated fuels to fund Focus on Energy
conservation and energy efficiency programs
for consumers of these fuels for heating,

Energy efficiency and safety through
lighting for rental properties
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the state adopt
legislation that requires rental properties to
install energy efficient lighting in common areas
and all mounted fixtures (other than fixtures
controlled by dimmer switches and fixtures in
appliances). It also would require exit signs to use
light emitting diode bulbs (LEDs).

23

production and other non-transportation uses
and the establishment of an audit and tracking
mechanism to ensure that such funding is used to
the benefit of the consumers of such fuels.

and engineering hurdles are daunting. This
special commission should report back to the
Governor before year-end 2008. On April 3, 2008
the PSC opened Docket 5-EI-145 to pursue this
recommendation.

Study of retrofit codes for mandatory
upgrades of existing single and multi-family
units
This policy calls for a legislative study committee
to consider the need for, and nature of, potential
mandatory, minimum energy efficiency standards
triggered by specific events (e.g. point of sale)
for existing single-family home and multi-family
rental units to complement voluntary energy
efficiency programs for these sectors.

Wind siting reform
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that legislation be
adopted to have the PSC establish uniform
standards for the siting of large and small wind
systems. Uniformity in the standards and process
will ensure equity to developers and local
communities, and enable needed wind projects
to be built safely in Wisconsin to support the
state’s renewable portfolio standard.

Residential energy efficiency retrofit
and rehabilitation
This policy calls for a major state-sponsored
energy efficient housing retrofit and rehabilitation
program for existing housing stock in lower
income areas (urban and rural), funded in large
part by allowance fees and auction revenues from
a Cap and Trade Program.

Great Lakes wind study
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the state, through
the relevant state agencies, convene a study
group to look at the technical and economic
potential for developing wind energy on Lake
Michigan and Lake Superior. The group, where
appropriate, should work with other Great Lakes
states. Wisconsin should examine the significant
potential for renewable energy development that
may lie only a few miles off its shores. This study
should be completed by December 31, 2008. On
April 3, 2008 the PSC opened Docket 5-EI-144 to
pursue this recommendation.

Electric Generation And Supply
Wisconsin geologic carbon
sequestration study
(included in Interim Report)
This policy recommends that the PSC and the
DNR convene a special commission to explore
the potential for geologic carbon sequestration
for CO2 produced by Wisconsin’s electricity
generation fleet. While it appears unlikely that
Wisconsin has suitable geologic repositories
available for CO2 injection, this option should be
explored, as should the more likely possibility
of piping CO2 to underground injection sites
in an adjacent state, or the importation of low
carbon gaseous fuels produced in connection
with geologic carbon sequestration in an
adjacent state. Planning for a future that may
rely upon geologic sequestration cannot get
started too early. The economic, legal, geologic,

PSC Amended Strategic
Energy Assessment (SEA)
This policy recommends that the PSC reopen the
current Strategic Energy Assessment, with all
utilities subject to the SEA required by October
15, 2008 to file comprehensive GHG emissions
inventories using recognized standards. In
conjunction with these filings, each utility would:
(i) identify the actions currently being taken or
planned to be taken during the next three years
that will reduce its GHG emissions, showing
estimated reductions, costs and other relevant
information; and, (ii) identify other actions that

24

are not included in its current actions or plans
that could be undertaken by it during this period
to further reduce its GHG emissions, and identify
the potential emissions reductions available,
the associated costs and any other relevant
information.

of meeting the non-Wisconsin portion of the
standards after 2013. This recommendation is
based on the premise that the concerns of the
First Nations regarding Manitoba’s existing hydro
system and new proposed projects, including
issuance of final licenses, will be resolved before
new projects are built. Finally, to incent the
conversion of existing Wisconsin coal-fired boilers
to biomass prior to implementation of a Cap
and Trade Program, electric providers should be
permitted to purchase renewable energy credits
for conversions by customers or install and own
a replacement boiler, supplying process steam
and heat to the industry on a contract basis and
utilizing the equivalency credits directly.

After review of this information by PSC and
the public, each utility would be asked to set
voluntary, near-term (prior to implementation
of a Cap and Trade Program) GHG emission
reduction goals for its systems and to report
regularly on progress. Future rate filings would
identify any reduction measures included in utility
cost of service and recovery of reasonable and
prudently incurred costs to meet goals consistent
with the PSC’s Assessment should be permitted.

To enable electric providers to meet the new,
more aggressive RPS recommended in this
Proposal in a timely manner and to avoid the
need for compliance deadline extensions, the
revised RPS would: (i) streamline the regulatory
approval and siting process; (ii) encourage
proposals that encompass multiple projects, with
multi-project, integrative plans for acquisition
of sites, equipment and contractors; (iii) allow
for PSC approval of multi-year commitments
for acquisition of necessary equipment in a
timely manner, with appropriate recovery of
development costs; (iv) provide additional
resources for the PSC to process applications; (v)
encourage larger electric providers to partner
on projects with smaller electric providers;
and (vi) remove existing siting and equipment
transportation barriers.

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS)
This proposal would increase the state’s RPS in
current law to 10% by 2013, 20% by 2020 and
25% by 2025. Of the required 20% by 2020 and
25% by 2025, minimums of 6% by 2020 and 10%
by 2025 would have to come from Wisconsinbased renewable resources. To encourage early
action the time limit for banking renewable
generation credits in excess of RPS requirements
would be removed. There would be no limit on
the use of renewable energy credits to meet
the revised standards, but only credits arising
from Wisconsin sources may be used to meet
Wisconsin minimum source requirements.
The definitions of renewable energy and
renewable resources in the existing RPS law
would be expanded to include the thermal
portion of Wisconsin co-generation projects
fired with biomass, as well as biogas produced in
Wisconsin that is put in the natural gas pipeline
system, solar water heating and other verifiable
renewable applications that displace fossil fuel
use. The revised definitions would also remove
the existing 60 MW size restriction on new
hydroelectric facilities, but only for the purposes

All other provisions of the existing RPS law
would continue to apply, including the existing
“off ramp” provisions for compliance deadline
extensions. In the event that a compliance
deadline is extended with respect to the in-state
RPS minimum, the remedy may be to waive the
in-state source requirement, while maintaining
the integrity of the overall RPS.

25

Electric transmission and distribution
improvements
This recommendation calls upon the state to
initiate a study group and/or open a PSC docket
to evaluate changes to the statewide and regional
electric transmission system that would facilitate
increased electric generation by renewable
and/or low-GHG resources. The effort would
also focus on evaluation and/or participation
by Wisconsin in negotiations with other states,
the Midwest Independent Transmission System
Operator (MISO) and the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) regarding
regional transmission system expansion and cost
allocation. The PSC should determine the scope
of work needed to implement this policy within
one month after the final Task Force report is
accepted by the Governor and implement as soon
as possible after that date.

technology, include a return comparable to the
utilities’ allowed returns, and be fixed over a
period of time that allows for full recovery of
capital costs. If PSC does not currently have
authority to establish these tariffs through ratemaking, the policy recommends legislation to
grant such authority.

Tax incentives for renewable energy
development
This policy recommends legislation to create
incentives for customers to enroll in utility service
options by making the amounts that customers
contribute to renewable programs for schools and
other public purposes tax deductible. Efficiencies
could be gained by establishing a statewide
501(c)(3) organization for this purpose. As is the
current practice, renewable energy that resulted
from the implementation of this policy would
not count toward Renewable Portfolio Standard
requirements of utilities.

The proposed policy would not mandate or
encourage new nuclear plant construction,
but would modify the current requirements
as follows: (i) A new Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) provision
would be added requiring that the proposed
nuclear plant must be built to meet Wisconsin
needs at a cost that is reasonable and
advantageous to customers in comparison with
available alternatives, taking account of emission
reductions benefits. If such a nuclear plant is a
plant to be built and owned by a party other than
a Wisconsin utility, the output would need to
be sold to Wisconsin utilities to meet the needs
requirement. In any event, any new nuclear
plant, regardless of any changes in ownership or
operational responsibility during the life of the
plant, would be subject to regulation by the PSC
on a basis that is comparable to the regulation
that would apply to such a plant if owned and
operated by a Wisconsin public utility. (ii) The
current requirement of a federally licensed or
foreign nuclear waste disposal facility would be
replaced with a requirement that to obtain a
CPCN the PSC must find the nuclear waste plan

Modify moratorium on construction of new
nuclear plants
Under Wisconsin’s current “nuclear moratorium”
law (§ 196.493, Wis. Stats.), the PSC may not
authorize the construction of a nuclear plant
unless it finds that a federal facility or a facility
outside the country will be available for the
disposal of high-level waste from all Wisconsin
nuclear plants and that the proposed plant is
economically advantageous to ratepayers based
on specified factors.

Advanced renewable tariff development
This policy recommends that the PSC establish
tariffs to stimulate the deployment of renewable
generation projects smaller than 15 MW. Utilities
would be required to enter into long term, fixed
price contracts to purchase all of the electricity
produced by customer-owned renewable
generation systems at favorable rates. The policy
recommends that these advanced renewable
tariffs should be based upon the specific
production costs of each particular generation

26

for the plant is economic, reasonable, stringent,
and in the public interest, given the safety and
other risks presented by such waste. (iii) The
proposed CPCN requirements for a nuclear
plant would apply to any proposed nuclear unit
regardless of size and include any replacement of
any existing nuclear unit. (iv) In addition to the
existing right of the PSC to apply for extension
of the 180-day time limit to act on a CPCN, an
additional extension could be sought by the PSC
in the case of a nuclear plant for a reasonable,
but defined period.

Rate mitigation strategies
This policy calls for the PSC to investigate rate
mitigation strategies designed to incent utility
investments in high fixed cost, low carbon and
GHG reduction projects while lowering total costs
for customers. This investigation should consider
levelization of cost recovery in rates, voluntary
securitization of related debt to lower interest
costs, and other strategies.

Transportation
California vehicle emission standards
This policy recommends that Wisconsin join with
other states that have adopted California rules
that set mandatory minimum GHG emission
standards for passenger vehicles, light trucks
and SUVs, in order to help move those standards
forward as the single, consistent set of vehicle
emission standards to be applied nationally. The
standards would apply to new motor vehicles
starting within three years of legislative approval
and would affect cars, pickups, minivans, SUVs
and any other vehicle whose primary use is noncommercial personal transportation.

The proposed modifications to the moratorium
would not take effect until a 25% by 2025
renewable portfolio standard consistent with
the enhanced RPS policy recommended by the
Task Force is enacted into law and a revised
energy efficiency program consistent with
the Task Force’s Enhanced Conservation and
Energy Efficiency Program recommendations is
approved by the PSC and, where required, the
legislature’s Joint Committee on Finance. This
recommendation is not a recommendation by
the Task Force that a new nuclear plant be built.
However, it would allow utilities to prudently plan
and propose that alternative if they believe it is
the most cost-effective and beneficial means to
meet GHG reduction goals and their obligations
to serve over the long term.

More than a dozen states have adopted the
California standards because they are more
stringent in terms of GHG emissions than the
federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
standards. The Task Force recognizes that this
issue will not be decided in Wisconsin. Instead,
it will depend upon the outcome of current
litigation, whether a future federal administration
accepts California’s rules, or whether the federal
CAFE standards are increased to match or
exceed California’s standards. The purpose of
the recommendation is to demonstrate support
for highly efficient vehicles and a single national
standard.

Green tariff option for customers- feasibility
study
The development of a green tariff option for
customers is an enabling policy to further
encourage the development of renewable energy
in the state. This policy requests the PSC to study
the feasibility of market-based pricing options for
customers. Tariff proposals would be designed
to accommodate individual contracts between
retail customers and renewable energy providers
through their utilities that are longer-term,
fixed price contracts for energy and capacity.
Renewable energy that resulted from the
implementation of these tariff proposals would
not count toward RPS requirements of utilities.

The Task Force also recommends that the state,
with the Janesville community and other affected
parties, work diligently with General Motors on
a plan of action to convert its Janesville facility
27

to manufacture highly efficient vehicles in order
to take advantage of the skilled labor force
in Janesville and the supply chain that exists,
instead of closing the plant. Furthermore, the
state should develop a comprehensive consumer
transportation education and marketing program
to aid automakers in the sale of highly efficient
vehicles.

needed to unload freight, engines are required to
idle to regenerate emission filtration devices or
required maintenance procedures are conducted.
Efficient trucks with 2007 or newer engines will
be exempt.
Government fleet adoption
of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
This policy recommends legislation to reduce
consumption of non-renewable motor fuels. This
legislation would require that by 2012, 25% of
the delivery vehicles, light trucks, and passenger
vehicles operated by the state and its largest
cities have Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV)
drive trains. The state would provide grants to
the affected municipalities to offset 50% of the
incremental cost of purchasing PHEV vehicles
compared to conventional vehicles of the same
make and model. In addition, the state would
make grants to private company partnerships
that include vehicle manufacturers and/or vehicle
systems integrators to accelerate the introduction
of PHEV drive train vehicle types. Preference will
be given to proposals that include companies
that are either headquartered in Wisconsin or
whose employment ranks include a majority of
Wisconsin residents.

Off-road equipment greenhouse gas
emission reductions
This policy recommends adopting voluntary
and mandatory emission reduction measures
to reduce GHG emissions from off-road sources
related to construction, agricultural, lawn/garden
care, recreational and industrial/commercial
sectors. Voluntary measures would entail allowing
market forces to improve fuel efficiency or use
alternate power sources (e.g., biofuels, electricity,
etc.), promoting public/private sector reductions
(e.g., voluntary relationships), increasing
availability of low carbon fuels, promoting idling
reductions, adopting use of low global warming
potential (GWP) refrigerant gases, creating tax/
fiscal incentives to adopt low GHG emitting
equipment and providing educational material
to increase understanding of the options and
opportunities to reduce both GHGs and criteria
pollutants. Mandatory measures are directed
at the public sector only and include: purchase
of low GHG emitting/fuel efficient equipment,
development and implementation of mandatory
idling reduction language for contracts and state
activities, use of low GWP refrigerant gases, and
purchase of low carbon fuels.

Speed of travel reduction
This policy recommends strict enforcement of
the existing 65 mph highway speed limit, a study
of potential future speed limit reductions, and
support and recognition for voluntary speed
reduction policies by businesses and other
organizations.
Incentives for electric, hybrid
and plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles
This policy recommends education and incentives
for the purchase of hybrid electric vehicles
(HEVs), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs)
and electric vehicles (EVs) including encouraging
businesses to allocate favorable parking for
these vehicles and by providing rebates or state-

Freight idle reduction
The task force recommends regulation to limit
truck idling at depots, overnight rest areas and
other long-term parking locations. The rule would
limit idling to a maximum five minutes except
when trucks are on the roadway during traffic,
there are temperature extremes, medical needs
require engine power, powering equipment is

28

tax credits. Policies to increase the market for
these vehicles should be tied to developing a
cleaner electric generation mix and to technology
advances.

of Transportation (DOT) Environmental Impact
Statements (EISs). A carbon audit would estimate
GHG emissions through forecasts of added/
reduced vehicle miles traveled resulting from the
proposed project, increased/reduced emissions
associated with congestion or its alleviation
and life cycle GHG emissions required for the
construction and maintenance of the facilities/
infrastructure. The carbon audit would be
reported by DOT through project related EIS
evaluations or permit analyses.

E85 infrastructure development and pricing
incentives
This policy recommends legislation to support
development of Wisconsin’s E85 infrastructure
and creation of retail E85 pricing incentives to
make E85 competitive with regular unleaded
fuel on a MPG-adjusted basis until the E85
infrastructure goal is met. The infrastructure
goal is to increase availability from the current
61 outlets to 500 by 2015, and 50% of all outlets
by 2020, at which time the pricing incentives will
have expired.

Energy efficient communities
This policy recommends regulatory action and
state funding to reduce vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) by individuals. The recommendations
include: (i) providing special transportation
funding for areas zoned for traditional
neighborhood design, (ii) including safety
provisions for pedestrians, bicyclists, and
transit vehicles in road projects along and
across corridors being improved, (iii) requiring
a VMT and GHG analysis for new developments
that will receive state economic development
assistance and for projects to expand state
roadway capacity, (iv) developing a model
parking ordinance that reconsiders mandatory
minimum requirements for retailers and uses
the market to price street parking, incorporating
parking standards based on technology and
market changes, such as small parking spaces
for microcars, (v) establishing multimodal
accessibility as the highest goal for the state
to ensure walking and biking accessibility, (vi)
considering VMT generated by applicant facilities
as a major factor in state economic development
funding decisions, giving projects with low levels
of VMT per employee preference over those that
increase VMT, (vii) considering VMT generated by
Wisconsin to be a higher priority on rehabilitation
of existing infrastructure over adding new lanemiles (fix-it-first) for funding purposes, and
(viii) encouraging the Wisconsin Department
of Commerce to develop incentives for local
governments to promote compact development

Low carbon fuel standard
This policy suggests legislation with regulatory
implementation and enforcement to develop a
low carbon fuel standard (LCFS) for fuel providers
on a sales-weighted average. The standard would
be developed by measuring CO2-equivalent grams
per unit of fuel energy, include all emissions
from fuel consumption and production, and be
regulated on an annual basis. Providers of fuel
that exceed the standard for the compliance
period would generate credits that can be banked
or sold. Penalties for noncompliance would be
applied. Providers could meet the standard by
blending ethanol (corn/cellulosic) with gasoline,
blending biodiesel with diesel, purchasing credits
from electric utilities providing renewable
electricity for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles,
improved efficiency in the exploration, processing
and distribution of petroleum fuels or other
strategies.
Carbon-audited transportation investment
This policy is intended to inform and promote
energy-effective transportation infrastructure
choices by requiring a carbon audit for state
funded transportation projects, including
carbon footprints for all Wisconsin Department

29

and redevelopment.

biofuels for electricity, heat and transportation
by (i) creating an Energy Crop Reserve Program
that would provide incentive payments to
landowners for growing perennial grasses
and energy crops, targeting land previously
enrolled in the federal Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP), (ii) providing financial support
to biomass producers for the purchase of new
equipment and technology needed to harvest,
process and transport biomass feedstocks, and
to replace older equipment or introduce more
energy efficient equipment, resulting in further
reduction of carbon emissions, (iii) providing
financial support to reduce risk and uncertainty
for biomass producers and (iv) providing support
for biomass aggregators and infrastructure such
as transportation, storage and processing. Such
support may include development of biomass
harvesting and classification deadlines, pilot
projects, promotion of commodity markets and
exchanges, outreach to producers and users and
grants to cooperatives.

Transit enhancement and
travel demand management
This policy recommends legislation to reduce
GHG emissions through establishing three
programs for public and private transit
alternatives: Intercity Rail, Transit Trust Fund
and a Regional Transit Authority. The policy
also recommends a voluntary Travel Demand
Management (TDM) policy for employers
with more than 100 employees. The Intercity
Rail initiative would advance the proposed
Chicago-Milwaukee-Madison high speed rail
improvements to Eau Claire and the Twin Cities
by increasing the non-federal share to a level
that will provide greater leverage to access
limited federal funding, up to $120 million. The
Transit Trust Fund would provide local units of
government with up to a 50% state match for
local rail projects, such as the Kenosha-RacineMilwaukee and Dane 2020 rail options.
The Regional Transit Authority initiative would
allow local units of government to fund transit
operations through a local sales tax of up to
one half cent to help transit systems account
for inflation. The voluntary TDM policy would
promote commute trip reduction programs for
employees to reduce single-occupant vehicle use
for workplace travel. Key elements of the TDM
program would include providing incentives for
alternate modes, considering parking supply
constrictions, tailoring support and incentives
suited for specific work sites, combining programs
that inform employees of commuting options
and making a range of commuting alternatives
available.

To establish the state as a leader in the use of
biomass, the policy recommends: (i) utilizing
solid/liquid/gaseous fuels derived from biomass
to provide 25% of the energy needs for state
owned or occupied facilities by 2025, (ii)
providing incentives to school districts that
use biomass for heat or electricity by excluding
the capital cost of biomass systems, fuel,
maintenance, and any purchase cost of heat or
electricity from revenue limits under the school
aid formula and (iii) excluding the cost of biomass
systems, fuel, maintenance and any purchase cost
of heat or energy from biomass from municipal
and county levy limits.
In addition, the policy recommends: (i)
developing procedures to facilitate regulatory
certainty, environmental safety and rapid
evaluation of new bioenergy technologies, (ii)
promoting outreach and education programs
to educate about bioenergy, (iii) supporting the
development of advanced biomass, biofuel and

Agriculture and Forestry
Advanced biomass and biofuel
commercialization and utilization
This policy recommends legislation to increase
the availability and use of renewable biomass and

30

related renewable energy degree programs by the
University of Wisconsin System, UW campuses
and technical colleges and (iv) developing awards
and prizes for bioenergy innovations.

outreach and promotion of climate change
programs and options to private landowners
and (iv) developing standards and protocols
for monitoring and measurement of carbon
sequestration on forests.

Afforestation and reforestation
This policy recommends enhancement of existing
state programs, and increased education and
assistance, to encourage afforestation and
reforestation to decrease GHG emissions through
terrestrial carbon sequestration. Enhancement of
state programs will provide additional incentives
for landowners. These changes may require
legislative rule changes, fiscal measures, or
manual code adjustments. First, Wisconsin’s
Managed Forest Law (MFL) would be improved.
Currently, MFL allows landowners to enter a
land parcel into this program that has less than
80% forest cover as long as 80% forest cover is
achieved within a certain period of time. This
policy change would allow landowners the
ability to enroll non-forested lands into MFL
with a longer term requirement for mandatory
afforestation practices within the first five years.

Forest loss prevention
This policy recommends legislation establishing
a state program to prevent loss of forest land
through parcelization or conversion out of
forestry. Legislation is recommended to require
changes to local zoning and related requirements
that discourage or prevent the conversion or
parcelization of forested land. A state Forest
Legacy Program that would mirror the Federal
Forest Legacy Program is recommended to
provide: (i) matching funds to land trusts
and local communities to allow the voluntary
placement of conservation easements for forest
lands, (ii) obtain federal grants to purchase
conservation easements, (iii) identify of sites that
are most important to protect from conversion or
parcelization and (iv) assist to local governments
to ensure that planned growth maintains or
increases forests.

Additionally, the Wisconsin Forest Landowner
Grant Program would be enhanced by increasing
the funding available to private landowners for
a variety of management actions. In addition,
specific policies should be designed to ensure
incentives are provided for all eligible entities
with consideration of the tax liabilities each faces.
For entities that have different structures, grants
could be considered or tax incentives could be
designed with the ability to transfer the incentive
to a third party.

Sustainable forest management
This policy recommends legislation to create
incentives for private landowners to engage
in sustainable forest management techniques
and practices that increase the carbon storage
potential of their forests. The state would: (i)
Identify opportunities within existing programs,
such as the Wisconsin Forest Landowner Grant
program, where incentives can be added. (ii)
create a new shorter-term incentive program
called the Carbon Sequestration Tax Incentive
Program (CSTIP) that would provide property tax
relief involving a “carbon lease” to the state while
requiring that the landowner develop a forest
management plan and commit to sustainable
forest management practices that increase the
carbon sequestration potential of the forest;
and (iii) enable property owners to take part
in multiple programs by developing rules and

Increased education and assistance activities
would include: (i) developing a statewide
communication strategy for terrestrial carbon
sequestration efforts and opportunities, (ii)
increasing the amount of technical forestry
assistance available to non-industrial private
landowners, (iii) enhancing existing programs, or
creating new programs, that provide education,

31

guidance for landowners and the state.

methane emissions. The task force recommends
promoting management intensive grazing at
existing grazed animal operations to increase soil
fertility, plant vigor and quality, and providing
financial incentives to producers to increase use
of animal nutritionists to promote a high level of
livestock health and productivity.

The policy also recommends the following
outreach and technical assistance efforts:
(i) developing systems to contact private
forest landowners with information about
eligible programs, technical assistance and
other resources; (ii) reducing transaction
costs of marketing carbon credits through
the development of statewide standards
and protocols for carbon monitoring and
measurement; and (iii) increasing technical
resource availability to landowners through
additional staff and grant funding.

Production, capture and use of animal
methane
This policy recommendation seeks to increase
the capture and use of animal methane for
electricity or heat and to reduce current methane
emissions. Several policy options are suggested:
(i) establish a cap-and-trade program to increase
demand for electricity and biogas from digesters,
(ii) establish a voluntary consumer payment
program for electricity or biogas produced from
manure, (iii) grant a tax credit for production of
electricity or biogas from manure, (iv) grant a
tax credit for investments in manure digesters
or lagoon covers, (v) provide a state subsidy for
digester capital costs, interest costs, or to cover
risk incurred by private lenders for digester
projects, (vi) create a state fund for incentives
for utilities to pay a higher rate for electricity or
biogas supplied from manure digesters, and (vii)
fund research to increase the economic viability
of manure digesters and other waste-to-energy
systems and efficiently bring waste-to-energy
systems to market through farmer-owned
cooperatives.

Urban forestry
This policy recommends a statewide privatepublic collaborative tree planting and
management initiative, an increase in the Urban
Forestry Grant Program, and additional state
support resources to decrease GHG emissions
in urban environments through increased tree
planting. The statewide initiative would engage
all sectors to plant and manage urban trees
on private and public property to maximize
urban forest contributions to GHG reduction.
Increased Urban Forestry Grants and state level
resources would facilitate and provide incentives
for partnerships needed by local governments
and urban property owners; foster integrated
efforts between the Wisconsin Urban Forestry
Council, UW Extension, teachers, professional
associations, private sector, non-profit
organizations, universities/tech colleges, nature
centers and local governments; monitor urban
forest impact on carbon and energy reduction;
and expand research on improving urban forest
contribution to reducing GHG emissions.

Nutrient and manure management
The goal of this policy is to reduce application of
nitrogen and overall use of chemical fertilizers
through state incentives and mandated adoption
of nutrient management practices, thereby
reducing nitrous oxide and CO2 emissions. The
task force recommends increasing state costsharing for nutrient management planning to
increase adoption of nutrient management
plans by farmers, requiring the adoption and
implementation of nutrient management plans,
and increasing funding for education on manure

Methane reduction through ruminant
nutrition
This policy recommends improvement of animal
health through better nutrition. For example,
healthier cows stay in the herd longer and fewer
replacements are needed, resulting in lower

32

handling, nutrient management, use of nitrogen
inhibitors, and other practices that reduce
nitrogen emissions.

provide state income tax credits (similar to the
existing farmland preservation tax credits) to
landowners who maintain existing vegetative
cover. The third would make grasslands eligible
for lowered tax assessments under a revised
use-value assessment law, even if they are no
longer enrolled in CRP. The fourth would establish
a Carbon Conservation Easement program to
purchase easements on private lands that would
restrict disturbances of existing vegetative cover.

Encourage prairie plantings
This policy recommends providing research
dollars to investigate carbon storage in prairie
systems and cost-share funding for prairie
restoration and creation by providing state tax
credits.
Soil management practices
The goal of this policy is to increase carbon stores
in agricultural soils by 10% over the next 25 years.
To do so, a significant number of farmers must
adopt agricultural practices such as reduced
tillage, no-tillage, cover cropping, incorporation of
organic matter, and other practices demonstrated
to be effective by research. This proposal
recommends advancing these practices by: (i)
increasing government payments to farmers
for adoption of these practices, (ii) establishing
a carbon cap-and-trade system to increase
market demand for carbon-sequestering soil
management practices, or (iii) making compliance
with the practices mandatory while offering
adequate cost-share funding. In addition, this
policy also recommends the state increase
funding for research on the most effective soil
management practices for sequestering carbon
and negotiate with the Chicago Climate Exchange
to allow credits for increasing organic matter in
soils.

Industry
Incentives for industrial boiler efficiency
improvements
This policy recommends a combination of
regulatory incentives and targeted financial
incentives to encourage the owners of industrial
boilers to implement energy efficiency
improvement measures. Boiler efficiency
improvement projects would be afforded
permitting relief and/or expedited permit
approvals. Annual funding of $5 million for grants
and loans would be provided through the Focus
on Energy Program specifically for technical
assistance, equipment purchases and installation
costs related to such projects. Alternatively,
a larger one-time revolving low-interest loan
program could be established.
Industrial efficiency incentives
This recommendation consists of a package of
incentives, with an emphasis on funding for
industrial projects that are not feasible within
the constraints of existing programs such as
Focus on Energy. They include: (i) cash grants
for conducting comprehensive energy audits,
implementing corresponding conservation
and efficiency measures, or purchasing
replacement or retrofit equipment that is more
energy efficient; (ii) refundable tax credits for
the purchase of equipment or other capital
expenditures that will result in quantifiable
energy savings and manufacturing transition
tax credits to assist companies that redesign

Preservation of existing vegetative
cover carbon sinks on CRP lands
This policy recommends four incentives to reward
private landowners for growing energy crops or
sequestering carbon by maintaining vegetative
cover. The first calls upon the state to create an
Energy Crop Reserve Program that would provide
incentive payments to landowners for growing
perennial grasses and energy crops on land
previously enrolled in the federal Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP). The second would

33

production facilities to produce new, cuttingage technologies with fewer GHG emissions;
(iii) low-interest or no-interest loans for large
capital expenditures intended to reduce energy
consumption; (iv) fast track permitting for
retrofit and/or equipment replacement projects
that would otherwise proceed on a traditional
permitting path, if the equipment will result in
energy efficiency or conservation savings; and
(v) industrial development bonds targeted to
businesses that do any of the following: begin
manufacturing energy efficient fixtures, metering
equipment or appliances; begin manufacturing
renewable energy products or components;
install renewable power generators in their
facilities; begin manufacturing component parts
for renewable fuel or hybrid/flex-fuel vehicle
operations; or transition from manufacturing
traditional vehicles to manufacturing hybrids,
advanced diesel, flex-fuel and other advanced
drive train vehicles and related components.

loans would be provided to owners of woodfired industrial boilers for physical plant changes
necessary to increase the utilization of forest
residues or non-wood biomass as fuel. A fuel cost
subsidy could also be provided. This proposal
recommends targeted funding from the Focus on
Energy program of $1.5 million annually in grants
for three years and $1.5 million in low interest
loans for three years. Future funding levels should
be determined by the Focus on Energy program
based on demand.

Incentives for industrial boiler fuel
switching
This policy recommends supply and demand side
incentives to increase the amount of non-wood
biomass and noncommercial forest residue used
as fuel in industrial boilers.

Energy intensity reduction with feebates
This policy recommends that the DNR explore
a feebate proposal as part of the existing Green
Tier program. The proposal would encourage and
enable industry sectors to voluntarily commit to a
sector-wide 2% annual energy intensity reduction.
If a sector chooses to make this commitment,
each participating business or entity in that sector
will be required to reduce its energy intensity/
electricity/natural gas use per unit of output
by at least 2.0% per year on a continuing basis.
Within the sector, below average performers
would pay a fee while above average performers
would receive a rebate. The total amount of all
fees would equal the total amount of all rebates
– an arrangement that is sometimes called a
“feebate.”

It is important that market supply and demand
balance be maintained in order to avoid driving
up the price of commercial stem wood used
as raw material in the pulp, paper, and wood
products industries. In addition, to the extent
allowed under federal regulations, permit
streamlining incentives should be provided
to offset the regulatory barriers that could be
associated with boiler projects.

On the supply side, a goal of 50% recovery
and use of forest residue for biofuels is
recommended. Financial assistance could be
provided via the Focus on Energy program in the
form of targeted grants and low-interest loans to
loggers for the purchase of equipment to collect
and transport forest residues to market and for
other technical assistance. The recommended
funding level is $1 million per year for three years,
with future funding determined by the Focus
on Energy program based on demand. It is also
recommended that best management practices
for the recovery of forest residues be developed
between DNR and the forest products industry.

Training for green jobs
This policy calls for the Department of Workforce
Development (DWD) to convene a group to assess
future training needs for the emerging green jobs
sector and to report back to the Governor with

On the demand side, grants and low-interest

34

recommendations by January 2009. DWD would
also be expected to assess a federal Green Jobs
bill, or similar proposed legislation, to determine
whether the Wisconsin Congressional delegation
should be asked to support the bill. Finally, the
Department of Commerce should expand the
focus of the existing Customized Labor Training
Program to expend at least 10% of its funds for
“green jobs” training and to support conversion
of manufacturing operations to the production of
renewable and efficiency components.

When the regional cap and trade agreement
and model rule are completed, Wisconsin
should promptly initiate the process for the
state to review, consider and take such action
on the agreement and rule as are required and
determined to be appropriate.
In order to mitigate costs and maintain the
environmental integrity of a Cap and Trade
Program, the Task Force’s recommendation
addresses a number of the design features of
such a program, including points related to the
scope of the program, basis for setting the cap,
program structure, allowance distribution, use of
program revenues, offsets, and cost containment
measures. The recommendation recognizes
that Cap and Trade Program design features
are complex, interrelated, and will remain
controversial. Positions taken on these issues by
members of the Task Force in the federal and
regional debates will depend on a variety of
factors.

Carbon Tax/Cap And Trade
Broad-based, multi-sector Cap
and Trade program
A broad-based Cap and Trade Program that
establishes a price for greenhouse gas emissions
is essential to meet the emission goals
recommended by the Task Force. Because the
program should cover the largest possible market,
the Task Force specifically recommends against a
Wisconsin-only Cap and Trade Program.

Recommended design elements for an
offset program as part of Cap and Trade
regulatory framework
This is the first of two policies designed to
achieve near-term GHG reductions in an interim
period before implementation of any federal
or regional Cap and Trade Program begins.
This policy recommends rapid establishment
of a formal program for voluntary registration
and verification of GHG offset projects, relying
perhaps on existing protocols such as Wisconsin’s
Voluntary Emission Reduction Registry or
The Climate Registry. If and when Wisconsin
participates in a mandatory Cap and Trade
Program that credits offsets, this voluntary
program could be modified as necessary to meet
the needs of a mandatory program.

The Task Force strongly supports, as the most
preferable alternative, development of a broad,
multi-sector, federal Cap and Trade Program
with a target effective date of 2012. The State
of Wisconsin’s position in negotiating the design
of a federal Cap and Trade Program should be to
ensure that due consideration is given to the fact
that states such as Wisconsin, which are highly
dependent on coal for electricity and have energy
intensive industries like paper production, are
likely to be disproportionately affected by the
costs of a Cap and Trade Program, particularly
during the transition period to a low-carbon
economy.
The Task Force also recommends that the State
of Wisconsin continue to participate and provide
leadership in the development of a Midwest
Regional Cap and Trade Program while at the
same time advocating for a federal program that
protects Midwestern and Wisconsin interests.

Incentives for voluntary programs
This is the second of two policies designed to
achieve near-term GHG reductions in an interim
period before implementation of any federal

35

or regional Cap and Trade Program begins. This
policy recommends that the State: (i) implement
financial incentives (such as tax incentives) to
encourage organizations to participate in certain
voluntary programs to track and reduce GHG
emissions, (ii) participate in the Chicago Climate
Exchange for emissions from state owned and
operated facilities and activities, retiring any
credits obtained, (iii) create a fund that could be
used to purchase and retire GHG emissions, with
money coming from voluntary contributions by
citizens via a check off box on state tax forms
and/or on gas and electric utility bills, and (iv)
request an IRS ruling on whether an entity that
generates GHG credits (e.g. emission credits and
offset credits) and permanently retires these
allowances instead of selling the allowances is
eligible for a federal tax deduction.

Enhanced water efficiency
and conservation
Water conservation reduces GHG emissions by
limiting energy inputs to power motors, pumps
and other infrastructure needed to produce,
distribute, use, collect, treat and dispose of water.
This policy recommends coordinating water
conservation and efficiency with energy efficiency
programs through state agency efforts. Either
through statutory changes or implementation of
current efforts, water efficiency and conservation
programs should be enhanced by creating a
statewide Focus on Water division through Focus
on Energy in order to establish a regional program
in areas of water supply concern and/or promote
pilot projects at individual water or wastewater
utilities. These efforts may include incentives
for utility customers to purchase, install and use
water-efficient products and services; technical
and financial assistance for water utilities, large
water users and wastewater utilities to identify
solutions for reducing their water and energy use;
and research, education and outreach materials
on water efficient technologies and practices.

Other Policies
Co-generation incentives and/or mandates
This policy recommends that the state establish
policies, incentives and information to identify
and install new combined heat and power (CHP)
systems and facilitate the decommissioning of
older, high emission sources and the replacement
of these units with CHP systems to reduce GHG
emissions. Specific components of the policy
proposal include: (i) conducting a review of
applicable statutes and regulations that may
inhibit the sale of electricity and steam from CHP
systems; (ii) funding site specific feasibility studies
and consider incentive programs through Focus
on Energy; (iii) providing information for utilities
and developers on CHP systems, including a
statewide survey of large users of thermal energy
and a database where industries can report
thermal needs; (iv) conducting an evaluation of
regulatory obstacles to the installation of CHP
systems; (v) establishing tax incentives to utilize
thermal energy; (vi) expanding the definition
of renewable resources as part of an enhanced
renewable portfolio standard; and (vii) conducting
a study to identify which existing steam facilities
can be replaced with CHP plants.

Increased paper recycling
This policy recommends legislation to increase
recovery of recyclable scrap paper in Wisconsin.
This policy would reduce emissions by diverting
more recyclable paper from Wisconsin landfills
through a graduated expansion of existing
landfill paper bans in conjunction with increased
outreach, enforcement and incentives. More
specifically, forest carbon sequestration should
be increased as forests are left intact rather
than harvested for paper production. The policy
adds mixed recyclable paper to the list of paper
categories required by Wisconsin statutes to
be recovered by effective recycling programs,
removes the existing exception for office paper
from households, increases education and
outreach on paper recycling to households and
businesses, improves collection services in areas
or business sectors that are underserved, and
creates incentives and enforcement strategies for
paper recycling. After implementing the above
36

measures, if a new waste characterization study
shows that significant amounts of paper are still
being landfilled, the task force suggests the state
develop stronger measures to recover paper,
such as prohibiting landfill disposal of more than
incidental quantities of recyclable paper.

programs, and research regarding further
recycling opportunities.
This policy also recommends using a portion of
the funds from the Recycling and Renewable
Energy Fund to research further recycling
opportunities, including studies on the
performance of recycling programs, gaps in
collection, the feasibility of incentive-based
programs, identification of the greatest potential
for recovery, and the best practices to enhance
recovery.

Recovery of untreated wood wastes
This policy recommends legislation to increase
recovery of untreated wood wastes through
a combination of local ordinances, financial
incentives and reduced regulatory barriers.
By combusting the wood to recover energy
(displacing generation by fossil fuels) or recycling/
reusing it in products such as landscape mulch
or engineered wood (i.e., chipboard and particle
board), the need to harvest new trees is reduced,
allowing forests to grow and sequester more
carbon. Local ordinances would require wood
waste generated in new construction to be
recycled as part of the building permit process
unless compliance would increase GHG emissions
due to transporting discarded wood or other
local factors. State financial incentives would
encourage development of the wood waste
recycling/reuse infrastructure. By reducing
regulatory barriers, recycling and reuse will be
increased. If a significant amount of untreated
wood continues to enter landfills, regulators
should consider imposing a landfill ban. In
addition, the task force also recommends that
the state promote reusing wood and other
materials recovered during demolition of existing
structures.

Electronics reuse and recycling
This policy recommends legislation to divert
electronics for reuse and recycling through
a landfill ban and a state program requiring
manufacturers to assume responsibility for
collecting and recycling certain discarded
household electronic products.
Reduced landfilling of food waste
This policy recommends studies be conducted
on food waste diversion. These studies should
examine reducing landfill methane emissions by
diverting materials that decompose anaerobically.
Currently, there is little infrastructure in
Wisconsin for large-scale composting of materials
other than yard trimmings. Therefore, the
task force recommends actions to enhance
knowledge rather than policies to legislate
action. The research should include identification
of contributors of pre- and post- consumer
food waste currently entering the solid waste
stream, investigations of public health issues,
examination of the practicality and costs of food
waste composting from commercial properties,
development of a hierarchy for the recovery of
source-separated food waste, and identification
of strategies to reduce barriers to increased
diversion of food wastes.

Enhanced recycling
Recycling provides substantial reductions in
GHG emissions by reducing the consumption
of energy and resources, such as forests, to
obtain raw materials for manufacturing. This
policy recommends legislation to enhance
current recycling programs through four
initiatives: education and outreach, grants to
local governmental units and others to increase
recycling, more effective deployment of recycling

37

Additional Policies for Consideration
In the process of the Task Force’s work (including in comments on this Proposal provided by the public at the end of our process),
a number of ideas have been proposed that
the Task Force has not been able to analyze
and recommend due to the time constraints.
Some of these possible additional recommendations could lead to significant GHG emissions reductions.
Given the magnitude of the challenges climate change presents, the Task Force recognizes the need to take all cost-effective,
feasible emissions mitigation actions, but we
also must come to closure. For illustrative
purposes, the list below identifies some, but
not all, of the ideas that have been raised but
have not been analyzed by the Task Force.
• Food supply chain emissions reduction
and strategies
• Food consumption emissions impacts and
related behavioral change strategies
• Freight hauling emissions reduction measures
• Measures such as the Massachusetts law
requiring new, large scale developments to
offset emission impacts
• Providing basis point reductions in
WHEDA loans for “green” projects
• A SF6 (sulferhexafluoride) emissions reduction requirement
• Anaerobic digesters at food processing
facilities and wastewater treatment plants,
and increased use of landfill gas
• Increased use of video conferencing
• Urban gardens
• Wave and underwater turbines
• Reductions in the use of plastic bags.

38

Appendix A

List of Policy Recommendations
PolicyName

PolicyArea

Page

EnsuringonͲgoingGHGemissionreductioneffectiveness

OverarchingPolices

59

Comprehensiveinitiativetosupportvoluntarylongtermgreenhousegas
emissionsreductions

OverarchingPolices

64

Researchanddevelopmentfunding

OverarchingPolices

67

Enhancedconservationandenergyefficiencyprogram

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

68

Aligningpublicandprivateinterestsforconservationandenergyefficiency

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

76

Improvedandinnovativeratedesigns

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

78

Demandresponseandloadmanagement

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

81

Residentialandcommercialbuildingcodes

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

84

Stategovernmentasleader

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

87

Energyefficiencyandsafetythroughlightingforrentalproperties

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

90

Stateapplianceefficiencystandards

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

92

Energyefficiencyinschools

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

94

NonͲregulatedfuelsefficiencyandconservation

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

96

Study of retrofit codes for mandatory upgrades of existing single and multiͲ
familyunits

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

100

Residentialenergyefficiencyretrofitandrehabilitation

ConservationandEnergy
Efficiency

103





39

Wisconsingeologiccarbonsequestrationstudy

UtilitySupplyͲSide

105

Windsitingreform

UtilitySupplyͲSide

107

GreatLakeswindstudy

UtilitySupplyͲSide

108

PSCamendedstrategicenergyassessment

UtilitySupplyͲSide

109

Enhancedrenewableportfoliostandard(RPS)

UtilitySupplyͲSide

111

Electrictransmissionanddistributionimprovements

UtilitySupplyͲSide

116

Taxincentivesforrenewableenergydevelopment

UtilitySupplyͲSide

118

Advancedrenewabletariffdevelopment

UtilitySupplyͲSide

120

Modifymoratoriumonconstructionofnewnuclearplants

UtilitySupplyͲSide

122

GreentariffoptionforcustomersͲfeasibilitystudy

UtilitySupplyͲSide

124

Ratemitigationstrategies

UtilitySupplyͲSide

125

Californiavehicleemissionstandards

Transportation

126

OffͲroadequipmentgreenhousegasemissionreductions

Transportation

129

Freightidlereduction

Transportation

132

GovernmentfleetadoptionofplugͲinhybridelectricvehicles

Transportation

134

Speedoftravelreduction

Transportation

139

Incentivesforelectric,hybridandplugͲinhybridelectricvehicles

Transportation

141

E85infrastructuredevelopmentandpricingincentives

Transportation

143

Lowcarbonfuelstandard

Transportation

145

CarbonͲauditedtransportationinvestment

Transportation

147

Energyefficientcommunities

Transportation

149

Transitenhancementandtraveldemandmanagement

Transportation

152





40

Advancedbiomassandbiofuelcommercializationandutilization

Agricultureand
Forestry

155

Afforestationandreforestation

Agricultureand
Forestry

159

Forestlossprevention

Agricultureand
Forestry

162

Sustainableforestmanagement

Agricultureand
Forestry

165

Urbanforestry

Agricultureand
Forestry

168

Methanereductionthroughruminantnutrition

Agricultureand
Forestry

171

Production,captureanduseofanimalmethane

Agricultureand
Forestry

173

Nutrientandmanuremanagement

Agricultureand
Forestry

177

Encourageprairieplantings

Agricultureand
Forestry

179

Soilmanagementpractices

Agricultureand
Forestry

181

PreservationofexistingvegetativecovercarbonsinksonCRPlands

Agricultureand
Forestry

184

Incentivesforindustrialboilerefficiencyimprovements

Industry

187

Industrialefficiencyincentives

Industry

189

Incentivesforindustrialboilerfuelswitching

Industry

191

Energyintensityreductionwithfeebates

Industry

194

Trainingforgreenjobs

Industry

196

CapandTrade

198




BroadͲbased,multiͲsectorcapandtradeprogram

41

Recommendeddesignelementsforanoffsetprogramaspartofcapandtraderegulatory
framework

CapandTrade 202

Incentivesforvoluntaryprograms

CapandTrade 205


CoͲgenerationincentivesand/ormandates

AdͲhoc
Groups

210

Enhancedwaterefficiencyandconservation

AdͲhoc
Groups

213

Increasedpaperrecycling

AdͲhoc
Groups

217

Recoveryofuntreatedwoodwastes

AdͲhoc
Groups

220

Enhancedrecycling

AdͲhoc
Groups

224

Electronicsreuseandrecycling

AdͲhoc
Groups

228

Reducedlandfillingoffoodwaste

AdͲhoc
Groups

230



42

Appendix B

Task Force Members and their Affiliations

Wisconsin Global Warming Task Force Co-Chairs:
Tia Nelson, Executive Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of Public Lands
Roy Thilly, CEO Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Members:
Daniel Ariens, Ariens
Forrest Ceel, IBEW 2150
Jeff Crawford, Forest County Potawatomi Community
Kristine Euclide, Madison Gas & Electric
Jonathan Foley, UW-Madison
Jon Geenen, United Steel Workers
Emily Green, Sierra Club
Charlie Higley, Citizens Utility Board
Steve Hiniker, 1000 Friends of Wisconsin
Mary Jean Huston, The Nature Conservancy
Scott Johnson, SC Johnson
Margi Kindig, Citizen
Gale Klappa, We Energies
Gary Malkus, General Motors - Janesville
C. David Myers, Johnson Controls
Representative Phil Montgomery
Bill Oemichen, Wisconsin Federation of Cooperatives
Senator Jeff Plale
Keith Reopelle, Clean Wisconsin
Tom Scharff, NewPage
Henry Steuber, General Electric - Oil & Gas Division
Susan Stratton, Energy Center of Wisconsin
Barbara Swan, Alliant Energy
Michael Swenson, Xcel Energy - NSP Wisconsin
John Vrieze, Dairy Business Association
Larry Weyers, Integrys Energy Group
Lynn Wilson, Plum Creek Timber
Agency Support Staff:
Eric Callisto, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Dennis Koepke, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Lisa Stefanik, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Lori Sakk, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
John Shenot, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Caroline Garber, Department of Natural Resources
Allison Hellman, Department of Natural Resources
Ed Jepsen, Department of Natural Resources
43

Matt Krumenauer, Department of Natural
Resources
Nick Sayen, Department of Natural Resources
Al Shea, Department of Natural Resources
Gary Radloff, Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection
Bill Walker, Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection
Sarah Walling, Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection

44

Appendix C

Task Force Work Group Co-Chairs and
Formally-Appointed Group Members

Carbon Tax/Cap and Trade Work Group
Co-Chairs
Keith Reopelle, Clean Wisconsin
Barb Swan, Alliant Energy
Members
Jonathan Foley, UW-Madison
Charlie Higley, Citizens Utility Board
Steve Hiniker, 1000 Friends of Wisconsin
Greg Bollom, Madison Gas & Electric
John Clancy, Forest County Potawatomi Community
Dennis Derricks, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
Barbara Freese, Union of Concerned Scientists
Joe Kramer, Energy Center of Wisconsin
Nina Plaushin, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Annabeth Reitter, NewPage
Kris McKinney, We Energies
Phil Molien, Gen-Sys / Dairyland Power Cooperative
Jim Turnure, Xcel Energy
Agency Support Staff
Lisa Stefanik, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
John Shenot, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Caroline Garber, Department of Natural Resources

Electric Generation and Supply Work Group
Co-Chairs
Kathy Lipp, Alliant Energy
Peter Taglia, Clean Wisconsin
Members
Dave Bender, Sierra Club
Forrest Ceel, IBEW 2150
John Clancy, Forest County Potawatomi Community
Tim Clay, Wisconsin Federation of Cooperatives
Charlie Higley, Citizens Utility Board
Andy Kellen, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Charles Matthews, We Energies
45

Rep. Phil Montgomery, Wisconsin Assembly
Adam Raschka, Rep. Montgomery’s Office
Scott Neitzel, Madison Gas & Electric
Tom Smies, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
Todd Stuart, Wisconsin Industrial Energy Group
Jim Turnure, Xcel Energy
Michael Vickerman, RENEW Wisconsin
Lynn Wilson, Plum Creek Timber
Agency Support Staff
Lori Sakk, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

Conservation and Energy Efficiency Work Group
Co-Chairs
Kristine Euclide, Madison Gas & Electric
George Edgar, Wisconsin Energy Conservation Corporation
Members
Margi Kindig, Citizen
Senator Jeff Plale, Wisconsin Senate
Jennifer Oechsner, Sen. Plale’s Office
Tom Scharff, NewPage
Susan Stratton, Energy Center of Wisconsin
Bruce Nilles, Sierra Club
Janet Brandt, Wisconsin Energy Conservation Corp.
Bruce Caucutt, Alliant Energy
Jean Derfus, Xcel Energy
Roman Draba, We Energies
Nicholas Hall, Consultant
Beata Kalies, Wisconsin Electric Cooperative Association
Katie Nekola, Clean Wisconsin
Clay Nesler, Johnson Controls
Barb Nick, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
Mike Stuart, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Mike Thompson, Trane Commercial Systems
Peter Vogel, Vogel Builders
Dan York, American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy
Agency Support Staff
Lisa Stefanik, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
John Shenot, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

46

Forestry and Agriculture Work Group
Co-Chairs
Bill Oemichen, Wisconsin Federation of Cooperatives
Todd Holschbach, The Nature Conservancy of Wisconsin
Members
Michael Bolton, United Steel Workers
Susan Crane, We Energies
Jeff Crawford, Forest County Potawatomi Community
David Donovan, Xcel Energy
Dennis Frame, Discovery Farms
Earl Gustafson, Wisconsin Paper Council
Dr. Chris Kucharik, UW-Madison, Nelson Institute
George Meyer, Wisconsin Wildlife Federation
David Mladenoff, UW-Madison
Pam Porter, Consultant
Gene Roark, Wisconsin Woodland Owners Association
Alice Thompson, Thompson & Assoc. Wetlands Services
John Vrieze, Vrieze Farms
Lynn Wilson, Plum Creek Timber
Ron Zillmer, Mid-State Technical College
Paul Zimmerman, Wisconsin Farm Bureau Federation
Agency Support Staff
Gary Radloff, Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
Sarah Walling, Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
Bill Walker, Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
Allison Hellman, Department of Natural Resources
Matt Krumenauer, Department of Natural Resources

Industry Work Group
Co-Chairs
Caryl Terrell, Sierra Club
Paul Linzmeyer, Ecolution, Inc.
Members
David Boyd, formerly of Briggs and Stratton
Tim Clay, Wisconsin Federation of Cooperatives
Charley Cole, We Energies
Dave Crass, Michael Best & Friedrich
Douglas Drake, formerly of United Steel Workers
Steve Dunn, UW-Oshkosh
Mike Gromacki, Cook Composites and Polymers

47

John Imes, Wisconsin Environmental Initiative
Scott Johnson, SC Johnson
Rick Koehl, Kohler Company
Scott Manley, Wisconsin Manufacturers and Commerce
Joe Muehlbach, Quad Graphics
Dave Oughton, Mercury Marine
John Piotrowski, Packaging Corporation of America
Nina Plaushin, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Satya Rhodes-Conway, UW-Madison Center on Wisconsin Strategy
Clare Stapleton-Concord, Office of the Commissioner of Insurance
Steve Steinpreis, Plymouth Foam, Inc.
Dave Stringham, AH West Group
Ed Wilusz, Wisconsin Paper Council
Ken Zak, MEGTEC
Agency Support Staff
Caroline Garber, Department of Natural Resources
Nick Sayen, Department of Natural Resources

Transportation Work Group
Co-Chairs
Steve Hiniker, 1000 Friends of Wisconsin
John Pearse, General Motors
Members
John Antaramian, Mayor, City of Kenosha
Ed Beimborn, UW-Milwaukee
Dennis Damman, Schneider National
Chris Deisinger, Union of Concerned Scientists
Mike Elder, Landmark Services Cooperative
Kristine Euclide, Madison Gas & Electric
Pat Goss, Wisconsin Transportation Builders Association
Matt Hauser, Wisconsin Petroleum Marketers & Convenience Store Association
Chuck Kamp, City of Madison
Rob Kennedy, UW-Madison
Margi Kindig, Citizen
Gary Kramer, Badger State Ethanol
Dave Merritt, Dane County Clean Air Coalition
Nina Plaushin, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Eric Sundquist, UW-Madison, Center on Wisconsin Strategy
Kerry Thomas, Transit NOW
Craig Thompson, Transportation Development Association
Francis Vogel, Wisconsin Clean Cities

48

Agency Support Staff
Ed Jepsen, Department of Natural Resources

Ad-hoc Low Income Work Group
Chairperson
Forrest Ceel, IBEW 2150
Members
Sue Brown, Division of Energy Services, Department of Administration
Earl Buford, BIG-STEP, Wisconsin Regional Training Partnership
Henry Hamilton, NAACP Environmental Justice Task Force
Joel Haubrich, We Energies
Robert Jones, Wisconsin Community Action Program Association
Peter McAvoy, Sixteenth Street Community Health Center
Vincent Montgomery, Social Development Commission
Mike Mueller, We Energies
Jim Phillippo, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
Jackie Reynolds, Division of Water Compliance and Consumer Affairs, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Satya Rhodes-Conway, UW-Madison, Center on Wisconsin Strategy
Agency Support Staff
Lori Sakk, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

Ad-hoc Co-Generation Work Group
Chairperson
Andy Kellen, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Members
Rob Benninghoff, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
George Edgar, Wisconsin Energy Conservation Corporation
Scott Neitzel, Madison Gas & Electric
Jennifer Feyerherm, Sierra Club
Tom Scharff, NewPage
Todd Stuart, Wisconsin Industrial Energy Group
Peter Taglia, Clean Wisconsin
Tom Tucker, Kinergetics, LLC
Agency Support Staff
Lori Sakk, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
Dennis Koepke, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

49

Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery and Disposal Work Group
Chairperson
Keith Reopelle, Clean Wisconsin
Members
Dave Anderson, Fox River Fiber
John Clancy, Forest County Potawatomi Community
David Donovan, Xcel Energy
Steve Hiniker, 1000 Friends of Wisconsin
Lynn Morgan, Waste Management Inc.
Bill Oemichen, Wisconsin Federation of Cooperatives
John Piotrowski, Packaging Corporation of America
Genise Smith-Watkins, PepsiCo
Gary Zajicek, Veridian Homes
Agency Support Staff
Nick Sayen, Department of Natural Resources
Brad Wolbert, Department of Natural Resources

Technical Advisory Group
Co-Chairs
George Edgar, Wisconsin Energy Conservation Corporation
Kris Krause, We Energies
Members
Lewis Gilbert, UW-Madison, Nelson Institute
Andy Kellen, Wisconsin Public Power Inc.
Joe Kramer, Energy Center of Wisconsin
Craig Loehle, National Council for Air and Stream Improvement
Paul Meier, UW-Madison
Annabeth Reitter, NewPage
Tom Smies, Wisconsin Public Service Corp.
Peter Taglia, Clean Wisconsin
Agency Support Staff
Caroline Garber, Department of Natural Resources
Nick Sayen, Department of Natural Resources
Dennis Koepke, Public Service Commission of Wisconsin

50

Appendix D

Summary Report Of The Technical Advisory Group
and how these decisions causally translate to
energy-use and emissions.

Modeling

The Technical Advisory Group (TAG) was
responsible for identifying an appropriate
approach to modeling greenhouse gas (GHG)
reduction policies for Wisconsin. The TAG
identified five criteria that were used to guide
the selection of a modeling approach for the Task
Force. These were:
• The model should be able to recognize the
likely interactions between policies across
sectors. It should have a multi-sector analysis
feature.
• The model should be comparable to models
being used elsewhere in the U.S. so that
Wisconsin results could be compared to those
in other areas.
• The model and the assumptions and
inputs used should be transparent and
understandable in order for policy makers and
the public to have reasonable confidence in
the outputs.
• The modeling effort should be relatively
easy to roll into a regional modeling effort.
With the Midwestern Governors Association
(MGA) process just getting underway, this was
thought to be important.
• The model should be able to model energy
efficiency in a way that considers price and
non-price factors, rather than just economic
factors.

ENERGY 2020 can be linked to a macroeconomic
model to provide economic impact data at the
state, regional and national levels. By running
iteratively with the macroeconomic model, it can
capture the feedback among energy consumers
and suppliers and the economy. A change in
price affects demand which then affects future
supply and price. The Wisconsin Department of
Transportation operates a macroeconomic model,
REMI, and this was used in this project.

Limitations of Modeling

The Technical Advisory Group has made certain
observations from the modeling process. While
great effort was made to keep the modeling
a technically respectable process, it is always
important that modeling observations be viewed
with attentive skepticism. Modeling will not
provide a definitive indication of the future.
Modeling can provide a consistent framework for
evaluating the implications of different policies
that can not be replicated by intuitive reasoning.
Due to the inherent uncertainties in assessing
the future, however, models should be viewed
as a means to inform good judgment and not as
predictive tools.

The Modeling Process

The first step in the modeling process was
to construct the Reference Case, which is a
projection of economic and emission trends,
in the absence of climate change policies,
against which the alternative policies would be
compared. The TAG thoroughly reviewed the
input data to ensure that the data describing
Wisconsin’s infrastructure was accurate and
current, and that future projections (e.g., fuel
prices and construction costs) were reasonable
and based on the best information available. The
TAG also spent considerable time in reviewing the
model’s assumptions and recommending changes
in certain areas.

The TAG interviewed several consultants and,
based on the above criteria, recommended
that the consulting firm of ICF International in
partnership with Systematic Solutions Inc. (SSI) be
retained.
The ICF/SSI partnership uses the ENERGY 2020
model which is an integrated multi-sector, multiregion energy model that provides state specific
output data on energy and emissions. It is a
causal and descriptive model which dynamically
describes the behavior of both energy suppliers
and consumers for all fuels and for all end uses. It
simulates how users and suppliers make decisions
51

Policy Case 01:
All Policies Except Cap and Trade. These included:
• Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
• Residential and Commercial Building Codes
• State Appliance Efficiency Standards
• Rental Lighting Standards
• Urban Forestry
• Biomass and Biofuel (State Bioenergy Use)
• California Vehicle Emission Standards
• Low Carbon Fuel Standard
• Energy Efficient Communities
• Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard

The Reference Case projected emissions from all
6 Kyoto gases by sector from 2006 through 2024.
Emissions associated with carbon sequestration
were not projected but were added exogenously
to the modeled gross emissions to provide an
estimate of net emissions. These sequestration
estimates were developed by Winrock
International, the consulting firm retained by the
Task Force to evaluate GHG sinks in the Forestry/
Agriculture Sectors. In addition, no climate
forcing CO2 emissions were assumed to result
from the combustion of biomass.
The Reference Case was modeled iteratively
with REMI to establish an economic baseline
for comparing the impact of future policies. In
mid-process, the federal Energy Independence
and Security Act (EISA) was adopted, which
resulted in a number of changes that affected
the emissions and costs of vehicles, buildings,
equipment and fuels. In order to isolate these
impacts and create a new economic baseline, the
ENERGY 2020 and REMI models were re-run to
calculate the effect of these changes. This then
became the point of reference for comparing
the emissions, energy and economic impacts of
policy scenarios. The TAG had some concerns
about the REMI model and the inability to adjust
assumptions and inputs to the model. However,
it was felt to be adequate for comparing the
direction and magnitude of economic impacts of
alternative policy scenarios.

Policy Case 02:
Same as above except without the California
Vehicle Emission Standards.
Cap and Trade (CT):
All Policies (PC01) Including Cap and Trade with
100% Free Allocation of Allowances and:
• CT 01: Assumes there is no regulatory limit
on the use of offsets.
• CT 02: Assumes that offsets are capped at
10% of the allowances needed in any given
year.
Cap and Trade (CT):
All Policies (PC01) Including Cap and Trade with
100% Auction of Allowances and:
• CT 03: Assumes there is no regulatory limit
on the use of offsets.
• CT 04: Assumes that offsets are capped at
10% of the allowances needed in any given
year.

Once the reference case had been established,
attention turned to the policy templates that the
Work Groups had recommended be modeled.
ICF consulted with the Work Group co-chairs, the
TAG and World Resources Institute (WRI) to make
sure policies were accurately characterized and
assumptions clarified.

Higher Energy Price Scenarios:
(50% higher prices for coal, natural gas, oil and
biomass than in the original reference or policy
cases) This was a sensitivity run to test the
effects of higher energy prices. These higher
prices were closer to the July 2008 prices than
the prices in the original reference case that was
completed in February 2008. This sensitivity run
was modeled for both the Reference Case and
the All Policies Except Cap and Trade Case (Policy
Case 01).

The TAG developed the following strategy
for modeling alternative policy scenarios, or
packages. The TAG had a “dream list” of policies
scenarios it would have liked to model, however
those listed below are all that there was time for.

52

*Policy Case 10:
Deep Carbon Reduction Scenario. This was
another sensitivity run that modeled:
• 2,000 Mw of zero carbon electric
resources being added to the state’s power
sector
• All existing coal units with a capacity of less
than 150 Mw being retired (about 1,400 Mw)
• Effective January 2020
• This scenario also included the All Policies
Except Cap and Trade (Policy Case 01)

Transmission Capability: The transmission
system capability impacts the amount of
electricity that can be imported into or exported
out of Wisconsin. The current system is not
adequate to handle free flow of electricity
under all conditions. In other words, the state
is “transmission constrained”. The WUMS/
MAPP (transfer capability between eastern
Wisconsin and the west) and WUMS/COMD
(transfer capability between southern Wisconsin
and Illinois) interfaces were adjusted to
increase transfer capabilities to reflect the new
transmission projects completed and underway
by American Transmission Company to improve
transmission infrastructure in Wisconsin. It was
assumed that adequate additional transmission
resources would continue to be built to serve the
Midwest, and that the cost to do this would be
shared among other states including Wisconsin,
so this constraint was not included in the
modeling.

*Please note that policy cases 3 - 9 are not discussed here.

Due to the complexities of modeling the cap and
trade policy scenarios, the TAG recommended
that the Task Force not rely on the modeling
results associated with these specific runs.
However, the effort provided important lessons
and observations, which the TAG shared with the
Task Force. Some of these are summarized in the
Key Findings below.
The TAG also reviewed the non-modeled policy
templates and developed a conservative estimate
of the emission reductions that they might
provide. These policies were primarily in the
Forestry and Agriculture sectors. The contribution
of emission reductions from the modeled and
unmodeled policies were used in the analysis of
potential short and mid-term statewide emission
reduction targets.

Capital Cost: Capital costs for new power plant
construction is highly uncertain and undergoing a
period of rapid real price escalation. This results
in extreme volatility in reported construction
costs for individual technologies, due to
underlying commodity prices and other inputs
to capital cost. Therefore efforts were focused to
identify a single set of internally consistent data
describing capital costs across all technologies,
as opposed to identifying the most current
estimates for individual technologies with the
resulting potential for inconsistent assumptions
between technologies.

Key Input Parameters

It is important to understand the underlying
assumptions in order to put the modeling results
in context. The “Assumptions Book” contains
the details, but the following parameters are
particularly important to keep in mind as they
have considerable influence on the modeling
results and findings:

Economic Forecast: The REMI model was used
to determine economic impacts. One of the
inputs to the model is electric demand growth
rate. Data was available from the Public Service
Commission’s Strategic Energy Assessment on
state utility projections through 2015, and this
data was input into the REMI model. The REMI
model’s base data projected a higher growth
rate, and this ultimately created a “knee in
the curve” of growth rate in 2016. The more

Fuel price: The price of three carbon based fuels;
oil, natural gas and coal were inputs to the model.
See attachment for graphs showing the fuel price
inputs to the Reference Case. Fuel price impacts
virtually all sectors considered.
53

aggressive economic growth rate in REMI starting
in 2016 and continuing through the end of the
modeling period (2024) was viewed by the TAG as
overly optimistic, especially for energy intensive
industries.

economy, employment and personal disposable
income increased over the 2006 to 2024 time
period, but at a slightly lower rate of increase
than projected under the Reference Case. The
TAG had concerns that the REMI runs, including
the robust economic forecast, may have been
somewhat insensitive in assessing economic
impacts.

Key Findings

Keeping the modeling limitations noted above in
mind, the following findings were observed from
the modeling:

Energy Independence and Security Act: EISA
was passed during the development of the
Reference Case. It was noted that there was
a reduction in GHG emissions when the EISA
provisions that would apply to Wisconsin were
added to the model. Most of the reduction came
from passenger cars because of the new CAFÉ
standard.

“Leakage”: Reducing Wisconsin’s energy demand
may result in “freeing up” in-state fossil fueled
power plant capacity to sell electricity to outof-state customers. The result could be that
Wisconsin customers would be using less energy,
but emissions from Wisconsin power plants
would remain the same or decrease less than
what would be expected.

Electricity Demand Growth: Annual electricity
demand growth rate is cut in half from two
percent in the Reference Case to one percent in
under Policy Case 1. This can be attributed to a
number of factors including the enhanced energy
efficiency policy, and to higher energy prices
resulting from the enhanced renewable portfolio
standard policy. This reduction in electricity
demand results in lower electricity bills in 2024.
While the rates that utilities charge customers
increase an average of 8 percent above Reference
Case in 2024, electricity bills are reduced by
between 12 and 15 percent depending on the
rate class. The experience of individuals and
particular businesses may vary significantly from
these projections.

Alternatively, if coal-fired generation is reduced
in Wisconsin but the demand for electricity is
met through imports, Wisconsin customers may
be using the same or more energy, but emissions
from Wisconsin power plants would decrease
and depending on the out of state source, total
emissions may increase.
Another example occurs if some of the renewable
energy required for the enhanced renewable
portfolio standard in Wisconsin was purchased
from out of state. The reduction in GHG
emissions would occur, but not within the state
boundaries.
Adding new zero emitting resources and retiring
carbon emitting resources in Wisconsin will show
globally large reductions in emissions. However,
the benefit will be understated if the analysis is
restricted to within the state boundaries.

Transportation Impacts: The commercial,
residential and transportation sectors all
experience absolute GHG emission reductions
from 2005 due to increased efficiency and
reduction in vehicle miles traveled. All other
sectors experience increases in GHG emissions
though slower than under the Reference Case.
Wisconsin adoption of the California vehicle
emission standards results in an additional
reduction of approximately 2 MtCO2e when
compared to a scenario where they are not
adopted.

All of these examples highlight the need to
consider the effects of electricity imports and
exports on Wisconsin GHG emissions.
Economic Impacts: Under all of the policy
scenario modeling runs, both those with and
those without cap and trade policies, the state’s
54

Attachment 1:
Review of Wisconsin’s Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Inventory

Cap and Trade: Several attempts were made
to model the Cap and Trade templates. For a
variety of reasons, the effort was cut short prior
to any definitive results. However, a number of
observations were made in the process. These
are fairly obvious, but will be noted here as
follows:
• Allowance costs are dependent on policy
design, and there is a relationship between
stringency of policy and resulting costs.
• The availability of offsets affects allowance
prices. Lower allowance prices were observed
when offsets were available in sufficient
quantity and higher allowance prices when
they were not. The modeling did not address
the policy issue of the desired balance
between the impact of offset availability on
allowance prices and the impact on the pace
of development of future technologies and
practices.
• The starting point matters. Prior
implementation of energy efficiency,
California Car requirements, etc. affects
relative position in the market as well as cost
of the next level of reductions.
• Ideally all jurisdictions participating
in a market should implement similar
complementary policies.

One of the first tasks assigned to the TAG by the
Task Force was to review the Wisconsin 2003
GHG Emissions Inventory prepared by World
Resources Institute (WRI) and to report back on
any improvements that should be made in order
to make the inventory more useful for Task Force
purposes. The Task Force Co-Chairs also asked the
TAG to determine whether a 2006 inventory was
feasible.
The TAG evaluated the methodology and data
used to prepare the inventory. The data is federal
data that is disaggregated to the state level. The
TAG determined that this “top-down” approach
provided a broad view of emissions and trends
across sectors in the state and that this was
adequate for Task Force purposes. The Task Force
used the inventory to provide benchmarks to the
sector workgroups as they developed emission
reduction policies for their sector and for high
level policy analysis purposes. The TAG evaluated
the option of updating the inventory to 2006 and
concluded that the improvements to the data
were not sufficient to warrant the additional
expenditure of time and resources.

It should be noted that Wisconsin is a lead in
the Cap and Trade and modeling effort under
the Midwest Governor’s Association Midwest
Greenhouse Gas Accord. The modeling
undertaken as a part of the Wisconsin Governor’s
process is providing valuable input into the MGA
process.

One area where the TAG noted that data was
inadequate was in the Land Use, Forestry and
Agriculture sectors and that additional work
was needed to bring it up to the same level of
quality as the other sectors. Subsequently, the
consulting firm of Winrock International was
retained to provide data for this sector. The
TAG also recommended that an estimate of
the greenhouse gas emissions associated with
electricity imports be developed and included as
an additional and separate emissions number.
An important point emphasized by the TAG is that
the inventory, while useful for policy purposes, is
not adequate for regulatory purposes.

For More Information

The TAG is preparing a stand-alone report that will
provide an overview of the modeling results and
attach documentation, including the Assumptions
Book, the Policy Memos, spreadsheets and other
materials, that may prove useful to others doing
this type of analysis and to the on-going efforts
in Wisconsin to monitor and evaluate progress
toward achieving the state’s emission reduction
goals.
55

Attachment 2:
Recommendation for improved data
collection and on-going oversight

put in place will include partnerships with the
UW-System and other knowledge organizations
throughout the state. It is our best hope that,
through its transparency, the data evaluation
mechanism will not only support policy
innovation, but also support civic engagement
with mitigating our GHG impacts and provide
opportunities for economic innovation as well.

While the great breadth of experience and
knowledge that the Governor’s Global Warming
Task Force (GWTF) and its portfolio of working
groups have brought to bear on our charge gives
us confidence that the recommendations of the
Task Force will advance us decisively toward our
goals, the difficulty of prediction ensures that
the details of our progress will contain both
welcome and unwelcome surprises. To ensure
that Wisconsin comes as close to its goals as
possible in as efficient a manner as possible
requires adaptive management that allows for
mid-course corrections, or even changes, along
the way. Adaptive management requires ongoing
monitoring of our GHG sources and sinks and
a comparison of projected results of specific
policies with what actually happens, in terms
of both economic impact as well as emission
reductions. In that light, the TAG submitted a
recommendation on how we might implement
the needed monitoring. This recommendation
has been included in the Final Report as the
“Ensuring On-going GHG Emission Reduction
Effectiveness” template.
Our recommendation is guided by the need to
develop a technically respectable infrastructure
that will provide policy- and decision-makers
throughout our state with reliable information
about how our policies are performing. In
particular, it will allow us to recognize early on
areas that need attention either because things
are not going well as we had hoped or because
they are working better than we expected.
The monitoring infrastructure we are envisioning
is not a regulatory body. It is an innovative
advisory body that, confidently implemented,
could establish Wisconsin as a leader in the
adaptive management of its GHG emissions.
While there is clear need for a single State
agency to have the authority and responsibility
for data monitoring, it is likely that the processes
56

Coal

Attachment 3:
Graphs showing fuel prices

Wisconsin Delivered Coal Price
(Current Dollars)

4.00
3.50

YOC$/MMBtu

3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50

Crude Oil

1.00
0.50
0.00
2005

2010

2015

2020

AEO '07 Reference
AEO '07 High Price

2025

2030

Crude Oil Price to Refiners
(Current Dollars)

200.00
180.00
160.00

YOC$/barrel

140.00
120.00
100.00
80.00
60.00
AEO '07 Reference

40.00

AEO '07 High Price

20.00
0.00
2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

The Annual Energy Outlook (AEO) 2007 High Price was used for both Coal and Crude Oil in the Reference Case. The Annual
Energy Outlook is prepared by the US Department of Energy.

57

Natural Gas
Wisconsin Delivered Natural Gas Price
(Current Dollars)

16.00
14.00

YOC$/MMBtu

12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
NYMEX '08 Basis

4.00

AEO '07 Reference

2.00
0.00
2005

AEO '07 High Price

2010

2015

2020

The NYMEX ’08 Basis was used in the Reference Case.

58

2025

2030

Appendix E

Task Force Recommended Policies

Ensuring On-going GHG Emission Reduction Effectiveness
1.		 Work Group: Technical Advisory Group and Task
Force Co-Chairs

or biennial) so that the public and decision-makers
can easily track progress toward the state emission
reduction goal. In addition, the agency should
be assigned the responsibility of evaluating the
effectiveness of existing policies and of evaluating
potential new policies on an established schedule.
For example, the Task Force recommends that
the effectiveness of voluntary measures in the
industry, agriculture and forestry sectors be
evaluated in 2012. This evaluation would be a
logical task to assign to this agency to lead. The
agency should also regularly re-evaluate the state’s
emission reduction goals based on current science,
technology and progress. Regular reports on
progress should be issued to government officials
and the general public.

2. Policy Name: Ensuring On-going GHG Emission
Reduction Effectiveness
3.		 Policy Type: Data collection and analysis, policy
evaluation and tracking progress
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
State government
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling template and would
not result in any direct emission reducts.
6.		 Estimated Costs: Costs were not estimated for
this template
		
		 Funding Sources: State budget

		
A. Data Collection Recommendations. During the
process of developing input for modeling current
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the Technical
Advisory Group (TAG) found that some areas
had very robust data while others had little
credible data. Based on this experience, the TAG
strongly recommended that areas with robust
data be maintained and those with data gaps be
strengthened. Specific recommendations are:

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: It is
recommended that a formal mechanism be
established (1) to continuously gather data and
monitor progress toward reaching the state’s
emission reduction goals; (2) to evaluate the
effectiveness, cost impacts and benefits of existing
policies and to review and evaluate potential new
policies to reduce or sequester GHG emissions
in order to meet the state’s goals; and (3) to
provide clear, understandable, credible and easily
accessible information to the public and policy
makers about emissions and the state’s progress in
reaching its goals.

1. Continue to maintain the Wisconsin Energy
Statistics Report. The data in this report
proved to be invaluable, and the ability to
download parts of the report directly from the
internet was a helpful feature.
2. Land use data. Implement the attached
recommendation from the Agriculture and
Forestry Work Group (Attachment 1). A
central source for data regarding land use
does not exist, or, if it does, it is not available
in a manner that facilitates analysis useful in
the process of evaluating sinks and sources
of carbon emissions. This data needs to
be collected at a frequency that allows for
effective tracking of land use changes. Land
use changes have a significant impact on many
of the policies recommended by the Task
Force.

		 Responsibility for these tasks should be assigned
to a single agency, either a new or an existing
agency, that is granted the appropriate authority
to obtain specific data in a timely manner from
other state agencies and has dedicated staff
and adequate funding to support its work on a
permanent basis. The agency should be assigned
the responsibility of gathering and reporting the
data on a regular and timely basis (possibly annual

59

3. Stationary Source emissions data.
Implement the attached recommendation to
augment the reporting of GHG emissions from
stationary sources to include the emissions
from small and medium sources and to
include methane and nitrous oxide emissions
from combustion sources (Attachment 2).
Make the data available to the public at a
level of detail (such as 4 digit NAICS) so that
the data is useful to facilities, industry sectors
and the general public for comparing relative
performance. This recommendation grew out
of a policy template prepared by the Industry
Work Group.

the internet was extremely helpful in developing
the modeling framework used to evaluate
emission reduction policies for the Task Force.
8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency of the
Option: The agency responsible for these tasks
should be identified and funded as soon as
possible so that the systems can be put in place
in a timely manner, missing data can start to be
collected and a formal mechanism established
to start monitoring and tracking progress. The
initial development of the program, including
identification of data sources, selection of
appropriate models, and program definition will
take approximately one year. The first complete
statewide assessment should be made available
within two years. This will be a continuing effort.

4. Mobile Source emissions data. Collect data
on mobile sources per the recommendation of
the Transportation Work Group in their policy
template: “Energy Efficient Communities.”

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: See language in section 5

“The appropriate state agencies should
calculate appropriate GHG emissions
from transportation sources annually.
The inventory should discuss the potential
impacts of reduction policies (e.g. vehicle
efficiency, carbon content of fuels) to
access the effectiveness of these policies
and report on progress toward the desired
emission reduction targets.”

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Cost
estimates have not been developed
11. Barriers to Implementation: Many of these
functions are scattered across multiple agencies.
Other functions are not being performed now.
In any event, there is currently no cohesive,
organized or systematic mechanism to pull the
date collection and analysis, policy evaluation,
and tracking related to climate change together
in a manner that can inform the government and
the general public about progress made toward
achieving the emission reduction targets.
		 One of the major challenges will be to assign the
lead responsibility to a single agency that would
work with other agencies. The person or agency
charged with this responsibility must have the
appropriate authority to request specific data
in a timely manner from other department of
the government. Finally, this effort must be
adequately funded.

5. End use data. Opportunities to collect
additional data regarding end use should be
considered by the PSC. It may be appropriate
to utilize the Act 141 EE docket as a forum for
this discussion.
B. Evaluation Recommendations. The TAG
recommended that a consistent process and
framework for monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of the package of emission reduction
policies be established. This recommendation
should include an assessment of an appropriate
modeling capability to support the analysis and
responsibility for maintaining and updating the
model. The TAG found that having a cadre of areaspecific expertise to delve into the quality of the
data, the modeling assumptions and evaluation of
model outputs is essential.

12. Other Factors: None

C. Public Information. The data that is collected
should be made easily and readily accessible to
the public, for example, by having it available on
the internet. The ability to download parts of the
Wisconsin Energy Statistics report directly from

13. Related Policies: This policy recommendation
is an integral piece of the entire policy package
recommended by the Task Force.

Attachment 1: Land-based

60

Carbon Accounting System
Recommendation: Assign and fund a state
agency(ies) or university department the
responsibility for developing and managing an ongoing and complete land-based carbon accounting
system to estimate and track net carbon emissions
(sinks and sources) due to land cover and changes
in land use or management.
Background: The Task Force identified significant
gaps in land cover and land use data. This made
it difficult to estimate the magnitude of GHG
sources and sinks from current land use, to identify
patterns and trends in land use change and to
assess the impacts of changes to carbon sinks due
to changes in the use or management of lands. A
major problem is that there is no systematic and
continuing effort to collect statewide land use data
in Wisconsin.
The Agriculture/Forestry Work Group coordinated
with the Technical Advisory Group to describe
these data gaps and to recommend the
development of a long-term complete land-based
carbon accounting system to address this issue.
Description: The development of a
comprehensive land-based GHG accounting
system requires detailed information and analysis
to accurately depict the carbon stocks on the
landscape and how these stocks change with
changes in land use and management. Emissions
from stationary sources such as power plants can
be readily calculated and measured. However,
emissions and removals from land use dynamics,
land use change and changes in land management
require a multi-faceted approach to accurately
track them. An important aspect of the system
will be the ability to present the current status of
GHG inventories, monitor changes in response to
policies or practices, and make projections into the
future.
System Requirements:
• The program should produce statistically
valid time series data, at intervals of not
less than every two years, which can be
used to estimate the net carbon emissions

Table 1 - Information Components of a Land-Based GHG
Accounting System
Examples
Information
Components
• Satellite imagery such as Landsat
Land Use
images collected on an annual basis
and Cover
•
GIS analysis to detect changes in
Change
cover and use
• Crop or pasture type
Agriculture
• Estimates of biomass accumulation
• Estimates and measurements of
appropriate carbon pools
• Estimates of rate of carbon loss due
to changes in use or management
• Tillage practices
• Life-cycle carbon analysis of
agricultural products
• Forest type and management
Forestry
• Estimates of biomass carbon
accumulation and decomposition
rates
• Estimates and measurements of
appropriate carbon pools
• Estimates of rate of carbon loss due
to changes in use or management
• Carbon content of forest products
and rate of retirement or disposal
• Life cycle analysis of forest products
• Estimates and measurements of
Grasslands
appropriate carbon pools
and
•
Estimates of rate of carbon loss due
Wetlands
to changes in use or management
• Estimates of biomass carbon
accumulation and decomposition
rates
• Estimates and measurements of the
Urban and
carbon sequestration rates for the
Suburban
urban forest
areas
• Estimates of the energy use impacts
of the urban forest
• Carbon emission and sequestration
rates of public open space
• Estimates of rate of carbon loss due
to changes in use or management

61

•

•

•

due to land cover throughout the state.
The data should be provided for the smallest
land areas practical, no larger than a county
basis, and should be derived both from
satellite observations and field sampling.
The program should stay informed of the
scientific literature on land use and carbon
emissions in order to obtain the most relevant
and valid data sets possible. However, where
possible, data should be valid over time to
allow long term trend analysis.
Although the program should focus on carbon
emissions, the state should authorize the
program to produce and track additional
land use data on topics such as forest cover,
agricultural land use, urbanization, etc.

Attachment 2: Air Emissions Inventory Reporting
Recommendation: Amend NR 438, Wis. Adm. Code,
to (1) lower the carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
reporting threshold for all stationary sources from
100,000 tons/year to 10,000 tons/year and (2) add
the reporting of methane and nitrous oxide emissions
from stationary combustion sources that report CO2
emissions.
Background: The Wisconsin Air Emissions Inventory
(ARS- Annual Reporting System) program, outlined
in Ch. NR 438, Wis. Adm. Code, requires facilities to
report their annual air emissions and sets reporting
thresholds for different pollutants. Currently the
reporting threshold for CO2 is 100,000 tons/year.
This provides CO2 emissions data from utilities and
very large industrial combustion sources, but leaves
a substantial information gap for emissions from
medium and small sources. Macro-level emission
estimates for these sources are possible through
the use of “top down” inventories (such as the WRI
inventory), but these techniques have limitations.
Methane is not currently included in ch. NR 438,
however it is one of the primary anthropogenic
GHGs and thus should be included in an effort to
construct an inventory of these emissions. Nitrous
oxide is currently included in NR 438, with a reporting
threshold of 6,000 lbs. Under this proposal, all nitrous
oxide emissions related to combustion would be
reported concurrently with the methane and CO2
emissions.

The development of a comprehensive land-based
GHG accounting system requires detailed information
and analysis to accurately depict the carbon stocks
on the landscape and how these stocks change with
changes in land use and management. Emissions from
stationary sources such as power plants can be readily
calculated and measured. However, emissions and
removals from land use dynamics, land use change
and changes in land management require a multifaceted approach to accurately track them.
Developing a baseline is an important first step in
this effort. This baseline should be an appropriate
reference year conducive to policy decisions. The
assessment of current emissions and removals of
GHGs and carbon stores and changes should then be
made annually or biannually and compared to both
the baseline and the previous years.

The lowering of the CO2 reporting threshold was
proposed by the Industry Work Group. It grew out
of frustration at the lack of emissions data from all
but the largest industrial sources, and the difficulty
in developing policy recommendations for emission
reductions in the absence of this information. With
their proposal the Industry Work Group sought
to close this important information gap while
minimizing the reporting burden on industry and small
businesses. The Work Group’s intent was to provide
a reliable macro-measure of statewide industry GHG
emissions, as well as a facility-specific micro-measure
baseline (for covered facilities) to enable the tracking
of progress in reducing GHG emissions. In addition,
the Work Group felt that a reporting system would

To build this system, multiple data sources are
needed. Table 1 summarizes the various information
components of a land-based accounting system,
examples of specific types of information, and the
source and availability.
Further discussions about the design and
implementation of a GHG accounting system will
need to assess the ability of the state to conduct
measurements of GHG emissions and removals as
compared to modeling of these flows with verification.
The resources needed to develop and implement a
system have not yet been estimated.

62

encourage voluntary reductions by companies by
serving as a feedback loop that would make them
aware of their facility emissions and emission trends.

reporting and there would be little additional
impact to them from this requirement. In addition,
CO2 emissions would be reported from the use of
limestone in emission control equipment and from the
production of cement or lime.

As requested by the Task Force Co-Chairs, the
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) is considering a
number of proposals to address overall statewide
data and information needs to better inform future
climate change policy decisions. The Industry Work
Group proposal was included in this process; the
TAG supported their proposal and decided to add
the methane and nitrous oxide emissions reporting
requirement to the recommendation.

This policy proposal will help fill the medium to small
stationary source information gap and provide more
information on large stationary sources. Using ARS
data on reported fuel usage and calculating the CO2
emissions, it is estimated that an additional 150 - 250
facilities would be required to report their emissions.
This would yield an estimated 5 - 6% increase in
reported facility level CO2 emissions beyond what is
currently reported to ARS. This more comprehensive
emissions inventory would include data on the
number of sources, industry type and size, location,
annual emissions and emission trends. It should be
noted that while this recommendation begins to
address medium to smaller sources of CO2 emissions,
it doesn’t address the very large number of diffuse,
small sources – i.e. those with less than 10,000 tons of
CO2 emissions.

Description: This recommendation would amend an
existing regulation. It proposes to adjust the current
CO2 emissions threshold and require the reporting
of combustion-related methane and nitrous oxide
emissions from these sources. This recommendation
would result in a more robust greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions reporting system. This in turn would lead
to a more comprehensive, empirical statewide GHG
emissions inventory for stationary sources. It would
not change the reporting methods or emission
estimation methodology.
Who would be affected and how: In developing
this proposal, the Industry Work Group performed
an analysis to assess the impacts on industry. The
analysis assumed natural gas as the fuel source, a
CO2 reporting threshold of 10,000 tons/year and no
change in other emission reporting requirements.
The analysis concluded that a source that emits
10,000 ton/year CO2 from fuel combustion should
already be reporting to the emissions inventory since
their fuel combustion-related nitrogen oxides (NOx)
emissions would exceed the reporting threshold of
5 tons/year of NOx emissions. Thus, lowering the
CO2 reporting threshold should not pull new sources
into the reporting requirements. Furthermore, there
are default emission factors for CO2, methane and
nitrous oxide from stationary combustion based on
the type and amount of fuel consumed. With fuel data
already being reported to the emissions inventory, this
proposal should place minimal additional reporting
burden on facilities.
In addition, coal and oil fired sources would report
their methane emissions, which they currently do
not. These sources are not new to emission inventory

63

Comprehensive Initiative
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency,
Transportation, and Industry

Governor from state government, the University
system, local government, private business and
not-for-profit organizations. The budget and
programs of the Initiative would be approved by
its Board and the state’s involvement would be
coordinated by the Office of Energy Independence.
The Board would be responsible for providing for
stakeholder input for, and oversight of, each of the
four programs of the Initiative described below
so that the Initiative’s activities meet the needs of
the program’s targeted sectors.

2. Policy Name: Comprehensive initiative to support
voluntary long term greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions reductions (Comprehensive initiative)
3. Policy Type: Cross-sector, comprehensive
marketing, education, technical assistance and
funding to facilitate GHG emission reductions,
behavioral change and sustainable practices by
individuals, local governments, communities,
farms and small and medium-sized businesses.

This policy complements other cross sector
enabling policies that recommend (1) a substantial
increase in funding for research and development
of commercially viable low carbon technologies;
and (2) programs to develop Wisconsin’s
significant bio-energy and terrestrial sequestration
potential.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-sectors and/or Entities: All
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Significant potential reduction of CO2
emissions, but difficult to quantify.
6. Estimated Costs: Recommended funding between
$20 and $30 million per year beginning in 2009.
This funding includes meeting required staffing
and other administrative costs for the Initiative.

The Initiative would coordinate with, and support,
a wide variety of private and public efforts
consistent with its mission in order to leverage the
resources of those efforts to meet the Initiatives
goals and avoid duplication of programs.

Funding Sources: State government and private
donors (including individuals, businesses and
major foundations). Source of state funds has not
been identified. If a multi-sector cap-and-trade
program, and/or a carbon tax is in place in the
future, funding may be supplemented by a portion
of cap-and-trade auction revenues, if any, and/or
carbon tax revenues.

Description of the Program
Large sources of GHG emissions are relatively easy
to identify and specific control strategies can then
be implemented. The smaller sources of emissions
– such as individuals, small and mediumsized businesses, farms and local government
operations – are significant in the aggregate, but
identifying control strategies is difficult. Much
of the state’s success in reducing GHG emissions
reductions will depend upon the wide variety of
choices that the smaller sources make, including
individuals in the aggregate. In order to maximize
GHG emission reductions, Wisconsin must use
a wide variety of strategies to drive significant
behavioral and operational changes, including
education, public sector leadership and an ongoing state-wide behavioral change marketing
campaign. At the same time, the state must
make available the tools, expertise and services
necessary for smaller sources to understand and
reduce their GHG emissions.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Establish
The Wisconsin Voluntary Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Initiative as a public/private partnership
created under the auspices of the Office of Energy
Independence to make Wisconsin a national
leader in achieving voluntary GHG emissions
reductions by individuals, local governments,
community-wide programs, farms and businesses.
The Initiative also would support related
workforce and business development programs.
The Initiative would be housed in a new, non-profit
entity eligible for tax exempt donations. State
funding would be held in a trust so that those
funds are legally available only for the intended
purposes. Investment of the funds would be done
with the guidance of the State Investment Board.
The Initiative would be managed by an executive
director and governed by a Board of Directors,
consisting of individuals appointed by the

Care will need to be taken not to duplicate the
extensive energy efficiency and conservation
programs of Focus on Energy. The Initiative’s
mission would be broader (cross-sector and

64

multi-strategy) than the mission of Focus. It
would supplement Focus by promoting greater
knowledge and use of Focus programs, as well
as addressing and supporting GHG reduction
behaviors other than energy conservation
and efficiency. In order to build on the strong
foundation already created by Focus on Energy,
the initial phase of the behavioral marketing
campaign program described below should, in
tandem with Focus, address energy consumption
behaviors, with transportation and other areas
added as the campaign matures.

behaviors and choices of community residents,
organizations and businesses. The Initiative would
provide a variety of resources to community-wide
energy independence and sustainability programs,
including materials, training, technical support,
services, recognition and grants. The objectives
would be (i) to reduce costs for municipalities
through energy efficiency, development of
local renewable resources, use of sustainable
operational practices and implementation of
decision-making driven by the goal of reducing
GHG emissions and (ii) to provide public
leadership, inspiring individual and business
behavioral changes throughout the community.
Recognizing that the state’s communities differ
significantly depending on size and location,
this task must involve cooperative planning with
participating communities to identify those GHG
reduction practices and strategies most likely to
be successful.

Four Program Areas
The Initiative would be concerned with four
primary programs:
A. Marketing to Change Behavior. The Initiative
would be responsible for developing, funding
and implementing a comprehensive, multi-year,
state-wide marketing campaign aimed at all
sectors to induce changes in behavior that will
substantially reduce GHG emissions over the long
term. The campaign would target those behaviors
that have significant reduction potential and the
greatest likelihood of success in terms of achieving
behavioral change. This will require carefully
planned and well-researched efforts to identify
barriers to change and the motivators necessary
to induce change in each targeted audience.

C. Support Business GHG Reduction Initiatives. The
Initiative would provide a variety of services,
including education, training, technical support,
evaluations, recognition programs and funding to
Wisconsin businesses (including farms) to assist
them in determining, tracking and decreasing
their GHG emissions. The objective would be
to assist businesses to become more efficient,
offsetting costs of reducing their emissions and
increasing competitiveness. The Initiative would
implement policies to identify, incent, recognize,
reward and promote voluntary emission
reductions by the state’s businesses and related
sustainability practices and behaviors in a variety
of ways. The primary focus of this program would
be on small and medium-sized businesses.

The Initiative, working with other groups including
the State Department of Public Instruction, the
UW Stevens Point environmental education
program and Focus on Energy, also would be
responsible for fostering the development and
implementation of energy efficiency, conservation
and sustainability curriculums at all levels of the
state’s educational system.

D. Support for Development of Wisconsin Business
Opportunities Tied to GHG Reductions. The
Initiative would assist in design, implementation
and coordination of programs (1) to provide
workforce development and training for job
opportunities related to GHG reductions
strategies; and (2) to assist existing Wisconsin
businesses expand, and attract new businesses
and jobs to Wisconsin, to provide products and
services, including carbon offsets, that support
emission reduction strategies and business
sustainability practices and operations.

B. Support for Community-wide Sustainability
and Energy Independence Programs. There
is tremendous interest in developing and
implementing comprehensive, communitywide energy independence and sustainability
programs to address climate change and lower
governmental costs for the long-term. There
also is a pressing need to provide assistance to
these communities so that this interest can be
translated into successful, permanent programs.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Beginning January 1, 2009 and ongoing

Sustainable community development not
only focuses on local government practices
and decisions, but seeks also to influence the

65

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Difficult to quantify, but potentially
significant
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Recommended funding of between $20 and
$30 million per year from a variety of sources
beginning in 2009, including money for staffing
and other administrative costs for the Initiative.
This funding would be divided equitably between
the four programs of the Initiative by its Board
in a manner designed to enable each program
to achieve its objectives as set by the Board, and
consistent with donor funding requirements. If
a multi-sector cap-and-trade program and/or a
carbon tax is in place in the future, additional
funding may come from a portion of cap-andtrade auction revenues, if any, and/or carbon tax
revenues.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Funding, including
access to the state’s General Fund, and
competition in the future for funds from any capand-trade auction revenues and/or carbon tax
revenues.
12. Other Factors: The policy proposal will need to be
implemented in coordination with other related
state initiatives that are underway or planned.
It proposes actions and strategies necessary to
maximize the effectiveness of many other Task
Force policy recommendations. Early facilitation
of voluntary emission reductions across sectors
is essential to enhance Wisconsin’s economic
competitiveness and energy independence in a
future that will be carbon-constrained.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•

Speed of Travel Reductions
Electric, Hybrid and Plug-in Hybrid Electric
Vehicle Incentives
Enhanced Recycling Programs
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program

66

Research and Development Funding
1.		 Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

change, including funding for the Wisconsin
Initiative on Climate Change Impacts, a partnership
between UW-Madison and the DNR.
		 The PSC should permit reasonable increased
spending on GHG emission reduction-related R&D
by utilities that will benefit Wisconsin, including
conservation and efficiency technologies, to be
recovered in rates.

2.		 Policy Name: Research and Development Funding
(R&D)
3.		 Policy Type: Research and development
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Primarily utility and transportation sectors

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
policy should begin immediately and continue
indefinitely.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Does not result in direct reductions of
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG).

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: There are no direct emission
reductions through this policy.

6.		 Estimated Costs: Cost estimates were not
developed for this policy
		 Funding Sources: Federal and state funds

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Cost
estimates were not developed for this policy

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: There
is a pressing need for additional research and
development (R&D) on the federal and state
levels to develop new technologies to reduce
GHG emissions. This policy recommends that a
variety of alternative technologies be explored
and developed rather than trying to pick a future
technology winner. This will provide options and
flexibility for compliance with the challenging
emission reduction targets at reasonable cost.
		 At the federal level, Wisconsin should aggressively
advocate for a dramatic increase in federal
R&D spending related to achieving substantial
reductions in GHG emissions.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Securing and
allocating the additional funding at both the
federal and state levels.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies: A variety of utility and
transportation policies, including but not limited
to those dealing with conservation and efficiency,
renewable energy, bio-fuels and biomass, carbon
capture and sequestration, and Great Lakes wind.

		 At the state level, the state should support
significantly increased R&D funding for renewable
and other low carbon technologies to enable
Wisconsin to become a leader in these areas.
In addition, the state should support R&D of
carbon capture and storage technologies in
order to achieve, if feasible, rapid development
and deployment on a commercial basis of coal
plants with this technology. This effort is needed
to ensure that alternatives are available to meet
future base load needs.
		 In addition, R&D funding should be provided to
enhance Wisconsin’s ability to adopt to climate

67

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency Program
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

are funded through program revenues collected
from utility customers in the rates of regulated
electric and natural gas utilities

2. Policy Name: Enhanced Conservation and Energy
Efficiency Program (ECEE Program)1 – included in
the Interim Report

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
Background
This template proposes a significant change in the
direction of the current Focus program from one
of a spending cap (as a percent of revenue) to one
of a savings goal (as a percent of usage).

3. Policy Type: Regulation
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities: This
policy affects all retail sales by electric and natural
gas providers, including municipal utilities and
electric cooperatives.

The Focus program utilizes a given amount of
funding (1.2% of utilities’ revenue) and then
attempts to save as much energy as possible.
The proposed ECEE Program would establish a
given energy savings goal and then be funded
appropriately to achieve that goal.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: 14 million metric tons of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) by 2020
6. Estimated Costs: By 2012 costs are estimated to
be about $285 million per year, by 2020 costs will
reach about $380 million per year. Benefits from
the proposal will exceed the costs because the
program will only target cost-effective savings.2
Funding Sources: All program administration costs

This template proposes savings targets of an
annual 2.0 % reduction of the electric load and an
annual 1.0% reduction to the natural gas load3 by
2015 after a ramp-up period. Currently, the Focus
program expends approximately 1.2% of annual
utility electric and natural gas sales revenue
to achieve appropriately a 0.4 - 0.5% annual
reduction in electric usage and a 0.3% annual
reduction in natural gas usage (i.e. usage by enduse customers not including usage for electric
generation). Thus, this shift to higher energy
savings goals will lead to new and expanded
programs which may include the following:
introduction of new efficient technologies,
promotion of current appropriate technologies,
technical assistance, education, outreach and
research, elimination of wasteful use, and
customer-sited renewable technologies.

1. Wisconsin currently has two distinct energy efficiency program
efforts: (1) a program funded by federal grants and a state fee on
Wisconsin electric usage for energy efficiency and bill assistance
efforts for low-income families/persons administered by the Department of Administration; and (2) the Focus on Energy (“Focus”)
program targeted primarily to conservation and energy efficiency
efforts for utility consumers above the federal low-income income
line. This template proposes revising the Focus program. To avoid
confusion this template will use the “Focus” label when speaking to the past and/or current program; it will use the “Enhanced
Conservation and Energy Efficiency (ECEE) Program” label when
speaking to the future, revised Focus program, as improved by the
suggestions here-in (recognizing that, in the future, even after the
implementation of these proposals, the conservation and energy
efficiency program will remain named Focus on Energy).
2. Since the inception of the Focus program, independent evaluation has indicated that it has produced energy dollar savings of
more than twice the program’s costs. These direct energy savings
reduce future utility costs and, compared to the use of more
expensive resources to service customers, result in lower future
utility bills. If direct economic and environmental benefits were included, even more savings would be generated on a dollar for dollar basis. In addition to these reasons, the proposed ECEE Program,
based on independent evaluations of the current Focus program,
is also likely to result in net positive benefits due to a substantial
number of jobs created in the state.
3. This is consistent with the Midwestern Governor’s agreement
to reduce electric load by 2% per year and the Governor’s Midwest
Gas Initiative which has proposed a reduction of 1.0% of natural
gas load starting in 2009.

The proposed increased GHG emission and
energy savings reductions can be achieved
from cost-effective conservation and energy
efficiency. The effectiveness of this effort will
be enhanced and facilitated by complementary
policies such as innovative rate tariffs, improved
demand response/load management efforts, and
improved consumer education and outreach.
These complementary policies are described in
other policy templates crafted by this work group.

68

The overall annual targets also include GHG
emission reductions and energy savings from
other templates proposed by the Industry and
Agriculture & Forestry work groups. (See section
13 for further reference to these interactions.)
The templates from these other groups call for
increases in, or additional targets for, expenditures
of the current Focus program in order to reduce
the use of regulated energy sources in those
sectors. (Providing adequate funding for energy
efficiency efforts for non-regulated energy sources
is addressed in a separate template crafted by this
work group.)

Reductions.4 For purposes of the estimates in this
template, it was assumed that the underlying
growth rate for electricity is 1.8%. No growth
for natural gas usage by end-use customers is
assumed.
Other than specifically recommended for change
here, the intent of this template is to preserve all
substantive and procedural provisions of Act 141.
Recommended Action
In order to enhance the ability to achieve and
maximize the result of this effort, the following
steps should be undertaken during the ramp-up
period:
• Continue to study best practices in other
states/regions to help identify programs and
strategies that provide the greatest system
benefits at the least-cost. Adopt these
practices in Wisconsin as appropriate while
continuing to develop new cutting-edge
initiatives and designs.
• Ensure the utilities and the PSC, with the
opportunity for effective public involvement,
provide leadership in determining the best
portfolio of approaches to reach 2.0% and
1.0% in annual usage reduction for electric
utilities and natural gas respectively by
viewing energy efficiency as Wisconsin’s first
resource priority.
• Continue to research the gap between
the achievable, and economic potential of
energy efficiency, and how consumers and
businesses make energy decisions. Broaden
the existing Potential Study to inform whether
higher targets of usage reduction would be
appropriate and cost effective, compared to
the expected cost of energy.
• Create programs and pursue initiatives that
will increase awareness, understanding and
participation through public campaigns,
education, and outreach. Such efforts to
affect customer behavior are essential
and valuable elements in the overall ECEE
Program and should be implemented as soon
as possible. The desirability of a Focus based
initiative in this area was approved by this

Utilities, the PSC and the Focus Administrator
should be given flexibility to be innovative
in reaching these goals. Actual budgets and
program/sector priorities should be determined
periodically by the PSC as defined in Act 141 in
a contested case proceeding, in order to provide
opportunities for public input. In particular,
the ramp-up to the 2% electric and 1% natural
gas annual reduction goals in 2015 should be
supported by a new efficiency potential study
prior to 2015 to determine whether benefits are
likely to exceed the costs of the ramp-up by a
reasonable margin and whether higher energy
savings goals and budgets are appropriate
prior to that date. Capturing all available costeffective energy savings should be Wisconsin’s
first resource priority to achieve GHG emissions
reductions as well as achieve energy savings
that can mitigate future energy costs and energy
infrastructure needs.
Annual savings targets should be established
over a program period (e.g. 3 - 4 years) as
the “average” annual savings to be achieved
during that period to allow program flexibility
to recognize that conditions may change during
that period. Several states have adopted a similar
energy savings goal of 2% of annual usage, after a
ramp-up period. It is widely believed that this is an
achievable and perhaps conservative goal, given
the cost of carbon reduction alternatives and the
opportunity to improve program effectiveness
including the use of approaches such as that set
forth in the Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions

4. For example see the most recent McKinsey study at: http://
www.mckinsey.com/clientservice/ccsi/pdf/US_ghg_final_report.
pdf

69

•

•

•

work group and should be implemented as
part of the Focus program as soon as possible.
When a broader multi-sector public campaign
to reduce carbon footprints through changing
customer behavior is established (such as the
proposed, separate Comprehensive Initiative
to Support Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse
Gas Emission Reductions template - which
also contains a description of the Focus based
initiative) these efforts should be coordinated.
The work group strongly believes that such
a multi-sector campaign is necessary and
appropriate and that the proposed Focus
sustainability initiative a necessary and
appropriate element in Focus efforts that
seamlessly fits within this larger effort when
that latter effort is initiated.
Create programs of recognition and incentives
for the most effective results. For example,
seek to use lighting programs to accelerate
the movement in the marketplace to lower
or no mercury compact fluorescent light
bulbs (CFLs) and other lighting while in the
meantime ensuring effective CFL recycling
efforts.
Create a public scorecard of achievement
for the state, by sector or by utility or other
geographic division or affinity group that is
readily accessible by the public.

•

•

Integrate other individual utility efforts with
statewide conservation and energy efficiency
programs.
Consider new ratemaking approaches to
“decouple sales” from profits for utilities that
may inhibit utility pursuit of all cost-effective
energy efficiency. For such decoupling
approaches, it may not be appropriate
to include large industrial customers that
operate in highly competitive markets. The
PSC should consider testing such decoupling
approaches with energy intensive customers
before considering their wider application to
such industries. Consideration should also be
given to the potential impact of decoupling on
low-income customers.
Incorporate appropriate policies/initiatives
to ensure that very price-sensitive customers
(such as low-income customers and large
customers that operate in very competitive
markets) can participate in cost-effective
energy conservation and efficiency
opportunities without meaningful adverse
impacts. For example, the PSC may wish to
propose that customers with an income of
200% of federal poverty or less should be
included in the state’s definition of “lowincome customers” with a commensurate
increase in low income funds to address the

ProposedEnergySavingsGoalsDuringRampͲup(as%ofload)
 Electric Est.Costs(%ofrev)
NaturalGasEst.Costs(%ofrev)
2009
0.75% 

2.0% 

0.5% 

2.0% 
2010
1.0% 

2.5% 

0.75% 

2.5% 
2011
1.25% 

3.0% 

1.0% 

3.0% 
2012
1.50% 

3.5% 

1.0% 

3.0%
2013
1.75% 

3.75% 

1.0% 

3.0%
2014
1.75% 

3.75% 

1.0% 

3.0%
2015
2.0% 

4.25% 

1.0% 

3.0%
2016Ͳ2020savingstargetsremainat2015percentagelevelsunlessPSCincreasestargets

 Notes: Actual budgets should be determined periodically by the PSC in a contested case hearing process with opportunity for
public input. Actual budgets in the 1990s were significantly higher than they are today, so these levels of effort are not wholly
untested in Wisconsin.
Higher annual energy savings targets and budgets beyond those suggested by the work group may be appropriate and should be
implemented earlier than suggested in the proposed ramp-up if information supports that the additional cost-effective energy
savings opportunities will be available and attainable sooner.

70

Proposed Energy Efficiency Strategies
1,600

Electric Savings Targets (GWH)

1,400
1,200
1,000
800

Note: Savings over BAU by 2020

600

1.5% by 2012 saves 12 million metric tons
2% by 2015 saves 14 million metric tons

400

2% by 2012 saves 15 million metric tons
200
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

1.5% by 2012

•

2014

2015

2.0% by 2012

needs of such customers through the existing
federal/state low income weatherization
and bill assistance program. This should
also include a careful consideration of
a transition period for a phase-in of the
funding changes for “large energy customers”
required by Act 141 to avoid potential “rate
shock.” An ultimate benefit of cost-effective
conservation and energy efficiency is to
increase the productivity and competitiveness
of Wisconsin businesses to maintain a strong
economic environment. Achieving that
benefit requires a consideration of both short
and long run impacts from expanded actions
to reduce GHG emissions.
Expand “large energy customer” self-direction
programs to allow increased flexibility and
recognize customer-side fossil fuel usage
reductions, subject to appropriate regulation.
In addition, the PSC should consider whether
it is appropriate to implement a rate crediting
mechanism that rewards substantial early
action in conservation and energy efficiency
taken by large, energy intensive industry at its
own expense after 2004.

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2.0% by 2015

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
This program builds upon the current Focus
program framework in Act 141 and establishes
statewide electric and natural gas load reductions
through conservation and energy efficiency. Thus,
the ECEE Program will take effect as soon as the
PSC approves savings targets and corresponding
budget levels and the Joint Finance Committee
completes its review of budgets that exceed
1.2% of annual utility sales revenues. Given these
circumstances, the earliest possible date for
implementation of the ECEE Program is calendar
year 2009. Preparation for increased efforts
can begin in 2008. The actual ramp-up periods
and investment amounts should be determined
pursuant to the provisions of Act 141, and after a
contested case hearing process based on relative
benefits and costs with the objective of capturing
all cost-effective conservation and energy
efficiency.
		
		 To reflect the importance and value of increased
energy efficiency efforts as well as for purposes
of modeling this recommendation, a suggested

71

ramp-up period for savings goals and estimated
budgets to attain such annual targets is shown in
the following chart (which does not include the
far higher value of the energy savings that reduce
future utility bills).

10. Approximation of Costs for Selected Years:
By 2012, estimated spending would be about
$285 million per year on electric and natural gas
efficiency programs and by 2020 approximately
$380 million per year. These estimates are
based on the current savings/cost relationships
in which approximately 1.2% of annual utility
revenues has resulted in approximately 0.4 0.5% of annual electric load reduction and 0.3%
of annual natural gas usage. These estimated
budgets include administrative costs which cover
program oversight, as well as measurement and
verification or results. These costs and projections
will depend on the speed of implementation and
effectiveness of other conservation and energy
efficiency initiatives such as improved building
codes and appliance standards, low carbon
electric generation sources, reduction of business
energy intensity, and the actual underlying growth
rates in electricity and natural gas usage. (Some of
these initiatives are addressed by other Task Force
policy templates).

9. Explanation of Estimate of GHG Reductions: This
proposal to achieve 2% annual electric savings
by 2015 should reduce CO2 emissions by 14
million metric tons by 2020. This assumes some
ability to achieve returns to scale with efficiency
spending in conjunction with implementation
of other related templates drafted by this work
group, utility efforts, as well as an improved,
comprehensive outreach and education efforts
that are coordinated with statewide programs
(including a consumer behavior initiative to
increase participation in programs). These
efforts will help to reduce the gap between the
“achievable” and “economic” potential for energy
efficiency as a resource. Coordination of program
and R&D initiatives with other states in the region
would also help in achieving more sustainable,
widespread reductions.

The following chart shows the approximate
estimated total budgets for three distinct rampups to achieve the scenario recommended in
this template of annual savings of at least 2% of

Approximate Energy Efficiency Spending
$400
$350
$300

Millions

$250
$200
$150
$100
$50
$2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

1.5% by 2012

72

2014

2015

2.0% by 2012

2016

2017

2.0% by 2015

2018

2019

2020

annual electric usage by 2015. The incremental
increase in budgets to achieve the proposed
savings targets is the difference between the
approximate $90 million Focus budget in 2008
based on 1.2% of estimated annual utility
revenues in that year and the total spending
budgets by year shown in the table.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Customer
participation is the largest barrier. To be more
effective, more innovative in investing in energy
efficiency, using a best practices approach and
an increased level of customer education and
outreach, as well as an integrated customer value
approach is appropriate. Increasing the overall
value to customers will also require increased
long-term program and technological R&D to
better design programs.

The objective of the ECEE proposal is to maximize
overall aggregate net benefits at the lowest
cost. It should be noted that the costs for this
template are calculated based on a cost/benefit
ratio methodology which does not recognize
the potential for greater economies of scale,
more innovative or effective programs, or more
innovative and effective approaches to funding an
ECEE Program. Increasing conservation and energy
efficiency spending to at least up to 3.5% to 4.25%
of annual electric revenues and up to 3.0% per
year of natural gas revenues, is justified to capture
the far higher benefits from reducing sales growth
and mitigate future utility and environmental
costs by taking advantage of all cost-effective
conservation and efficiency opportunities
available.

While cost-effective energy efficiency provides
significant benefits to society and participating
customers, increased short-term rates from
increased energy efficiency budgets (as well as
other costs causing rates to increase) can cause
concerns, especially for low-income customers
and large customers who operate in very cost
competitive markets. Actions to mitigate adverse
impacts from increased funding for the ECEE
Program, while maintaining the opportunity to
achieve cost-effective savings, should be pursued.
These actions include: (1) the continuation and
possible expansion of an effective “self-direction”
option that encourages large customers to
pursue their own significant cost-effective savings
opportunities that can be credited toward their
overall contribution requirement for the ECEE
Program (including qualified and verifiable actions
funded by Industrial Revenue Bonds, revolving
loan programs and performance contracts, as
well as demand response programs); and (2)
the creation of a “large customer” advisory
group for the ECEE Program to help develop and
target effective programs to better address the
diverse savings opportunities and needs of such
customers. Integrating ECEE Program actions
with opportunities for potential productivity
improvements, and meeting emission reduction
requirements through a “single stop” process,
offered with other federal/state entities or publicprivate partnerships, should also be encouraged
for such large price-sensitive customers.

Actual Focus budgets should be determined
periodically by the PSC in a contested case
hearing process taking account of relative benefits
and costs of such program efforts. This hearing
should also consider the development of more
innovative, lower cost funding for such efforts,
and the development of policies to better align
regulation with the objectives of: (1) reducing
GHG emissions; (2) avoiding, or delaying, the need
for expensive new power plants; (3) balancing the
need to provide clear ratepayer benefits with the
need to maintain a healthy utility industry able
to meet Wisconsin’s energy needs on a highly
reliable basis. Such incentives will contribute to
the success of a significantly larger effort. Costs
of this policy should be compared to the cost of
business-as-usual which would include building
new generation and paying for the associated
fuel. These estimates assume that innovative
rate design and more comprehensive consumer
education and outreach will be implemented at
least to some extent to help support and achieve
the desired results.

73

12. Other Factors:
Savings versus Spending/All Wisconsin Energy
Utilities
It is important to emphasize that this new target
savings goal approach is a major departure from
the current spending cap approach. The proposed
savings goals are set considerably higher than
expected goals of the current Focus program (but
not higher than achievements set in the state’s
earlier conservation programs in the 1990s) and
therefore must rely on state-of-the-art programs,
as well as a portfolio of other complementary
policies initiatives (such as innovative tariffs,
and consumer education and outreach, etc.) to
motivate increased participation and success. The
cost figures may represent a modest increase in
rates but should result in a decrease in usage for
participating customers. Over the course of the
ECEE Program, participants will experience lower
bills than would otherwise have been the case,
despite the modest addition to rates.

cost-effective energy efficiency or behavior
change strategies. This is reflected in program
participation rates that reflect past practices.
The scope of the 2005 study excluded any
initiatives or efforts to combine programs with
innovative rate structures, as these initiatives
were not included in the current Focus program,
or under the Public Benefits charge “umbrella.”
Estimates were made based on programs and
approaches which were similar to those currently
used by the Focus program (or “tried and true”).
The scope of the study also excluded any efforts
or initiatives that were not currently within the
purview of the current program.
In any potential study, the price of electricity will
determine the level of economic or cost effective
efficiency investments. The data used in the 2005
study was pre-Hurricane Katrina and did not
reflect subsequent natural gas price increases.
Natural gas prices affect both natural gas
efficiency opportunities, as well as opportunities
in the electric sector where natural gas is used for
generation. This means that the 2005 estimates
were understated due to the price changes
immediately after the report was final.

Similar increases in energy savings targets, energy
efficiency efforts and funding levels should be
set for all Wisconsin energy utilities including
municipal utilities, and electric cooperatives to
ensure equity in achieving and maximizing the
achievement of GHG reductions in Wisconsin.
Equitable participation by large energy customers
in the program, both as to benefits and costs,
is also recommended and required in order to
meet the established targets. Wisconsin should
continue and expand its initiatives for improved
programs and R&D efforts with other regional
entities.

Further, the 2005 study did not made a separate
estimate of “economic” potential. The costeffective savings target estimates proposed in this
template are likely to be less than the economic
potential, but more than the so-called businessas-usual “achievable” potential.
Future Potential Studies
Future potential studies should incorporate a
number of scope and method modifications to
provide data for future decisions by the PSC:

Comparison of this Recommendation to Recent
Estimates of Potential
In 2005 the Energy Center of Wisconsin conducted
a study of the achievable potential for energy
efficiency and customer-sited renewable
technologies in Wisconsin. In the study the term
“achievable” was meant to connote a level of
adoption of economic technologies and initiatives
similar to those observed under past programs
that featured rebates, incentives, technical
assistance and the like. The measure of achievable
potential also recognizes that consumers
and businesses simply do not implement all

A. Carbon reductions and other environmental
benefits should be valued at some range of values
or actual market rates if possible.
B. Market prices for electricity should also be used to
value efficiency.
C. Future reductions in usage should not be
discounted.

74

D. The useful lives of measures should be
reexamined to reflect best available information.
E. The combined effect of efficiency programs with
higher levels of complementary efforts such as
education, outreach, and innovative tariffs should
be incorporated into participation rates. This will
require likely require additional research.
F.

More innovative, aggressive program approaches
should be explored for inclusion.

G. New technologies should be incorporated.
H. An evaluation of the contribution of building
code and appliance standard changes should be
assessed, but counted separately from efficiency
potential from voluntary program efforts.
I.

Both economic and achievable potential should be
calculated.
Finally, all research presented to the Task Force
on energy efficiency indicates that it is one of the
most cost effective, immediate tools to address
GHG reduction. The proposed annual energy
savings targets can be achieved using current,
proven technologies, while technologies to
reduce emissions on the supply side continue
to need additional research and development
(CCS, nuclear, biomass) before they can reach
full potential. Energy efficiency has the capability
to provide immediate cost-effective results on a
fast-track timeline to reduce GHG emissions and
to mitigate future utility costs and infrastructure
needs.
This recommendation makes no assumptions
about the potential impacts on electric system
usage from the addition of electric cars (PHEVs).

13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•

State Appliance Efficiency Standards
Aligning Public and Private Interests for
Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)
General Incentives for Industrial Energy
Conservation and Efficiency

75

Aligning Public and Private Interests
1.		 Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

design efforts would benefit substantially from
aggressive efforts and support by utilities. To
obtain such efforts and support, it is essential to
recognize that substantially increased CEE has
the potential impact to erode a utility’s current
earnings and diminish its future profitability for
two primary reasons. First, in the short term
(between rate cases), to the extent energy sales
are less than forecasted in the test year, the
utility will under-recover its fixed costs (which
include a profit margin). This result is produced
because, under current PSC practice, some of the
utilities’ fixed costs (including profit margin) are
recovered through an energy (kWh) charge. This
is done to provide better long term price signals
to consumers. But, CEE and significant changes
in rate design, such as inverted block rates, may
contribute to lower sales than forecasted, and thus
lower profits. The risk created provides a potential
disincentive for a utility to pursue aggressive costeffective CEE and innovative rate designs where
the risk of lower than estimated sales result in
direct losses to shareholders.

2.		 Policy Name: Aligning Public and Private Interests
for Conservation and Energy Efficiency (Aligning
Interests) -- included in Interim Report
3. Policy Type: PSC policy changes to consider the
need to and, if appropriate, the means to remove
disincentives, and create positive incentives, for
Wisconsin utilities to accomplish conservation
and energy efficiency (CEE) and innovative rate
design objectives. The policy changes should also
explore mitigation strategies to minimize customer
impacts, especially to price sensitive customers if
such policy changes are pursued. The PSC should
consider these issues in a process that provides for
the opportunity for effective public participation
such as a contested case hearing process.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Utilities, utility customers
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and does not
result in any direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
reductions

Second, to the extent that aggressive CEE (or
innovative rate designs) reduces sales, the
lower sales will reduce the need for capital
expenditures on future utility infrastructure. While
this reduction provides societal benefits, it also
potentially lowers earnings growth opportunities
for utilities, since they are allowed to earn a
return only on capital investment. If an entity can
earn a return on only one type of investment, it
is encouraged to make that type of investment,
even if another option would be less costly to its
customers and society.

6. Estimated Costs: Administrative costs for
modifying PSC ratemaking policies will be minimal
beyond current efforts. Potential increased costs
for utility customers will depend on the type of
mechanisms developed.
		 Funding Sources: This investigation would be
funded within the current PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
		 Background
		 A major increase in end-user CEE can make an
essential contribution toward meeting GHG
emission reduction goals. While this will require
additional expenditures, CEE can be accomplished
in the near term, in contrast to many other GHG
strategies. CEE therefore should be a very high
priority.

The potential interaction of traditional regulation
and aggressive CEE or new rate design initiatives
can also create a tension between a utility’s
customer service objectives (controlling bills
and achieving societal objectives) and a utility
management’s fiduciary duty to its shareholders
(providing a reasonable return). Left unaddressed,
this tension may create a disincentive for a utility
to strongly support aggressive CEE efforts, as
well as measures like stronger building codes,
appliance standards, or new rate designs. The

Dramatically increasing CEE and innovative rate

76

existing PSC ratemaking paradigm creates
these potential disincentives and the prospect
of a carbon constrained world should provide
motivation for considering and resolving this
tension.

utility rate case. The policies would remain in
effect until changed by the PSC.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy and does
not result in any direct GHG emission reductions

Recommended Action
The work group recommends that the PSC,
as soon as possible, establish a public hearing
process to analyze the nature and extent of
potential disincentives to utility support for
aggressive CEE and innovative rate design
initiatives and identify and, if appropriate, take
the steps necessary to address such disincentives.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Administrative costs will be borne in the near
term.
11. Barriers to Implementation: The primary barrier
is the need for PSC action to modify its ratemaking
policies to achieve CEE objectives. There also may
be opposition to the policy changes by certain
utilities or customers due to perceived impacts on
earnings or rates or other principled objections to
such new policies.

This inquiry should include both the potential
need to remove specific disincentives and also
the potential need for, and design of, effective
mechanisms that would provide utilities a positive
incentive to support aggressive CEE initiatives
(such as allowing a utility to share in a portion of
the net benefits created by its efforts or earning a
return on its CEE expenditures).

12. Other Factors: Many of the GHG reductions
achievable by new PSC policies may be
accomplished without the need for new
legislation. The incremental impact on overall
GHG reductions is difficult to predict.

It also should include exploration of rate
mitigation strategies to minimize customer
impacts by: (1) exploring less costly means of
funding cost effective CEE efforts; and/or (2) by
potentially excluding specific customer classes
such as large, price-sensitive customers with the
option of “self-direction” from a “decoupling”
mechanism. The self-direction option should
allow internal CEE project costs to offset the
overall amount required to fund the third party
administered portion of statewide programs,
should be verifiable and flexible and should
permit the use of alternative financing methods
such as Industrial Revenue Bonds, revolving loan
programs and performance contracts. The PSC
should also consider the impact of new or revised
ratemaking changes on lower-income customers.

This policy option should be considered together
with the other policy options concerning energy
efficiency, ratemaking policy and innovative rate
designs. All three are closely related, should be
seen as a package of actions available to the PSC
to reduce GHG emissions, and should not be acted
upon separately, but in an integrated manner.
This policy would facilitate the implementation of
the Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program, and other conservation and energy
efficiency efforts, as well as the implementation of
innovative rate designs.
13. Related Policies:
•

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Because these action(s) may be necessary to
facilitate other actions, PSC consideration of these
issues should be initiated as soon as possible and
if determined to be appropriate, specific proposed
changes should be considered for implementation
in a contested case hearing process, such as a

•
•

77

Enhanced Conservation and Energy 		
Efficiency Program
Improved and Innovative Rate Design
Demand Response and Load Management

Improved Rate Designs
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

gas (GHG) emissions, and the need to build
new physical infrastructure or buy future new
supply. A good rate design should reflect costs
that differentiate between demand at the time
of system peak, on-peak and off-peak as well as
when GHG emission impact costs are significant.

2. Policy Name: Improved and Innovative Rate
Designs (Improved Rate Designs) – included in the
Interim Report
3. Policy Type: Regulatory. PSC policy changes
to better align utility electric and natural gas
rate designs with the impact of usage on
global warming and the need for future energy
infrastructure and fuel supply. It is possible some
approaches may need legislative authorization.

The current flat rate design for smaller customers
provides very blunt signals about the effect of a
customer’s consumption on GHG emissions or the
need for new infrastructure and supply. Innovative
rate designs are needed to better reflect these
costs and to help to offset adverse GHG emission
impacts and mitigate the sources of future utility
cost increases. These innovative rate designs, in
addition to providing better price signals, should
also facilitate the ability of customers to effectively
respond to such price information to lower their
overall bills. Such new rate designs are needed as
soon as possible.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-sectors and/or Entities:
Electric and natural gas utilities, electric and
natural gas utility customers
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Together with the Enhanced Conservation
and Energy Efficiency Program, expected to
reduce total annual electric sales by at least an
additional 1.5% per year beyond the current 0.5%
annual savings from the existing Focus on Energy
program. This policy would create price signals
that better reflect the cost of the carbon footprint
created by a customer’s usage, and would
facilitate the uptake of lower cost options such as
increased conservation and energy efficiency.

		 Effective, improved rate designs are both a source
of efficiency savings in and of themselves (as
customers modify their behavior or take action to
reduce their bills), and a means to help facilitate
other savings efforts such as the Enhanced
Conservation and Energy Efficiency Program. It
also needs to be recognized that the adoption
of significant new rate designs, like a substantial
increase in energy efficiency efforts, can create
revenue stability problems for a utility that need to
be addressed to eliminate a potential disincentive
for a utility to implement such new designs.

6. Estimated Costs: Limited administrative costs to
hold regulatory proceedings. New rate designs
would likely result in a different distribution of
costs among different customers depending
on level and time of usage. Implementing new
rate designs will create new costs for recovery
by utilities including metering, billing, customer
service, marketing and IT, especially if new
metering infrastructure must be created.

		 Recommended Action
		 The work group strongly recommends that
the PSC, with all deliberate speed, open a
proceeding(s) to investigate improved and
innovative rate designs for all customer classes,
that better reflects the impact of consumption
on global warming, and the need for new energy
infrastructure and supply. This inquiry should: (1)
provide appropriate price signals to customers
that reflect the ultimate costs imposed on the
utility to serve, as well as impact on global
warming; (2) provide effective opportunities for
customers to respond to such price signals by
reducing their overall bill (including during critical

Funding Sources: This investigation would be
funded within the current PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
		 Background
		 Improved rate designs and rate design options
are necessary to provide better price signals to
customers concerning their cost of consumption,
and that consumption’s impact on greenhouse

78

peak pricing periods); and (3) recognize that rate
designs should be better integrated with demand
response and energy efficiency opportunities, as
well as improved information, and information
pathways, to affect customer behavior. These
important, latter linkages in the development of
new rate designs should be specifically integrated
in that process to create as valuable, seamless
and easy a choice for customers to control their
usage as possible. Utilities should also be provided
the flexibility to offer a menu of appropriate rate
designs.

participation by interested parties, the PSC should
pursue the development and implementation of
improved rate designs with all deliberate speed.
Both improvements in electric and natural gas
rate designs should be treated as a priority, but
given limited resources and greater expected
GHG emission reductions from improved electric
pricing, the PSC, if necessary, should proceed with
developing and implementing innovative electric
rate designs first.
9. Explanation of Rough estimate of GHG
Reductions: See Section 5

		
		 The work group urges the PSC to specifically
analyze for implementation inverted rates, and/or
inverted time-of-use rates, for smaller customers,
as well as other options, to better track and
reflect the impact of usage on global warming.
Additionally, the PSC should analyze these rates
(and other options) to address the situation of
customers who have the least-financial ability to
respond to these new types of price signals. For
larger customers, we recommend an investigation
of improved time-of-use rates, among other
innovative new options. The PSC should also
continue to improve utility buy-back tariff designs
to both better reflect costs and benefits, and
especially to recognize the carbon reduction value
of customer-owned renewable energy.
		
		 The PSC should also consider the potential
disincentive of lost revenues from new rate
designs that can discourage a utility from pursuing
such designs. This could be done in the same
proceeding recommended in the Aligning Public
and Private Interests for Conservation and Energy
Efficiency policy template.
		
		 The PSC should adopt improved rate designs after
the opportunity for effective public participation.
Given the expected rate impacts from rate design
changes, specific rate design changes for a utility
should be included in a contested case hearing
process, such as a utility rate case.

10. Rough Estimate of Cost for Selected Years:
As previously noted, the main direct costs
are for administrative proceedings, although
implementing new rate designs will potentially
create new costs for utilities for metering, billing
and IT. The main costs will come from incurring
the metering, IT and billing costs to allow smaller
customers to be faced with, and respond to,
better price signals.
11. Barriers to Implementation:
New costing approaches, and the implementation
of new rate designs, will re-distribute cost
responsibility among existing customers. It should
be expected that, to the extent some customers
incur greater cost responsibility from better
aligned rate designs, they may be resistant to
such changes, regardless of the overall utility and
societal benefits. Currently, not all Wisconsin
utilities have the same metering, communications
and/or IT capabilities and, as a result, are limited
to provide some of the innovative rate designs
without additional investment. This latter
situation poses both a potential timing and cost
barrier. Also, some designs may require legislative
authorization.
		 It is important that the PSC address the potential
impact of innovative rate designs on lower income
customers (whose usage distribution ranges from
low to high levels). Providing higher price signals
to customers with a limited ability to respond to
them in appropriate ways should be expected
to only exacerbate other social concerns and
problems.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Improved rate designs that better reflect the
costs of GHG emissions, and the cost of future
supply to meet future consumption, should
be an immediate priority. While ensuring full

79

12. Other Factors: While providing better price
signals for the cost of global warming and future
utility costs is a necessary condition, providing
customers effective options to respond to such
price signals, is also a necessary condition that
allows customers, the utility and society to
mutually benefit from lower future costs and
diminished global warming impacts.
This policy option should be considered together
with the other policy options concerning energy
efficiency and ratemaking policy. All three are
closely related, should be seen as a package
of actions available to the PSC to reduce GHG
emissions, and should not be acted upon
separately, but in an integrated manner. These
three policies facilitate, and are facilitated by, the
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program, and other conservation and energy
efficiency efforts that provide an effective and
least cost means for customers to respond to
improved price signals.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

Demand Response and Load Management
Aligning Public and Private Interests for
Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program

80

Demand Response and Load Management
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency
•

2. Policy Name: Demand Response and Load
Management (Demand Response, Load
Management) – included in the Interim Report
3. Policy Type: This policy is to review and
recommend an expansion of current PSC demand
response and load management policies, and
related rate designs, to address global warming.
This template focuses on demand response and
load management actions that would reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
		
		 Additionally, this policy calls for implementation of
pilot programs to test rate design and equipment,
define communication standards and promote
evolution to a “Smart Grid” in ways that create
greater customer acceptance and greater energy
efficiency.

Funding Sources: Administrative costs would be
funded within the PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
Background
Load management is defined by the Edison
Electric Institute as: “Economic reduction
of electric energy demand during a utility’s
peak generating periods. Load management
differs from conservation in that load
management strategies are designed to either
reduce or shift demand from on-peak to offpeak times, while conservation strategies may
primarily reduce usage over the entire 24hour period. Motivations for initiating
load management include the reduction of
capital expenditure, circumvention of capacity
limitations, provision for economic dispatch,
and cost of service reduction, system
efficiency improvements, or system reliability
improvements. Actions may take the form of
normal or emergency procedures.”
		
		 Demand response is defined by the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission as: “The planning,
implementation, and monitoring of activities
designed to encourage customers to modify
patterns of electricity usage, including the
timing and level of electricity demand. Demand
response covers the complete range of load-shape
objectives and customer objectives, including
strategic conservation, time-based rates, peak load
reduction, as well as customer management of
energy bills.”

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Affected sectors are principally electric utilities
and utility customers
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy that assists
in achieving the success of the Enhanced
Conservation and Energy Efficiency Program and
thus, while appropriate demand response/load
management programs would be expected to
result in some direct reduction in GHG emissions,
these reductions have been accounted for under
the Enhanced Conservation & Energy Efficiency
template.
6. Estimated Costs: Future costs will depend on the
nature and extent of any recommended load
management efforts. However, types of potential
costs that may be incurred can be identified:
•
•
•

“Prices to Devices” to use as template for
pilots)
Additional costs to develop education and
communications materials for customers to
understand, accept and implement demand
response and load management programs and
rate designs

Limited administrative costs for technical
hearings
Additional costs for rate design and costs to
cover R&D for equipment for pilots
Pilot programs to test effectiveness of rate
design, equipment, customer acceptance,
and level of energy efficiency gains. (see EPRI

This policy is intended to promote demand
response and load management strategies,
programs and rate designs that incorporate
energy efficiency gains, thus GHG reductions, as
well as reducing peak demands to avoid building

81

infrastructure that would also create a carbon
footprint. These actions have other benefits such
as deferring the need to build new infrastructure
and mitigating the level and volatility of wholesale
energy markets.

value for customers by achieving a net reduction
in GHG emissions. Effective programs will require
innovative rate design, technology advances,
and customer acceptance including providing
customers an acceptable means to respond to
demand response options and signals.

		 Load management and demand response create a
heightened awareness of peak usage and energy
usage in general. Effective demand response
pricing reduces peak loads and mitigates the need
for infrastructure additions that add to the total
carbon footprint. Demand response and load
management programs provide incentives for
customers to conduct a critical review of energy

B.		 Require State of Wisconsin facilities to participate
in demand response programs offered by utilities.
C. Upon completion of evaluation of pilot programs
to verify cost effectiveness, degree of customer
acceptance and impact on environment,
implement full scale programs as soon as

Energy Efficiency/Conservation

Energy Efficiency/Demand Response

usage, especially at peak times. Research has
demonstrated that customer awareness of electric
real time prices, such as demand response, can
lead to conservation and efficiency not previously
identified and therefore could contribute to a
reduction in overall GHG emissions.

practical, based on equipment availability and
completion of necessary communications and
device deployment, billing changes, etc.
D. Develop education and communications
materials for customers to understand, accept
and implement demand response and load
management programs and rate designs.
Incorporate information on available demand
response and load management offerings
with enhanced statewide programs and
existing infrastructure and channels to further
disseminate information and acceptance of
demand response and load management. Seek
out further opportunities for energy efficiency
when promoting demand response and load
management.
		

		 Recommended Action
		 This policy recommends the following:
A. That the PSC require all electric utilities to
implement pilot programs to test acceptance
of demand response programs and options for
customers. The pilot programs should evaluate
rate design, load management and demand
response and related equipment, customer
acceptance, and improved energy efficiency and
the contribution to reducing GHG emissions.
		 Pilot programs should be structured in such a
way to optimize environmental and economic

82

In developing and implementing these programs,
it is important that the utilities and the PSC
consider the overall costs of peak and off-peak
energy, as well as their levels of GHG emissions, to
ensure that the goal of GHG emission reduction is
furthered by the selected programs.

customers’ perception of value. Customers
may be resistant to change regardless of overall
utility, environmental or societal benefits. Large
customers may experience product and service
interruptions that impact other aspects of their
business quality, costs, etc.
		
The process for considering these options and
programs should provide the opportunity for
effective public participation. A specific proposal
for implementation should be considered in a
process that provides the public the opportunity
to be heard (such as a contested case hearing
process).

8. Timetables, Duration and Contingency Option:
The PSC should establish an expeditious time
frame for this activity. A potential timeline
considered by the work group proposes to
implement pilot programs in the 2010-2011
timeframe to be completed and evaluated by
2013-2014. Full scale implementation would be
completed, to the extent practical, shortly after
initial pilot program evaluations.

12. Other Factors: Load management and demand
response actions have the potential to shift loads
that can result in GHG emissions increases rather
than reductions. The focus of this template is on
efforts to identify and pursue actions that reduce
overall GHG emissions.
		
This policy option should be considered together
with the other policy options concerning energy
efficiency, ratemaking policy and innovative rate
designs. All three are closely related, should be
seen as a package of actions available to the PSC
to reduce GHG emissions, and should not be acted
upon separately, but in an integrated manner.
These three policies facilitate, and are facilitated
by, the Enhanced Conservation and Energy
Efficiency Program, and other conservation and
energy efficiency efforts that provide an effective
and least cost means for customers to respond to
improved price signals.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy and does
not result in any direct GHG emission reductions
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Administrative costs for rate design and
implementation would be minimal.
Rough estimates of the costs of implementation
for residential customers could range from $100
- $1000/customer. Costs of implementation
for commercial and industrial customers will
vary, according to individual applications and
equipment.
		
New costs for customer education, metering,
billing, IT and communications infrastructure
may vary from utility to utility according to
what technology innovations have already been
adopted. The customer education component
must provide for feedback to create the needed
customer behavior changes for adoption of
demand response and load management
programs and rate designs.

13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

11. Barriers to Implementation: A barrier to
implementation is resistance to change
from customers due to perceived or real
“inconvenience.” Changes in energy usage
may lead to a decrease in customer comfort.
Load management and demand response
actions may be time consuming, or require
operational changes. These factors could erode

•

83

State Government as Leader
Improved and Innovative Rate Design
Aligning Public and Private Interests for
Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program

Residential and Commercial Building Codes
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
ultimate objective is to realize zero energy usage
for new residential and commercial buildings by
2030. Achieving “zero-demand buildings” will
require the development of appropriate policies
and applications, which ensure the expansion of
cost-effective renewable energy resources and
promote energy efficiency.

2. Policy Name: Residential/Multi-Family and
Commercial Building Codes (Residential and
Commercial Building Codes) – included in the
Interim Report
3. Policy Type: Legislation to update residential/
multi-family and commercial building codes
(chapter 63) and introduce a voluntary, higher
performance commercial building code with
incentives (referred to here as a “Commercial
Green Building Code”)

This policy proposal consists of two distinct but
complementary actions. The first is to establish
a policy of automatically adopting the latest
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
code, at a minimum, as the state residential/
multi-family and commercial building codes
(chapter 63) within 18 months of publication
(with the opportunity for customization to fit
Wisconsin circumstances). Future versions of the
commercial IECC code will be based on the next
ASHRAE 90.1 standard that is expected to increase
energy efficiency in commercial buildings by 30%.
Future residential/multi-family building codes
would be expected to increase energy efficiency
by approximately 20% with the next residential/
multi-family code revision in 2010 and 15% for
each subsequent revision. This policy is consistent
with Act 141 that requires at least three year
review/updates and “consideration” of IECC,
ASHRAE or other “generally accepted” commercial
energy efficiency codes.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Residential, Multi-family, Agricultural and
Commercial building sectors
		 Sub-Sector: Electric and natural gas 		
utilities

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Total reductions are estimated at 2.0
million metric tons (MMt) of CO2 by 2020.
6. Estimated Costs: Administrative costs for the
updated residential and commercial building
code will be minimal beyond current efforts.
Enforcement costs would likely increase in order
to achieve a targeted level of 90% compliance.
There would also be additional cost for education
on the new code(s). Establishing an additional
Commercial Green Building Code, based on BSR/
ASHRAE/USGBC/IESNA 189P, would represent
an incremental administrative cost, but less than
that of creating a custom state energy code. The
cost impact of the accelerated permitting process
would be neutral through fee adjustments for
standard permit applications. Property tax rebates
should be used to encourage participation in the
Commercial Green Building Code, and equivalent
financial incentives for entities that do not pay
property taxes (e.g. government agencies and nonprofits) should also be developed.

		
The second policy recommendation is to establish
a Commercial Green Building Code based on
proposed standard BSR/ASHRAE/USGBC/IESNA
189P. This draft standard, being drafted in code
compliance language, includes a number of
provisions and requirements to improve the
energy and environmental performance of
commercial buildings. The current draft standard
would increase energy efficiency by 30% over
ASHRAE 90.1-2007 and require 1% of electrical
service load to be provided by renewable power
generation. This provides a convenient mechanism
to enforce Executive Order 145 that mandates
that state buildings be designed to be 30% better
than code in energy efficiency. ASHRAE has stated
a long-term goal of net zero energy-use buildings
and by 2015 to have standards for buildings that

		 Funding Sources: Costs and benefits will accrue in
the private sector. Funding sources for increased
code enforcement and Commercial Green Building
Code to be determined

84

consume 70% less energy than buildings built in
2000. The State of Wisconsin should join other
organizations, including the American Institute
of Architects and 375 Colleges and Universities,
in committing to this long-term goal. There are
additional environmental benefits to these high
efficiency standards including reduced water
usage, improved indoor environmental quality and
the use of recycled/recovered materials. Other
high efficiency standards (e.g. LEED, GBI) could be
used as equivalent standards for compliance.

over compliance); (2) 90% participation; (3) 31.6
million ft2 of new construction and major retrofit
per year for commercial buildings greater than
20K ft2, (4) 17.1 kWh/ft2 and 35.5 CF/ft2 energy
use. GHG reductions from the Commercial Green
Building Code assume: (1) an additional 30%
energy efficiency improvement (beyond 2006
IECC); (2) 25% participation.
		
		 These assumptions result in the following
reduction calculations: estimates for new
commercial buildings are based on two policies:
(1) the commercial building code update is
estimated to yield a reduction of 55,000 metric
tons of CO2 in 2010; (2) the Commercial Green
Building Code is estimated to yield an incremental
reduction of 36,700 metric tons of CO2. By 2020
these two policies are estimated to yield total
reductions of approximately 1.7 million metric
tons of CO2. By 2020 improved residential/multifamily codes are estimated to yield a reduction of
0.3 million metric tons of CO2. Annual reductions,
when totaled, are estimated at 2.0 million metric
tons of CO2 by 2020.
		
		 Specific modeling assumptions are captured in
the table below (note that the Commercial Green
Building Code is referred to as “High Performance
Green Building Code”).

		
In addition to the property tax rebates noted in
section 6, the legislative options that could be
considered to encourage compliance with the
Commercial Green Building Code include (1)
mandatory compliance for state-owned facilities;
(2) a fast-track permitting process for such
buildings; (3) a 0.5% of construction cost low
interest loan for private sector new construction
and major retrofit projects; and (4) a 0.5% of
construction cost low interest state loan for
primary, secondary and higher education new
construction and major retrofit projects.
		 High energy efficiency standards for new
construction building codes should also be
developed and implemented for agricultural
buildings (including but not limited to barns,
milking parlors, cheese processing facilities) by the
beginning of
2010.
8. Timetables,
Duration and
Stringency
Option: This
policy of
adopting the
latest residential/multi-family and commercial
IECC model and related codes and Standard 189
within 18 months of issuance would remain in
effect until changed by law.

		
		 GHG emission reductions and energy savings for
the improved residential/multi-family building
codes were modeled in the Policy Case 1 by the
Technical Advisory Group and can be found in that
documentation. The actual energy savings and
GHG emissions reductions attained are in part
dependent on the level of compliance with the
codes (thus also on the level of enforcement of
the codes).

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions
from the enhanced commercial building code
make the following assumptions: (1) 12.5%
average energy efficiency improvement (half of
the 25% 2006 IECC improvement due to current

85

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
incremental cost of meeting commercial IECC
2006 energy requirements can be considered
very small due to the estimated high level of overcompliance to the current commercial IECC 2000
based code. For example, recent studies (Langdon,
2007) have shown that the average incremental
cost of meeting a LEED – New Construction Silver
rating is approximately 1% with a resulting annual
energy operating cost reduction of 32%. The cost
of compliance with the expected improvements
in residential and multi-family IECC codes is
also not expected to be significant as the code
is developed to achieve cost-effective energy
savings. The cost of increased building code
enforcement, a property tax rebate approach and
alternative financial incentive approach to incent
participation in the higher voluntary code needs
to be developed.

construction would also further the attainment of
the overall objective.
In addition, “Dark Skies” type initiatives that focus
on both energy savings and diminishing nighttime
“light pollution” from outdoor light sources, are
valuable initiatives and should be developed
into building codes or facilitated through local
ordinances.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•

11. Barriers to Implementation: The primary
barrier is the need for legislation concerning
the proposals to upgrade existing and future
building codes and a funding source(s) providing
incentives to encourage widespread adoption of
the Commercial Green Building Code. There may
also be opposition to the policy of automatically
updating the state building codes to reflect
the most recent IECC model codes due to the
uncertainty of future content and local impact,
despite the opportunity to customize the code
for Wisconsin during the 18 month window
between IECC code availability and automatic
implementation. There is also concern about the
ability to effectively enforce the residential/multifamily and commercial building codes without
additional funds and efforts
12. Other Factors: Some of the GHG reductions
claimed by enhancement of state building codes
could be duplicated in other policy proposals.
This policy would be implemented by the existing
state organizations responsible for maintenance
and enforcement of commercial building codes
and administration of Focus on Energy. Ensuring
effective enforcement of the revised codes should
be a critical element of ensuring that the expected
reductions actually occur. Review of lighting plans
and specs by DOA prior to issuing a permit for new

86

State Appliance Efficiency Standards
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
State Government as Leader
Study of Retrofit Codes
Enhanced Water Efficiency and Conservation

Government as Leader
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

A. Require state agencies and facilities (including
the University System) to identify their current
GHG footprints. Based on this data, establish an
overall target and implementation plans for state
agencies, facilities and state transportation to
reduce overall GHG emissions to at least 1990
levels by 2020. Opportunities for GHG reductions
that the state should consider include, but are not
limited to: energy efficiency, potential upgrades
and fuel switching of state boilers and energy
generation facilities, transportation including a
reduction in employee travel through increased
use of video conferencing, reduced material usage,
increased recycling and afforestation of state
lands, such as rights-of-way adjacent to highways
or other roadways, where there are limited or no
opportunity costs to using the land for forestry.

2. Policy Name: “State Government as Leader”
Program (Government as Leader) – included in
Interim Report
3. Policy Type: Executive, administrative and
legislative
4. Affiliated Sectors, Sub-sectors and/or Entities:
State government agencies, University of
Wisconsin System facilities, state facilities and
state transportation assets
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reductions were not estimated for this
policy
6. Estimated Costs: See Section 10

B. Establish a “sustainability office” to oversee
the GHG emission reduction targets and
implementation plans of state government,
as well as the energy efficiency and other
sustainability goals and programs necessary to
attain such targets from state facilities and state
transportation assets.

Funding Sources: Sources were not identified for
this policy
7. Specific Policy Description: The recent adoption
of Act 141 and Executive Order 145 significantly
increased the role and targets for energy efficiency
as part of state government initiatives in building
new facilities, retrofitting existing buildings
and purchasing energy efficient products and
equipment. These actions build on a Wisconsin
government tradition of recognizing that costeffective energy efficiency is an important means
to stabilize agency budgets while capturing
multiple societal benefits. The ability of costeffective energy efficiency to reduce both capital
costs, and operating expenses, provides important
savings opportunities that save government funds,
as well as provide an example of how valuable
energy efficiency actions can be. By highlighting
the value of cost-effective energy efficiency to
achieve multiple objectives, including the costeffective reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, state government provides both an
example of “good government” and good fiscal
management.

C. Adopt the following three specific policy
recommendations that build on expanding costeffective energy efficiency initiatives by ensuring
the effective implementation of Act 141 and E.O.
145 by: (1) providing adequate resources and
priority for such implementation including the
formation of an internal working group within
state government whose primary responsibility
and authority across agency lines is identifying
the opportunities and obstacles to cost-effective
energy efficiency initiatives and acting to capture
such opportunities while eliminating and
mitigating the obstacles; (2) extending the targets
and timeframes set forth in E.O. 145 until at least
2020 to achieve increased incremental savings
including at least a 30% reduction in energy
usage per square foot in existing buildings by
2020 from a FY 2005 baseline; (3) improving the
ability of state and local governments and schools
to benefit from using third party performance
contractors, sharing experience and models and
joint purchasing of energy efficient equipment.

		 The state should extend its role as a “leader” by:
(1) establishing overall GHG emissions reductions
targets and (2) demonstrating that the utilization
of cost-effective conservation and energy
efficiency is the least cost means to achieve those
targets. Therefore, the state should pursue the
following actions:

		 To become even more effective, achieving
appropriate reductions in GHG emissions
through the use of least cost resources, such
as conservation and energy efficiency, must be

87

treated as a high priority whenever constrained
public funds are utilized. There are important,
continuing needs to address the potential
disincentives to GHG emissions reductions
including: through energy efficiency created by
the distinction between capital and operating
budgets and the priorities established within
those budgets, the diversity of purchasing
authorities within government, the potentially
divergent energy efficiency standards for
equipment use in existing facilities (e.g. for
compact fluorescent lighting, ENERGY STAR “plug
load” equipment and vending machines) and
the pressures created by multiple objectives,
especially for smaller equipment purchases and
practices.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Extending the
requirements of E.O. 145 to (1) establish GHG
emissions targets and programs for state facilities
(including state agencies and the University
System) and state transportation use and (2)
increase the cost-effective energy efficiency
savings target for existing state facilities through
2020 will require executive, action. The effective
implementation of GHG emission reduction
targets including existing and future energy
efficiency initiatives will require a “champion(s)”
with requisite authority and reach to help
facilitate appropriate actions as well as identify
and mitigate existing barriers.
12. Other Factors: Increased sharing of experiences
and effective models among the various levels of
government (state, county and local) would be a
valuable aid to facilitate future effective actions.
In addition, all levels of government should
promote the multiple benefits of cost-effective
energy efficiency as good, effective government
that is leading by example, while highlighting
the private and societal benefits from such
actions to encourage similar actions by others.
To assist in promoting this message, increased
and more prominent use of the Energy Efficiency
Recognition award (authorized in Section 14.165
of the Wisconsin Statutes) should be pursued by
the state to further raise the public recognition of
the availability and valuable benefits from costeffective energy efficiency opportunities.

		 The state should also assess in 2008 whether it
would be desirable to become a participant in the
Chicago Climate Exchange in order to generate
additional benefits from its actions to reduce GHG
emissions and increase conservation and energy
efficiency.
8. Timetable, Duration and Stringency Option:
State facilities and agencies should identify their
GHG emissions footprint by June 30, 2009. The
State should establish specific savings targets for
state agencies, facilities and state transportation
by December 31, 2009, adequate to achieve
a reduction of GHG emissions to 1990 levels
by 2020. State facilities and agencies should
identify specific reduction implementation plans
to achieve the established targets so that such
plans can be implemented no later than July 1,
2010. The means to achieve the overall target
should include an extended savings target of at
least a 30% reduction in energy usage per square
foot in existing state buildings by 2020 (based
on a FY 2005 baseline) should be established by
2010 to extend the current requirements in Act
141 and E.O. 145. In addition, the current 30%
improvement for new state buildings over the
existing state commercial building code should be
interpreted to mean a 30% savings over the state
commercial building code in effect when a new
state building is to be constructed.

These efforts should build on, and enhance, the
good foundation to achieve the objective of this
template established by the Conserve Wisconsin
Initiative administered by the Department of
Administration. The Conserve Wisconsin Initiative
has made important progress and should be
viewed as an important base within, or around
which, to pursue the proposed additional
initiatives. Also, in implementing this policy of
leading by example, the state should work in
tandem with the Comprehensive Initiative to
Support Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reduction Initiative.
13. Related Policies:

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Reductions were not estimated for
this policy

•
•
•
•

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
proposal will be cost-effective (i.e. direct benefits/
savings will exceed costs).

88

Residential and Commercial Building Codes
Demand Response and Load Management
Off-Road Equpment Emmission Reductions
Government Fleet adoption of Plug-In Hybrid
Electric Vehicle Incentives

•
•
•

Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization
Energy Efficiency in Schools
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reduction Initiative

89

Rental Lighting Standards
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

complied with these requirements. In addition, the
legislation could provide that tenants can deduct
the cost of purchasing bulbs from their rent if the
landlord has not provided the energy efficient
lighting.

2. Policy Name: Energy Efficiency and Safety through
Lighting for Rental Properties (Rental Lighting
Standards) – included in the Interim Report
3. Policy Type: Legislation establishing minimum
lighting efficiency standards for rental properties
in Wisconsin

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Options: July
1, 2009 for common areas including exit lights and
starting in January 1, 2010 for in-units fixtures,
with at least one year of compliance assistance
and education.

4. Affected Sectors, Subsectors and/or Entities:
Landlords and tenants

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Efficient fluorescent lighting
uses about one-fourth of the electricity that
incandescent bulbs use and lasts up to ten times
as long. Exit signs lit with LEDs can last up to
25 years and use less than 4% of the electricity
required for incandescent exit signs. Requiring
efficient lighting in Wisconsin’s rental properties
would cut electricity and maintenance bills as well
as bulb replacement costs. In addition, common
areas would be safer for residents because of less
bulb failures.
		 There are approximately 278,000 rental buildings
in Wisconsin, with 658,000 rental units. If all rental
properties that have not already switched to
efficient lighting were to do so in common areas,
fixed in-unit fixtures, and exit signs, they would:

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction
Impact: 589,100 tons of CO2/year
6. Estimated Costs: $200,000 to produce
educational materials and work with landlord
and tenant associations to educate them about
this requirement. No anticipated additional
enforcement costs. Enforcement would be a
combination of complaint driven (by tenant) and
standard inspection procedures, including fire
departments that inspect compliance with exit
sign ordinances. Savings to renters and landlords
with 100% compliance would be approximately
$46,000,000 annually.
		 Funding Sources: Funding source for education
materials to be determined. All other costs and
benefits would accrue to landlords and/or tenants.

•

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
proposed legislation should require all rental
properties in the state of Wisconsin to install
fluorescent or light emitting diode (LED) bulbs,
or any other bulb that has an energy efficiency of
at least fifty (50) lumens per watt, in all common
areas by July 1, 2009, and all mounted fixtures
with Edison bases at the beginning of each lease
period starting January 1, 2010. This requirement
shall not apply to fixtures controlled by dimmer
switches or to any fixtures in appliances. The
legislation should further require that all exit lights
in rental properties be lit by LED bulbs. To increase
compliance rates this proposal should include
requirement that a landlord provide a certification
to each tenant at time of lease that he/she has

•
•

Reduce annual energy use by 560 million kWh,
or 2% of annual residential electricity demand
in Wisconsin, according to the 2006 Wisconsin
Energy Statistics report
Cut global warming pollution by 589,100 tons
of CO2 each year
Save landlords and tenants $46,000,000 each
year in energy costs alone, assuming the
average cost of a compact fluorescent bulb
(CFL) is $2.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
$200,000 for first year
11. Barriers to Implementation: Requires legislation.
Rental property owners may prefer voluntary
programs to convert to more energy efficient
lighting than a mandatory requirement.

90

12. Other Factors: This program should be
coordinated with Focus on Energy’s new CFL
recycling program to ensure safe disposal of CFLs.
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Study of Retrofit Codes
Residential and Commercial Building Codes

91

Appliance Standards
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

typically prohibit the sale of less efficient models
within a state.

2. Policy Name: State Appliance Efficiency Standards
(Appliance Standards)

		 Appliance efficiency standards are a proven means
for improving energy efficiency. Their objective is
to raise the efficiency of residential, commercial
and industrial energy-consuming equipment
where cost-effective to do so. Standards have
proved to be an especially effective tool for
addressing split incentive situations, emergency
purchases and for mass market products where
energy efficiency improvements may only be a
small element, but when aggregated provide
a meaningful contribution to load growth (e.g.
“plug loads”) and are difficult to capture through
voluntary energy efficiency programs. They also
are an effective means to ensure that energy use
reductions translate into lower greenhouse gas
(GHG) and other pollutant emissions.

3. Policy Type: Legislation would be required to
create state appliance/equipment efficiency
standards for products not covered by federal
government standards or for which a waiver of the
federal standards could be sought
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Businesses that manufacture, distribute or sell
at retail the specified appliances / equipment;
consumers
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Based on an estimate by the Appliance
Standards Awareness Project and American
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ASAP/
ACEEE), the enactment of state appliance
standards for residential gas furnaces and furnace
fans, compact audio equipment and high efficiency
commercial boilers, combined with a standard
for industrial boilers (based on an independent
estimate separate from ASAP/ACEEE), would save
392,809 metric tons of CO2 by 2020.

		 The recommended action is that a specific
appliance standard bill be developed for Wisconsin
based on actions already taken in other states
and be enacted by the legislature for new
commercial & industrial boilers, new residential
furnaces, and furnace fans and compact audio
equipment. The ASAP/ACEEE proposed model
bill standards set forth in “Leading the Way:
Continued Opportunities for New State Appliance
and Efficiency Standards, 2006” serves as a guide
for the enabling bill development process in
Wisconsin. If the uses in the proposed bill are
pursued, then a waiver of the existing federal
standard for commercial boilers and residential
furnaces may need to be sought since there are
federal standards currently for both items. There is
no explicit federal standard for residential furnace
air handlers until at least 2015 or for industrial
boilers.

6. Estimated Costs: Based on the ASAP/ACEEE
estimates, the net present value (NPV) of the
reductions in bill savings for consumers is
positive and would yield a NPV of approximately
$550,000,000 by 2030. Thus while there would
be increased consumer costs from the higher
incremental cost of the new equipment, these
costs would be recouped by consumers over a
payback period ranging from less than a year to
up to 6-7 years. There would also be some cost
for administrative rulemaking to implement and
revise the standards as established by the enabling
legislation.

		 Recommended standards

Funding Sources: Administrative costs for
adopting and enforcing new standards would be
funded through state operating budgets

		 For commercial boilers, the proposed standard
would require new commercial boilers to have
a thermal efficiency of at least 80% for natural
gas boilers, and 83% for oil boilers, installed in
Wisconsin. This is a 3% increase over the federal
standards set in 1989. For industrial boilers, the
proposed standard would require new industrial
boilers installed in Wisconsin to have a thermal
efficiency increase of at least 3% compared to the
average efficiency of applicable, currently available
models. Existing commercial and industrial boilers

7. Specific Policy Description:
State appliance efficiency standards establish
minimum energy efficiency levels for appliances
and other energy-consuming equipment not
already covered by federal standards, or for
which an application for waivers of federal preemption to increase the standard for selected
other equipment would be made. These standards

92

are unaffected by the proposed new standards. All
new boiler installations must comply with federal,
state and local requirements.

incremental costs estimated by ASAP/ACEEE
are: (1) for commercial boiler, $2,968 per unit
with about a 6.9 year payback; (2) for residential
furnaces/furnace fans, about $100 per unit with
a 1.2 year payback and (3) for compact audio
equipment, a $1 cost per unit with 0.2 year
payback. For new industrial boilers, incremental
costs are estimated to be proportionately higher
than for commercial boilers, but with a similar 6.9
year payback.

		 The proposed standard for new residential gas
furnaces would require a 90%+ AFUE and an
efficient furnace fan (as defined in the ASAP/
ACEEE model bill). The current federal standard is
an 80% AFUE with no standard for the furnace fan.
For residential furnaces, the standard would apply
to all new residential furnaces, with the exception
of mobile homes and attic mounted furnaces.

11. Barriers to Implementation: There is a need for
legislation to enact a state appliance efficiency
bill for Wisconsin. The most likely objections
would be from the provider/retailer of a specific
product/equipment included in the bill or concern
about the impact of a specific included product
on up-front consumer costs. Consumers may
also be concerned about higher up-front product
costs despite lower-lifetime costs. Meeting with
interested providers and retailers of affected
products as part of the bill’s development could
help mitigate potential concerns. For a specific
measure, there may be a need to seek a waiver of
federal preemption.

		 While the work group has set forth specific
recommended efficiency standards for boilers
and furnaces, we also recommend adopting
the proposed compact audio product efficiency
standards set forth in the “Leading the Way”
report noted above.
8. Timetable, Duration and Stringency Option: The
sooner an acceptable state appliance efficiency
standard can be developed and enacted, the
sooner that important energy savings can be
achieved and GHG emissions reduced. A start
year of 2010 would be needed to achieve the
estimated levels of GHG savings identified. The
standards should stay in place until changed by
law as part of a periodic review and upgrade
process delegated to an agency by the enabling
legislation.

12. Other Factors: A Wisconsin Appliance Efficiency
Standard would achieve GHG savings and reduced
energy costs from areas that are typically difficult
to achieve by other means. It also helps as
part of a broader portfolio of policy actions to
diversify the cost impacts/incidence to reduce
GHG emission, rather than concentrating those
mitigation costs primarily on a single set of
entities or consumers (e.g. electric customers).

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The emissions reduction amount
from ASAP/ACEEE is based on an estimate
assuming the enactment of state standards
for specific items of equipment/appliances
similar to those enacted by at least 10 other
states in 2006 (including California, New Jersey,
Connecticut, Oregon and New York) including:
residential furnaces and furnace fans; compact
audio equipment; and commercial boilers. The
estimated reduction for industrial boilers was
developed by the work group with assistance from
World Resources Institute.

Wisconsin should work with neighboring states
to achieve regional coordination and advocate for
stronger appliance efficiency standards where this
is technically feasible and economically justified.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•

By 2020, there would be a GHG emissions
reduction of approximately 392,809 metric tons
of CO2. About 90% of this reduction is from the
residential furnace and furnace fan standard
resulting in a GHG reduction of 367,405 metric
tons of CO2. Commercial boilers save about 3,711
metric tons of CO2; industrial boilers (assuming
only natural gas savings) save about 1,896 metric
tons of CO2; and the compact audio equipment
standard saves about 19,802 metric tons of CO2.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The

93

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Study of Retrofit Codes
Residential and Commercial Building Codes
Industrial Boiler Efficiency Improvements

Energy Efficiency in Schools
1.		 Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

strategies, reduced materials usage and increased
recycling.

2.		 Policy Name: Energy Efficiency in Schools (EE
Schools)

C. Utilize such reduction actions as an educational
tool on the benefits of such actions to students
and the community.

3.		 Policy Type: Legislation to create fiscal incentives
to implement energy efficiency programs in
schools and to change the existing school levy
limits and/or the shared revenue funding formulas
to eliminate conservation and energy efficiency
project disincentives for schools.

A. Identify the current GHG emission footprint of the
school district and the individual school facilities
and transportation within the district.

D. The Department of Public Instruction (DPI)
should facilitate information and resources for
educational efforts including leveraging the
current University of Wisconsin at Stevens Point
Environmental Education Initiative.
		 It is imperative that current and future school
levy, fund sharing formulas and other statutory
enactments, provide incentives, rather than
disincentives, to local school districts to reduce
their current GHG emissions footprint from school
facilities and transportation.
		
Under the current school funding formula, schools
are funded based on need. Therefore, the less
spent in a given budget cycle, the less allocated
to a school from the state’s General School
Fund in the following budget cycle. This formula
results in a financial disincentive for local schools
to adopt energy efficiency policies; eliminating
this disincentive requires legislative approval.
Implementation of reforming legislation should
enable local schools to retain monetary savings
derived from energy efficiency programs. Because
energy savings would be directly proportional to
new funds available, schools would incrementally
benefit with each biennium. Using third party
funding energy efficiency programs could be
designed and implemented. Savings resulting from
upgrades and implementation of energy efficiency
curriculum can eventually be rolled into the
General School Fund to address funding shortages.
Reforming legislation would have to address lifting
the school spending cap specifically for energy
efficiency and reduction of GHG emissions, as well
as changing the school funding formula within the
same parameters.

B. Establish GHG emission reduction targets and
develop plans to reduce GHG emissions through
appropriate actions including cost-effective
conservation and energy efficiency, transportation

Information on how much energy a typical
elementary, middle or high school in Wisconsin
should consume is currently available from Focus
on Energy. This information will assist other

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Local schools
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reductions were not estimated for this
policy.
6.		 Estimated Costs: Cost can only be determined
following an energy audit of a significant sample
group of Wisconsin schools, 50 to 100 buildings.
As some schools fall far behind others in terms
of efficient energy use, allocations would have to
vary from school to school.
		 Funding Sources: The State should help provide
adequate funds to facilitate local school districts
to develop greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
targets and action plans. Focus on Energy funds,
especially under the Enhanced Conservation and
Energy Efficiency template funding levels, could be
used to assess and develop cost-effective energy
efficiency plans and actions.
7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Local
school districts should be encouraged and
provided adequate resources and expertise
necessary to:

94

schools to see how far they have to go to meet
acceptable levels of energy consumption, or
how they can raise the standards. It is important
to note again that some schools far exceed
others in terms of efficient energy use; therefore
allocations would have to vary from school to
school. Focus on Energy has information available
on the lowest/highest performing schools in terms
of energy efficiency. A Focus on Energy study
group could be utilized to determine the best
starting point. Addressing the needs of the lowest
performing schools would have the greatest
overall impact for GHG emissions in Wisconsin.
The study group could identify these lowest
performers, as well as which improvements/
behavior modifications would have the greatest
impact in the least amount of time. Energy
efficiency will be addressed by the study group,
with equal attention given to GHG emission
reduction.

eliminating revenue caps is a highly contentious
issue that is heavily debated and may be a hard
sell to the legislature. While we recognize the
immense value in passing such legislation, it is
likely to be a tough battle.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•
•

		
A case study conducted by Focus on Energy (Public
Schools Benchmarking Project, If You Cannot
Measure It, You Cannot Manage It) compiled
quantifiable data regarding energy usage,
and would help enable schools to plan energy
efficiency improvements.
8.		 Timetable, Duration and Stringency Option:
Establishing a timetable will require development
of a business plan from consultants working with
schools. Time requirements could be written
into the reforming legislation. Duration would be
ongoing, barring attempt to rescind legislation
over time.
9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Reductions were not developed for
this policy.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: See
Section 6
11. Barriers to Implementation: Political barriers
to passing legislation may include claims of
irresponsible spending by schools of monies
saved; claims that money saved through energy
efficiency should go toward property tax relief.
Changing the school funding formula and

95

State Government As a Leader
Enhanced Conservation and Energy
Efficiency Program

Non-Regulated Fuels
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

The second funding level option starts at the same
level at which natural gas and electricity customers
currently contribute to the Focus on Energy
program (in aggregate 1.2% of annual gross sales
revenues, or whatever level they will be increased
to, based on the recommendations of the Task
Force to the Governor). Programs funds would
change as this constant percentage is applied to
changing annual gross sales.

2. Policy Name: Non-regulated Fuels Efficiency and
Conservation (Non-regulated Fuels)
3. Policy Type: Legislation to develop and fund
conservation and energy efficiency programs for
consumers of fossil fuel energy sources that are
not regulated by the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin for heating, production and other nontransportation uses and the establishment of an
audit and tracking mechanism to ensure that such
funding is used to the benefit of the consumers of
these fuels.1

Funding Sources: The specific means by which
funding is secured for the conservation and energy
efficiency program should be established by the
legislation. As described above, the work group
proposed that funding be provided by a fee or tax
on the respective fuel source (i.e. an increase in
the current gross receipts tax on such fuels).

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Residential, commercial, agricultural and
industrial equipment and building sectors
		Sub-Sector: Propane, oil, coal industry

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The work
group recommends legislation be developed
and enacted to design and implement a nonregulated fuels conservation and energy efficiency
program that addresses residential, commercial,
agricultural and industrial consumer needs.
While the work group has tried to provide initial
estimates and recommendations, we believe that
more time and effort is needed to design the
specific program elements and funding structure
that will result in successful private and societal
benefits. An audit and tracking system should be
established to ensure that funds collected for nonregulated fuel conservation and energy efficiency
efforts are being used to benefit the consumers
who are contributing the funds for the program.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reduction to 1990 levels of CO2
(1,845,345 metric tons) by 2020 from the use of
non-regulated fuels in Wisconsin.
6. Estimated Costs: The costs for the proposed
conservation and energy efficiency program
should be developed as part of the legislation.
However, to aid in that calculation the work group
proposed two funding options: one that phases in
over time and a second that establishes an annual
funding level that remains constant by percentage
of gross sales revenue over time. Under the first
option, the first year program costs would be a
designated lower level for program in the first
year and continually ramp by an adequate amount
to secure adequate GHG reductions that would
reduce GHG emissions from the use of these fuels
back to 1990 emission levels by 2020 and to attain
the emission reduction target recommended by
the Task Force for 2050. Estimated annual program
delivery costs are presented in a table in section
10.

Significant potential cost-effective GHG reductions
are available through improved conservation
and energy efficiency for the use of the “nonregulated fuels.” Similar to customers of regulated
energy sources, non-regulated fuel users should
be provided effective assistance in reducing
their energy bills and carbon footprints. The CO2
emissions factors for LPG (136 lb/MMBtu) and
oil (159 lb/MMBtu) are greater than for natural
gas (118 lb/MMBtu), thus the GHG reductions
for equivalent savings in energy are greater for
the non-regulated fuels, further emphasizing the
interest in developing programs to improve the

1. These fuels include liquid petroleum gas (LPG), fuel oil (oil) and
coal; throughout this policy template the term “non-regulated
fuels” refers to this category of fuels. Other fuels, such as natural
gas, are already regulated by the PSC and are referred to here as
“regulated.”

96

efficiency of their use.
Greatly reducing GHG emissions in Wisconsin
will require increasing the efficiency of use of
all fossil and biomass fuels. Wedge analyses by
EPRI, McKinsey and Princeton University show
conservation and energy efficiency to be the
largest wedge for reducing GHG emissions.
Wisconsin has successfully implemented programs
to reduce the use of electricity and natural
gas during the last three decades. This success
significantly did not include non-regulated fuels
(other than in the federal/state low-income
weatherization program). Prior to 2005, the
Focus program was allowed to help homes using
eligible electricity to save LPG, oil and other nonregulated fuels to a limited degree. This was an
important means to achieve a “whole house”
savings approach in which maximum cost-effective
savings from a home could be captured at lower
costs. The revisions made in Act 141 appear to
prevent this effort.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The projected (from 2007 data)
natural gas savings for the Focus program for FY08
would be about 29,755,892 first year therms for
the residential and business sectors. This is about
0.84% of the 2005 statewide natural gas use.
If we assume that the current Focus programs
were allowed to include the non-regulated
fuels program to achieve comparable savings, a
simple sales projection would suggest that about
1,930,988 gallons of LPG and oil could be saved
in the first year (1,803,198 gallons of LPG and
127,790 gallons of oil).2 These 1,930,988 gallons
saved equate to 191,289 MMBtu conserved, and,
using the emission factors discussed earlier, result
in an estimated reduction of 13,233 metric tons of
CO2.
Assuming a program would start in FY2008,
1990 GHG emissions of 1,845,345 metric tons
of CO2 could be reached in 2020 with reductions
of 47,201 metric tons of CO2 that year. An 80%
reduction from 1990 levels could be reached
in 2050 with 374,659 metric tons of CO2 being
emitted in that year.

According to the Wisconsin Energy Statistics, LPG
and oil make up 17% of the residential sector
fossil fuel use (or 21% as much fuel as natural
gas use). The total LPG and oil use in Wisconsin is
10% of the total natural gas use in buildings. This
suggests the potential savings in the commercial
and industrial sectors, while lower in aggregate
potential than in the residential sector, are still
important (e.g. coal use for boiler fuel). There
are particularly important opportunities in the
agricultural and industrial sectors, as reflected
by the recommendations of the Agriculture and
Forestry and the Industry work groups for an
energy efficiency program for non-regulated fuel
sources funded through state general revenues or
by some other means.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
The proposal suggests that a program to help
Wisconsin residents reduce their use of nonregulated fossil fuels usage be part of the larger,
existing Focus program. This is intended to reduce
the cost of implementation (e.g. by applying
a “whole house/facility” delivery approach
that reduces delivery costs while maximizing
benefits to customers by offering full services to
residential, commercial and industrial customers
to save both regulated and non-regulated fuels).
The non-regulated fuel reduction opportunities
are used in some facilities that are eligible for
current Focus programs based on their electricity
or natural gas provider. Also, these opportunities

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The timetable for this policy recommendation
could mirror the timetable for implementing the
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program. Funding is prescribed through 2020
and beyond based on emission reduction targets:
1990 emission levels by 2020 and 80% below 1990
emission levels by 2050.

2. The potential may be greater based on two market conditions:
(1) the cost of LPG and oil per Btu is significantly higher than that
of natural gas and (2) there is more “low hanging fruit” still available because homes and businesses using these fuels have not
been explicitly eligible for conservation and efficiency programs in
the last 20 years. Also, there is potential not considered here from
improving efficiency in homes and commercial/industrial facilities
using biomass and coal to produce thermal energy for heating and
processes (e.g. fuel-switching from coal to natural gas which is currently prohibited by Focus’ limited scope of regulated fuels).

97

are available in facilities that are in the proximity
of others that are, or will, participate in existing
Focus programs and the local deliverers of the
Focus programs typically have the skills and
opportunities to implement similar approaches for
non-regulated fuels.

12. Other Factors: Creating non-fuel-discriminatory
programs also allows for replacement of fossil
fuel technologies with biomass technologies (such
as pellets, corn, cherry pits, etc). This could offer
much greater potential for reducing GHG than is
discussed here.

The main costs to deliver these program services
as an extension of Focus programs are likely to
be proportional to the Focus program cost. The
average year 2007 cost for program efforts for
Focus programs differs between the residential
and business programs. The estimated first year
costs for the delivery of program services as
part of the Focus effort is $2,953,049 for the
residential sector and $986,106 for the business
sector – for a total of $3,939,158. This cost would
rise to $12,986,116 in 2020.

In addition, the high costs of LPG and oil provide
a significant opportunity to reduce the financial
burden on our citizens for energy purchases from
sources out of state. While the fee to create the
program will slightly add to the price of the fuel
product, the funds will result in bill savings for
those who participate in the program and reduce
GHG emissions. The local environmental impacts
of SOx and NOx are reduced compared to natural
gas (impacts of Hg might increase). Finally, LPG
and oil are delivered to each home by trucks, so
reducing the use of these fuels would yield an
additional reduction in GHG emission through
fewer fuel delivery trips.

		The above estimates are based on a program with
a budget commensurate with the Focus 2007
program budget – and with significant increases
(>10% albeit off a far smaller base than Focus)
per year.3 The table below shows the values of
emission reductions and costs through 2020. The
cost escalates by 10.45% per year through 2020
to provide accelerated savings by this plan to
facilitate early success.

While the work group was able to begin to
estimate the potential costs and sources of
funding for a non-regulated fuels program, it
was felt that more effort was needed to confirm
the initial numbers and estimates, including
potential impacts on consumers. These key
elements on the funding source annual program
funding amount and program delivery method
should be ultimately resolved by the legislature
in the legislation drafted to implement this
recommendation and involve the participation of
interested industry and consumer interests.

11. Barriers to Implementation: The major barrier
to implementation of this policy is the need for
legislation to establish funding the program.
Opposition may come from purveyors of LPG, oil,
and coal in Wisconsin for fear of reduced sales and
from consumers due to slightly increased prices,
especially if a gross receipts tax is used to raise
the required funding. Opponents may argue that
relative to sales of natural gas, sales of these nonregulated fuels are small. However, as much as
11% of the fossil fuels used for thermal processes
in buildings are non-regulated fuels. And it is
likely that about 17% of the GHG emissions from
building and business thermal processes are from
these non-regulated fuels. However, using a more
gradual (or equivalent occasional) increase in the
funding could mitigate opponents’ arguments.

It is important to note that the Industrial Boiler
Efficiency Improvements template and the
Industrial Boiler Fuel Switching template are
intimately related to this template in that a
program could facilitate the ability of industry
to move to less intensive GHG emitting fuels or
renewable energy in lieu of the use of coal boilers.
This is also true of the Agriculture and Forestry
work group templates seeking to improve energy
efficiency in the use of non-regulated fuels. This
template and the other templates call for an
adequate funding source. But, it is important to
note that the emission reductions from these
different templates are NOT additive and attempts
to sum the emission reduction estimates may
result in overlap and double counting.

3. An analysis was also done assuming a higher starting budget
that is four times the assumed budget in the first year – rather
than by set percentage of sales or revenues over time. This was
done to give the Task Force another option of recommendation for
this policy; results are available for review.

98

13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

Industrial Boiler Efficiency Improvements
Industrial Boiler Fuel Switching
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program

99

Study of Retrofit Codes
1. Work Group: Conservation and Energy Efficiency

Stat. and potential improvements.

2. Policy Name: Study of retrofit codes for
mandatory upgrades of existing single and multifamily units (Study of Retrofit Codes).

The work group tended to believe that a
preference for voluntary energy efficiency
programs for existing residential homes and multifamily units was appropriate, but recognized that
there may be circumstances where voluntary
programs by themselves would be inadequate to
help achieve the emissions reductions targets and
objectives established in Wisconsin. For example,
Wisconsin has adopted a set of mandatory energy
efficiency requirements for existing multi-family
units at the time of sale of the building (Wis.
Stat. 101.122) to overcome the split incentive
between owner and tenant that has limited the
effectiveness of voluntary programs in this sector.

3.		 Policy Type: Establish a legislative study
committee to consider the need for, and nature of,
potential mandatory, minimum energy efficiency
standards triggered by specific events (e.g. point
of sale) for existing single-family home and multifamily rental units to complement voluntary
energy efficiency programs for these sectors.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Subsectors and/or Entities:
Home buyers and sellers, realtors, multi-family
rental owners, renters and home improvement
and building contractors

The work group recognized that mandatory
energy efficiency retrofit requirements should
be a carefully considered and crafted. The
recommendation to establish a legislative study
committee (including affected parties) is to allow
this appropriate consideration to be undertaken.
This more thorough consideration is appropriate
because potential retrofit codes requiring
energy efficiency upgrades (existing single-family
residence or multi-family rental) could have two
important benefits: (1) it could accelerate the
time when cost-effective emission reductions
occur and (2) it could increase the overall level of
energy savings or emission reductions to more
than would be expected with only voluntary
energy efficiency programs. Thus, while over time,
some savings from retrofits in existing dwellings
would be expected to be captured through
voluntary programs, point of sale/transfer type
triggering event requirements for certain energy
efficiency upgrades would address areas where
voluntary programs have important limitations
on their effectiveness due to barriers such as split
incentives or a history of limited penetration of
voluntary efforts.

5 . Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and does not
result in any direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
reductions. Potential emission reductions that
may occur as a result of any retrofit codes are
discussed in section 9.
6.		 Estimated Costs: The direct cost of this
recommendation is the cost of funding the
legislative study committee activity. Potential
costs of any legislative enactments would depend
on the specific retrofit codes/standards adopted.
These costs would include the private sector costs
to comply with retrofit codes and the public cost
to ensure effective enforcement of such codes;
these are discussed in section 10.
		 Funding Sources: Direct costs would be absorbed
by State budgets
7.		 Specific Description of the Policy Proposal:
The specific recommendation is to establish
a legislative study committee to provide
recommendations on the need for, and content/
design of, effective energy efficiency retrofit
requirements for existing residential homes
(1-2 family) and multi-family units. This should
include a review of the existing rental unit energy
efficiency standards in section 101.022 of Wis.

8.		 Timetables, Duration, and Stringency Option:
The adoption of any recommended requirements
should be sought to be enacted by legislation in
2009 so that any retrofit code adopted could be
operating by 2010.

100

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The level of GHG emission reductions
from retrofit codes depends on the specific
retrofit codes/standards adopted. The following
are the potential benefits in GHG emission
reductions that might be achieved through energy
efficiency retrofit requirements for existing singlefamily and multi-family homes that underlie
the recommendation that such legislation be
considered and adopted as appropriate. These
specific potential retrofit code applications are
provided to better understand the potential
benefits that may be available rather than to
suggest what types of approaches should or
should not be considered by the legislative study
committee.

ECW estimates that implementing all 10-year
payback measures in existing units would save
82 therms of natural gas, 15 therms of propane,
16 therms of fuel oil and 493 kWh of electricity.
Using conversion figures of 1.692 lbs CO2/kWh
and 11.708 lbs CO2/therm of natural gas (and
conservatively assuming fuel oil and propane have
the same CO2 emission rate as natural gas) the
annual CO2 reductions = 1.08 tons CO2/unit/year.
Assuming 115,000 existing homes sold annually
were updated with energy efficiency measures
with 10-year payback or less, this policy would
yield approximately 1.24 million metric tons
of CO2 by 2020. Additional savings could be
accomplished if energy efficiency measures were
also required during major renovations. Further
reductions would be attained if a prohibition on
replacing an existing conventional electric water
heater with a new conventional electric or ondemand electric water heater was enacted

		
A. Existing Single-Family Residential Units. The
study committee should consider requiring
energy efficiency upgrades at point of sale, during
major renovations, and other similar measures
adopted in other states and cities. There are
approximately 115,000 existing single-family
homes sold in Wisconsin annually. At point of
sale, or another similar triggering event, the
seller could be obligated to install all measures
identified by Energy Center of Wisconsin (ECW)
having a 10 year payback period or less (i.e. the
savings exceed the cost within that period). This
would include replacing older appliances (boilers,
furnaces, water heaters, etc.) with Energy Star
appliances, and various insulation and lighting
upgrades.

B. Existing Multi-Family Residential Units. There
are approximately 277,763 rental buildings
encompassing 658,000 housing units in Wisconsin.
Small buildings (fewer than 5 units per building)
constitute 90% of the buildings and more than
50% of the units are single-family or duplexes
(ECW, April, 2005). Improved energy efficiency in
rental units is difficult for a number of reasons,
but especially due to the “split incentive” situation
(i.e. where the owner and who pays the energy
bill are different persons).

		 A separate stand-alone retrofit requirement
provision could require that an existing electric
water heater could not be replaced with a
conventional electric water heater (or on-demand
electric water heater) in homes where natural gas,
LP gas or oil are available in the home for heating
to reduce GHG emissions as well as electric system
demand. Converting an electric water heater
would save approximately 3.1 metric tons of CO2
per year and reduce system demand by about 0.4
kW per home on average. Since approximately
26% of the water heaters in Wisconsin are electric
(about 585,000 water heaters), this requirement
could significantly reduce GHG emissions and as
well as electric system demand.

		 As a starting point, the study group could focus
on identifying how to achieve energy savings no
later than 2020 equivalent to installing all 10-year
payback options in rental properties statewide.
The ECW list of such measures with less than
a 10-year payback include refrigerator, boiler,
furnace and washer replacement, fuel switch
water heater (or a provision similar to the electric
water replacement requirement for residence
that prohibits a new conventional or on-demand
electric water heater replacing an existing electric
water heater if the building already uses natural
gas, LP gas or oil), reduce temperature water
heater, replace water heater, showerheads, water
pipe insulation, boiler controls and lighting. The

101

initial focus should on the 40% of buildings that
offer 80% of the savings as noted by ECW. The
possible recommendations to achieve these
energy savings could also consider expanding the
rental Efficiency Standards in Wis. Stat. 101.122,
to include rental properties constructed after
1976.

B. Existing Multi-Family Residential Units. The
estimated cost to install all 10-year measure
paybacks would be about $748 million. State
legislation could be enacted in 2009 to be
effective in 2010 (its impact would likely be
phased, for example if time of sale was the driver,
only a certain # of rental units would be affected
any year)

		 The legislative study should also recommend
ways to improve the current Wis. Stat. 101.122(2)
the Rental Unit Efficiency Standards statute that
requires certain energy efficiency actions at point
of sale or transfer (that would cover about 5,000
rental buildings annually).
		
		 According to the ECW study, if all technically
feasible measures with a 10-year payback were
implemented in existing rental properties the
energy savings would equal 2,168 million kWh.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Retrofit codes
could involve a large number of transactions
that increase the challenge of ensuring effective
enforcement (e.g. approximately 115,000 annual
sales of single family homes and 5,000 annual
sales of multi-family units). In addition, such
retrofit codes would impose costs on multi-family
unit owners and sellers/buyers of existing homes
who may have concerns about the impacts of
such costs. Mandatory requirements may not be
preferred over more aggressive voluntary retrofit
program efforts. Any statute or ordinance would
need legislative approval.

		 These savings would convert to more than 1.9
million metric tons of CO2 by 2020.
		 Total potential CO2 reduction by 2020 from
Retrofit Codes for existing residences and rental
units could approach approximately 3.14 million
metric tons of CO2.

12. Other Factors: Realtors, multi-family building
owners and other directly affected parties must
be engaged in the work of the legislative study
committee for the consideration and formulation
of potential cost-effective and workable retrofit
codes.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
costs resulting from retrofit codes depend on
the specific retrofit codes/standards adopted.
The following are the potential costs that might
be recognized through energy efficiency retrofit
requirements for existing single-family and multifamily homes that underlie the recommendation
that such legislation be considered and adopted as
appropriate. These specific potential retrofit code
applications are provided to better understand the
potential costs rather than to suggest what types
of approaches should or should not be considered
by the legislative study committee.
		
A. Existing Single-Family Residential Units. The
cost per unit for all 10-year payback measures
is estimated at $496 and five-year payback
measures at $160. This assumes low prices for
electricity ($0.065/kWh) and natural gas ($0.60/
therm). Using more current energy prices the
savings would be even greater and paybacks
shorter.

13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•

102

State Appliance Efficiency Standards
Enhanced Conservation and Energy
Efficiency Program
Residential and Commercial Building Codes
Enhanced Water Efficiency and
Conservation
Energy Efficient Housing Retrofit and
Rehabilitation Program

Residential Retrofit and Rehabilitation Program
1. Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

property owners and renters (with the landlord’s
cooperation) with an audit identifying costeffective energy efficiency measures; and (2)
allowing the cost of installed measures to be
paid back over time (i.e. “financed”) out of
the savings generated by the energy efficiency
savings, preferably on the utility bill. Focusing
on community efforts, as well as the “green
jobs” potential of this initiative not only
magnifies benefits beyond energy savings and
GHG reductions, but may also lead to higher
participation levels than have been reached
by other programs which also aim to achieve
increased energy efficiency in existing housing.

2. Policy Name: Residential Energy Efficiency
Retrofit and Rehabilitation Program (Residential
Retrofit and Rehab Program)
3. Policy Type: Regulatory, legislative
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or entities:
Homeowners, renters and rental properties
owners, municipalities, utilities, community
organizations, Focus on Energy and construction
trades
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: See section 9

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: A
prototype for this type of initiative has already
been proposed by the Center for Wisconsin
Strategy (COWS) in the City of Milwaukee.
Current efforts have involved COWS, the City of
Milwaukee, We-Energies and Focus on Energy in
moving the proposed program to implementation.
Thus, this initiative could begin as early as 2009
and expand to others areas as interest is created.
The model of the initiative is applicable to many
communities in Wisconsin and therefore over
time would be expected to expand and generate
energy savings, GHG reduction and other benefits.
Because the energy savings and GHG emissions
from this initiative are subject to Measurement &
Verification, the stringency of the GHG reduction
attained would be high.

6. Estimated Costs: See section 10
Funding Sources: Because of the “financing”
model nature of the initiative, the primary funding
for the effort should come from state or other
funds outside of the Focus on Energy program
(however the Focus program should coordinate
and assist the initiative). A significant portion of
the funding is proposed to come from allowance
fees or any auction revenues under the Task
Force’s Cap and Trade Program recommendation.
7. Specific Description of the Proposal: This
initiative is targeted at improving the energy
efficiency of residential and multi-family buildings,
especially in lower-income urban and rural areas
through retrofit and rehabilitation activities.
The objective is to improve inefficient buildings
to enhance existing community housing stock
that will save owners and renters money, reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, mitigate future
utility cost increases and infrastructure needs and
increase “green job” employment opportunities
for skilled and unskilled work for building trades
(including the opportunity for a related job
development and training program), especially for
community residents.

9. Explanation of the Estimate of GHG Reductions:
The expected reductions from the broad
implementation of this initiative are yet to be
determined. However, the proposed Milwaukee
initiative (discussed in section 8) for an electric
and natural gas residential building retrofit
and rehabilitation targeted to all rental units
and owner-occupied homes built prior to 1960
is estimated to yield annual electric savings
of 388,488,360 kWhs and annual natural gas
savings of 16,649,500 therms (assuming a
50% participation rate). This would represent
approximately 25% of residential electric sales
in Milwaukee and 9% of residential natural gas
sales. The estimated cost for this initiative is
approximately $162,000,000. The estimates
of residential savings opportunities is based
on surveys performed by the Energy Center of
Wisconsin and set forth in two reports: Energy
and Rental Housing in Wisconsin: A Wisconsin

The initiative is designed to overcome the current
barriers to increased retrofit and rehabilitation
efforts which include split-incentives between
renters and rental property owners; limited
resources available to owners and renters;
limitations on current energy efficiency funds
for housing rehabilitation purposes; and lack
of access to information. To overcome these
barriers, the initiative is based on: (1) providing

103

Characterization Study (2005) and Energy
Efficiency and Housing in Wisconsin: A Study of
Owner-Occupied Single Family Homes (2000).
These studies also indicate that lower-income
properties built prior to recent improvements in
building codes provide a potentially deep source
of additional cost-effective energy savings for
Wisconsin (and corresponding GHG reductions).

13. Related Policies
•
•
•
•

10. Approximation of Costs for Selected Years:
Because total costs are dependent on the extent
to which the initiative is broadly implemented
across Wisconsin communities, the costs
for selected years are yet to be determined.
Estimated costs (in relation to expected energy
savings) for the proposed Milwaukee initiative
are identified in section 9. Also, it should be
noted that the use of a “financing” model in
which customers pay back the cost of installed
measures out of savings would be less costly than
the traditional model of only relying on customer
incentives, thereby lowering the overall cost to
attain energy savings and corresponding GHG
reductions.
11. Barriers to Implementation: There are three
primary barriers to successful implementation
of the initiative: (1) an adequate funding source
to allow installed measures to be “financed”
(i.e. paid back over time using the savings from
the installed measures); (2) the ability to allow
payment by customers to be made on the utility
bill, including the potential for such repayment
obligation to be conveyed to a subsequent
owner/renter (it appears this would require new
legislative authority to allow such a model); and
(3) the lack of increased customer participation
expected from the innovative design of the
initiative compared to prior efforts in residential
retrofit efforts. This initiative will require the
effective cooperation of a number of partners as
noted in section 4.
12. Other Factors: While the initiative is focused
on increasing cost-effective energy savings and
corresponding GHG reductions, it also has as
its objective increasing other important public
benefits. These include increasing “green job”
opportunities plus the opportunity for increased
job development and training; revitalization of
lower income communities and enhancing the
quality of the existing housing stock in Wisconsin
communities.

104

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Enhanced Water Efficiency and Conservation
Non-Regulated Fuels Efficiency and
Conservation
Cap and Trade Program

Geologic Carbon Sequestration Study
1. Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

infrastructure in the state is not well suited to any
individual utility or industry in Wisconsin.

2.		 Policy Name: Wisconsin Geologic Carbon
Sequestration Study – included in the Interim
Report

		 The timeline for deploying CCS to lower GHG
emissions from Wisconsin’s electric generation
sector is strongly dependent on the pace of
carbon storage implementation in adjacent
states. The carbon storage opportunities closest
to Wisconsin’s major baseload power plants are
the oil and gas fields, coal seams, and deep saline
aquifers found in relatively uniform layers across a
wide area of Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky in the
geological feature known as the Illinois Basin.

3.		 Policy Type: Create a Commission to work
collaboratively with Midwest partners to study and
recommend possible opportunities for geologic
sequestration of CO2 from Wisconsin’s utility
sector. Continuation of this work, through annual
revision, is recommended to keep current with
advancements in technology and adaptations
for Wisconsin greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction
policies.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and does not
directly result in any GHG emission reductions.

			The implementation timeline for CCS is also
dependent on the technology used. For Wisconsin
we assume that the construction of a new IGCC
plant with CCS, or the retrofit of an existing plant
with CCS, is not likely for at least 10 years. In
Illinois, CCS from a coal or petroleum coke plant
producing synthetic natural gas, and selling CO2 for
enhanced oil recovery, may be possible in 2 or 3
years.

6.		 Estimated Costs: There should be limited
governmental administrative costs associated
with this program. These costs would mostly
involve the state’s involvement in the proposed
Commission.

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The CCS Commission should convene by July
1, 2008 and should issue its initial findings and
recommendations by December 31, 2008. The
report will be reviewed and updated annually.

		 Funding Sources: The study is to be completed
within the PSC operating budget

		 As discussed in section 7, deployment of CCS
in Wisconsin is assumed to be at least 10 years
away. However, as CCS technology becomes
more available, Wisconsin needs to achieve rapid
deployment.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Carbon
sequestration, also referred to as carbon capture
and storage (CCS), is a strategy for reducing GHG
emissions from baseload electric generation.
The PSC and DNR should form a Commission
to evaluate the technical and economic
potential, and infrastructure requirements,
for CCS deployment in Wisconsin. In addition
to the DNR and PSC, representatives from the
University System, independent power producers,
environmental groups, industrial groups, and
others should be included on the Commission.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This policy, standing alone,
would not result in any direct GHG emission
reductions. However, if CCS is found technically
and economically feasible, the findings and
recommendations of the Commission would
inform those responsible for assisting in the
development of this technology for Wisconsin
and would provide a foundation for planning the
infrastructure necessary for CCS.

		 Background
The absence of promising geological formations
for storage in Wisconsin will likely result in the
need to either transport CO2 by a pipeline system
that does not currently exist, or transport low or
non-carbon gaseous fuels (e.g. synthetic natural
gas or hydrogen) in the current natural gas or
future hydrogen pipelines. As with the electric
transmission grid, planning the future gas pipeline

		 The magnitude of GHG reductions from this
technology depends on the type of capture (e.g.
pre-combustion or post-combustion) and the
type of fuel. In some cases, CCS implemented at
a facility burning or co-firing biomass can have an
even larger reduction impact on GHG emissions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: As

105

identified in section 6 there would be relatively
limited governmental administrative costs with
this policy. If the timeline suggested here is
followed, most of these costs should conclude
by January 2009. Some costs may be required
beyond this time for annual updates.
11. Barriers to Implementation: There should not
be barriers to convening the CCS Commission.
There may be legal and other barriers to any
recommended actions issued by the Commission.
12. Other Factors: The work group discussed the
potential of CCS and concluded that the future
feasibility and cost of this technology was no more
certain than other large-scale GHG reduction
options, such as nuclear. The goals for GHG
reduction need to be established in a state-wide
PSC planning forum where the uncertainties in
technology availability can be evaluated (see
the Amended Strategic Energy Assessment
template). The safety and environmental risks of
either CO2 pipelines, or geologic storage sites for
captured CO2, would also need to be addressed
to gain public acceptance of this option. The U.S.
Department of Energy and numerous foreign
countries are sponsoring research in this area.
Three large-scale (greater than one million metric
tons of CO2 per year) projects are currently using
geologic storage, but the scale of CCS necessary
to have a significant impact on regional GHG
emissions is much greater.
13. Related Policies: None

106

Wind Siting Reform
1. Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

specified period of time to adopt rules establishing
uniform standards for permitting wind projects.
Local groups and others will be able to raise
concerns and suggestions regarding the rules
during this process. These regulatory standards
would apply to PSC-reviewed wind projects as
well as those reviewed by local jurisdictions.
These rules would remain in effect indefinitely.
Regardless of whether wind siting decisions are
made by local jurisdictions or by the PSC, local
groups and others would continue to be able to
provide input relevant to such decision making.

2. Policy Name: Wind Siting Reform – included in
the Interim Report
3. Policy Type: Legislation that reforms the siting
process for wind projects less than 100MW to
make it comparable to the process for projects 100
MW and greater.
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities, the PSC,
counties, municipalities, towns, and the wind
energy industry

6. Estimated Costs: Implementation of this option
would result in increased costs resulting from
greater workload at the PSC, but reduced costs for
wind power producers and consumers.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Today, at least 400 MW of wind
projects currently under development are
subject to local restrictions that prevent them
from going forward. 440 MW of wind power
operating at a capacity factor of 29% should
produce approximately one million MWh annually,
which in turn should reduce annual emissions
by approximately 925,000 metric tons of CO2e.
Continued contributions from these smaller wind
resources could reduce 1.4 million metric tons
of CO2e annually by 2020 and 1.85 million metric
tons of CO2e annually by 2025. (See Enhanced RPS
template for full potential of renewable resources)

Funding Sources: Rule development would be
completed within the PSC operating budget

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Costs
would be borne in the near term.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy recommendation includes the following
elements: (1) definitions of large and small wind
energy turbines; (2) a requirement for the PSC to
draft uniform standards for siting large and small
wind energy turbines; (3) creation of an optional
process for PSC review of projects less than
100 MW; (4) a mechanism for allowing parties to
appeal a decision rendered by a local jurisdiction
to the PSC; (5) extending Chapter 227 judicial
review provisions to wind projects permitted by
local jurisdiction; and (6) a prohibition on local
ordinances restricting meteorological test towers.
The new standards adopted by the PSC for wind
projects less than 100 MW would not require an
alternative site as part of the permit application.

11. Barriers to Implementation: This policy
recommendation could generate opposition from
specific municipalities.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This policy would not directly reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Wind Siting
Reform is an enabling policy to an Enhanced
Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), and would
contribute to the overall reduction of GHG
emissions in the RPS.

12. Other Factors: The Wind Siting Reform
recommendation was considered by the work
group as an enabling policy necessary to meet the
supply requirements of an Enhanced RPS with the
economic benefits of in-state wind generation.
13. Related Policies:
•

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
proposal calls for the enactment of legislation, the
process for which would include opportunities
for public input by local groups and others. If
the legislation is enacted, the PSC would have a

107

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)

Great Lakes Wind Study
1. Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
study group should convene by July 1, 2008 and
should issue its findings and recommendations by
December 31, 2008.

2. Policy Name: Great Lakes Wind Study – included
in the Interim Report
3.		 Policy Type: Commission a study group to assess
the technical and economic potential for wind
generation in the Great Lakes, with cooperation of
the other Great Lakes states.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This policy, standing alone, would not
result in any GHG emission reductions. However,
if off-shore wind development is found technically
and economically feasible, the findings and
recommendations of the study group may assist
in the development of off-shore wind projects,
which would help the state meet its present, and
potentially it’s Enhanced, Renewable Portfolio
Standard requirements.

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and does
not directly result in any greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission reductions.

10.		Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: As
identified in section 6 there would be relatively
limited governmental administrative costs with
this policy. If the timeline suggested here is
followed, these costs should conclude by January
2009.

6.		 Estimated Costs: There should be limited
governmental administrative costs associated with
this program. These costs would result mostly
from the state’s involvement in the proposed
study group.

11.		Barriers to Implementation: There should not
be barriers to convening the off‑shore wind study
group. There may be legal and other barriers to
any recommended actions issued by the study
group.

Funding Sources: The study is to be completed
within the PSC operating budget.
7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
PSC, DNR, and the Board of Commissioners of
Public Lands should be requested to form a study
group to evaluate the technical and economic
potential for wind generation in Lake Michigan
and Lake Superior. Among other issues, this group
should evaluate costs of development of wind
facilities in the lakes, public trust issues related to
wind development in the lake bed, avian impact
issues, potential riparian owner concerns, and
effective regulatory approaches to addressing
siting issues. The study group should also evaluate
whether Wisconsin should explore a partnership
with Michigan regarding the development of
off‑shore wind facilities in Lake Michigan.

12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•

		 The study group should likely have representatives
from the DNR, PSC and the Board of
Commissioners of Public Lands. In addition, utility,
independent power producer, environmental,
commercial fishing, commercial shipping, riparian,
and other representatives should be included.

108

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)

Amended Strategic Energy Assessment
1. Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

GHG emissions, such as dispatch modifications
and early unit retirements, and identify the
potential emissions reductions available,
the associated costs and any other relevant
information.

2. Policy Name: PSC Amended Strategic Energy
Assessment (Amended SEA)
3. Policy Type: PSC proceeding and report

		 Upon review of all this information after public
input and examination of leakage issues, each
utility would be asked by the PSC to set voluntary,
near-term (prior to implementation of a Cap and
Trade Program) GHG emission reduction goals for
its systems, including in its internal operations,
just as many other major businesses are doing,
and to report regularly on progress. Future rate
filings should identify any reduction measures
included in the cost-of-service and recovery of
reasonable and prudently incurred costs to meet
goals consistent with the PSC’s Assessment should
be permitted.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric Utilities
Sub-Sector: Generation
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy to address the
implementation of specific greenhouse gas (GHG)
reduction efforts for the electric generation sector
and would not directly result in any emission
reductions.
6. Estimated Costs: To be determined, with the
expectation of minimal administrative costs.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
policy calls for the development of voluntary GHG
reduction plans and should not be considered
stringent. The timetable for this policy is ambitious
and is based on statutory requirements. PSC was
required to complete a draft of the SEA by July 1,
2008. PSC must hold a non-contested case public
hearing no later than 90 days after issuing the
draft, and must complete the final SEA within
90 days after the hearing. This means the SEA
must be completed by the end of 2008. This
policy requires utilities to submit information by
October 15, 2008, leaving PSC with approximately
2 months to incorporate the supplemental
information into the SEA. Although this policy
proposal is focused on the current SEA, PSC may
routinely require similar information as part of
each future SEA.

		 Funding Sources: PSC and utilities will cover costs
from their operating budgets.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
current Strategic Energy Assessment (SEA)
should be reopened, with all utilities subject
to the SEA required by October 15, 2008 to
prepare, document and file comprehensive GHG
emissions inventories for their systems, using
recognized standards on a consistent basis (such
as the internationally recognized GHG Protocol),
as determined by the PSC. These filings should
include reasonable estimates of emissions
associated with imported power. They should
present this information in detail in a format
accessible to others for expert review and analysis
and also in a summary format easily understood
by the public. In conjunction with these filings,
each utility should:
•

•

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This policy will not directly result in
GHG reductions but it will lead to the development
of voluntary near-term reduction goals for each
utility. The amount of reductions that might be
included in those plans cannot be predicted.

Identify the actions currently being taken
or planned to be taken during the next
three years (including, but not limited to,
conservation and efficiency measures in
its service area and renewable resource
deployment), that will reduce its GHG
emissions, showing estimated reductions,
costs and other relevant information; and,

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: A
detailed analysis of the costs associated with
this policy has not been completed. Again it is
important to note that this policy does not directly
require capital expenditures for GHG reductions,
but such expenditures may be necessary as part of
the voluntary plans developed by each utility.

Identify other actions that are not included in
its current actions or plans that could be taken
by it during this period to further reduce its

109

11. Barriers to Implementation: PSC has broad
statutory and regulatory authority to request
information from utilities for the SEA. However,
PSC is under a statutory schedule for completing
the SEA and adhering to that schedule will be
more difficult as a result of this policy. Utilities will
be on a tight schedule to compile the necessary
information described in this policy and PSC
will be on a very tight schedule to analyze that
information and include it in the final SEA.
12. Other Factors: One alternative a utility may wish
to pursue may be to join the Chicago Climate
Exchange and make voluntary commitments
through that vehicle, provided that the SEA
process and reporting requirements discussed
above are fulfilled. In addition, utilities should be
encouraged to join the Climate Registry.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Improved Rate Designs
Aligning Interests
Demand Response, Load Management
Incentives for Voluntary Programs
Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard

110

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)
1. Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

required siting or permitting approvals or
transmission constraints.

2. Policy Name: Enhanced Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS)

This policy would modify the existing RPS through
legislation as follows:

3. Policy Type: Legislation amending existing RPS

A. New Minimum Standards

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities and retail electric
cooperatives
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: To be determined. The Electric
Generation and Supply work group estimated
that a similar policy proposed by their work group
could reduce GHG emissions by 11.6 MMt in 2020
and 19.5 MMt in 2025, compared to business-asusual.

•

The current 2015 RPS should be amended
to move the 10% requirement forward from
2015 to 2013 in order to accelerate early
reductions of emissions through renewable
energy substitution. The post-2013 standards
will be 20% by 2020 and 25% by 2025.

•

To meet the post-2013 standards a minimum
amount of each electric provider’s renewable
energy should be required to come from
Wisconsin-based renewable energy resources,
including any Great Lakes wind and renewable
energy credits from Wisconsin sources. This
requirement should increase reliability and
decrease the need for expensive, difficult to
site new transmission, as well as stimulate
growth of jobs in Wisconsin. The Wisconsin
source RPS minimum by 2020 would be 6%
and 10% by 2025. Conversely, the maximum
amount of renewable energy from out-ofstate used to meet the RPS would be 14% for
the 2020 standard and 15% for 2025 standard.
These requirements are minimums that are
likely to be exceeded if Wisconsin-based
sources are the most economic alternatives.
Whether this will be the case is impossible to
predict. It will depend, among other factors,
on whether Great Lakes wind is feasible at a
reasonable cost, cost-effective development
of the state’s bio-energy and solar potential,
the construction of major transmission
improvements to the west and the cost
responsibility for such facilities assigned to
Wisconsin.

6. Estimated Costs: To be determined. The Electric
Generation and Supply work group estimated
that the annual costs associated with a similar
policy proposed by their work group could range
between $612 million and $1,109 million above
business-as-usual costs in 2025 (based on 2007
dollars). In terms of costs, there may be significant
differences between that policy proposal and this
one.
		 Funding Sources: Electric rates paid by utility
customers and cooperative members
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
Wisconsin’s existing RPS law (§ 196.378, Wis.
Stats.) requires electric providers (electric utilities
and retail electric cooperatives) to increase their
use of renewables to generate electricity. The
overall effect of the law is to require 10% of
Wisconsin’s total electric energy consumption in
2015 (and thereafter) to originate from specific
“renewable resources” as defined in the law.
Requirements vary for each electric provider
depending on their average renewable energy
percentage in the years 2001-2003. Individual
electric providers can meet their RPS requirement
by generating electricity from renewable resources
or by purchasing renewable resource credits from
another provider. Compliance deadline extensions
(a.k.a. “off ramps”) can be granted by the PSC if
despite reasonable efforts to comply, there will be
undesirable impacts on reliability, unreasonable
increases in rates, or delays as a result of receiving

B.

Changes to the Definition of “Renewable”
•

111

The definitions of renewable energy and
renewable resources in the existing RPS law
would be expanded to include the thermal
portion of Wisconsin co-generation projects

fired with biomass (in addition to the electric
portion of such projects which is covered
by the current definition), as well as biogas
produced in Wisconsin that is put in the gas
pipeline system, solar water heating and
other verifiable renewable applications in an
electric provider’s service area that displace
fossil fuel use by the electric provider. The
revised definition of renewable resources
would also remove the existing 60 MW size
restriction on new hydroelectric facilities,
but only for the purposes of meeting the
non-Wisconsin portion of the standards after
2013. This change would permit purchases
of hydroelectric power from any large
project, including new Manitoba projects,
to qualify post-2013. This recommendation
does not constitute endorsement of any new
hydroelectric projects planned by Manitoba
Hydro. The First Nations and others have
strongly voiced concerns about the impacts
of the existing hydro system on the First
Nations and the environment, including
concerns about the licensing status of the
existing projects. The Task Force recognizes
that the construction of proposed new plants
by Manitoba is likely to be controversial and
involve complex issues. These issues, as well
as the licensing of any new plants, and any
conditions imposed in any new licenses or
on existing projects must be resolved under
Canadian law, treaties with the First Nations
and any agreements reached by affected
parties. This recommendation is based on
the premise that the concerns of the First
Nations related to the existing hydro system
and any new proposed projects, including
issuance of final licenses, will be resolved
before new projects are built, as Manitoba
Hydro has indicated. The Task Force cannot
predict whether new plants will be built or,
if so, when or under what conditions, or
whether the related transmission necessary
for export of energy to the U.S. will be built.
This recommendation simply recognizes that:
(1) hydroelectric generation is a renewable
resource regardless of size; (2) the output
of any new plants built by Manitoba that is
exported to the U.S. and displaces fossil fuel
generation will reduce GHG emissions; and

(3) the Manitoba Hydro system can provide
significant storage benefits that will enhance
the value of U.S. wind power, provide
renewable resource diversity and enable
more efficient use of major new transmission
built to access wind resources to the west of
Wisconsin.
•

To incent the conversion of existing
Wisconsin industrial coal-fired boilers and
other customer-owned coal-fired boilers
to biomass prior to implementation of a
Cap and Trade Program, electric providers
should be permitted to purchase renewable
energy credits for such conversions. In the
alternative, where an industry wishes to
deploy its capital elsewhere, by contract with
the affected industry, an electric provider may
install and own a replacement boiler, supply
process steam and heat to the industry on
a contract basis and utilize the equivalency
credits directly.

C. Changes to the Treatment of Renewable Resource
Credits

112

•

To meet the revised standards in this Proposal
and incent early action on a cost-effective
basis, renewable resource credits (a.k.a.
renewable energy credits or RECs) available
for compliance should not expire after four
years, but have an unlimited carry-forward
life. A Wisconsin source requirement, coupled
with credit carry-forwards, will stimulate
quicker development of the state’s renewable
resource potential and provide related
business and job benefits, enhance electric
system reliability and reduce transmission
costs and transmission losses.

•

There should be no limit on the use of
renewable energy credits to meet the revised
standards in this Proposal, so long as the
underlying resource for the REC qualifies as
a “renewable resource” under Wisconsin
law, and only Wisconsin sources may be used
to meet the Wisconsin minimum source
requirements. Use of the Midwest Renewable
Energy Tracking System (M-RETS) credits
would be available for the remainder of the

requirements regardless of source location.
In addition, to mitigate rate impacts, the
PSC should have the authority, but not the
obligation, to allow the use of credits from
other programs that are comparable in terms
of stringency and verification to (M-RETS).

the overall RPS.
8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency
Option: The timetable is implicit in this policy
recommendation. Duration is until changed by
law. This policy should be regarded as stringent
as a result of PSC enforcement authority identical
to the enforcement provisions of the existing RPS
(2005 Act 141).

D. Other Changes
•

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: A detailed analysis of the emission
reductions associated with this policy has not
been completed. Preliminary estimates can be
made based on calculations done by the Electric
Generation and Supply work group in association
with a similar proposal for an Enhanced RPS
policy, which called for the same targets in 2020
and 2025 but was different in other details. The
amount of energy needed to meet the 2020 and
2025 targets will depend on total demand for
electricity. Two scenarios were considered by
the work group, based on business-as-usual (2%
growth per year) and the proposed Enhanced
Conservation and Energy Efficiency policy (0.5%
growth per year). The work group concluded
that meeting the RPS targets in their proposed
policy under these two scenarios would require
the following amounts of MWh from renewable
energy resources (in excess of 2003 renewable
generation):

To enable electric providers to meet the new,
more aggressive RPS recommen ded in this
Proposal in a timely manner and to avoid the
need for compliance deadline extensions,
the revised RPS should: (1) stream-line the
regulatory approval (for all affected agencies)
and siting process for renewable projects; (2)
encourage proposals that encompass multiple
projects, with multi-project, integrative
plans for acquisition of sites, equipment and
contractors; (3) allow for PSC approval of
multi-year commitments for acquisition of
necessary equipment in a timely manner, with
appropriate recovery of development costs;
(4) provide additional resources for the PSC
to process applications; (5) encourage larger
electric providers to partner on projects with
smaller electric providers; and (6) remove
existing siting and equipment transportation
barriers.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: A
detailed analysis of the costs associated with
this policy has not been completed. Preliminary
estimates can be made based on calculations
done by the Electric Generation and Supply work
group in association with a similar proposal for
an Enhanced RPS policy, which called for the
same targets in 2020 and 2025. However, it is
important to note that the work group’s policy

All other provisions of the existing RPS law
would apply to the revised portfolio standards in
this Proposal, including the existing “off ramp”
provisions for compliance deadline extensions. In
the event that a compliance deadline is extended
with respect to the in-state RPS minimum, the
remedy may be to waive the in-state source
requirement, while maintaining the integrity of

The work group estimated the following
associated impact in terms of CO2 reductions:

EnhancedRPSMWhOutput
(inMillionMWh,inexcessof2003
renewablegeneration)
Enhanced
BusinessͲasͲ
Conservation
usual

andEnergy
(2%/yr
Efficiency
Growth)
(0.5%/yrGrowth)
2020

13.8

11.5

2025

23.3

18.1

CO2ReductionsInMillionMetricTons(MMt)
Enhanced
BusinessͲasͲ
Conservation
usual

andEnergy
(2%/yr
Efficiency
growth)
(0.5%/yrgrowth)



113

2020

11.6

9.7

2025

19.5

15.2

proposal did not allow for new large hydropower
projects and did not include minimum in-state
renewable generation targets. The differences
between the two proposals may have a significant
impact on costs and further analysis may be
necessary to understand those impacts.

These estimates are based on the projected costs
for wind projects developed in Wisconsin and the
West (Wisconsin projects are assumed to have
the lowest current costs). The following amounts
of Wisconsin and West wind projects (based on
nameplate capacity) are included in the cost
estimate:

		 Incremental administrative costs of the Enhanced
RPS are estimated to be negligible because the
PSC already has in place the infrastructure for
regulating this requirement. The other costs are
potential impacts on electric rates. These impacts
will depend on demand growth, as well as the
projected costs of power and energy from the mix
of renewable resources employed to meet the
requirement compared with the estimated cost
of coal- and gas-fired generation that is displaced,
including carbon adders. The Electric Generation
and Supply work group estimated the following
increases in annual electric costs based on their
proposal for an Enhanced RPS and a range of
assumptions about demand and cost variables:


WindNameplateMWCapacityFor25%RPSin2025

612

742

979

1,109

WindCapital
Cost=
$1,650/kW
WindCapital
Cost=
$2,215/kW

ReplacesEnergyOnly

388

489

688

790

7,500(assumed
maximumfor
Wisconsin)

6,891

West

1,020

0

11. Barriers to Implementation: The major barrier
to implementation of this policy is the need for
legislation to amend 2005 Act 141. Opposition
may come from electric customers who believe
that this requirement will materially increase
their electricity costs. The new requirements for
Wisconsin-based renewables could potentially
face legal challenges based on the Interstate
Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
Questions have been raised in other states
that already have in-state RPS requirements,
but to date none of those state laws have been
challenged in court on that basis. The drafters
of the Enhanced RPS legislation should carefully
examine the Interstate Commerce Clause issue
and draft the in-state requirement to minimize the
risk of a successful Interstate Commerce Clause
challenge.

IncreasesinAnnualElectricCostͲEnhancedConservationand
EnergyEfficiency(0.5%/yrGrowth)
2025(RPS=25%),(inmillions2007$)
ReplacesEnergy&
Capacity

Wisconsin

may be used by electric providers to meet the
Enhanced RPS, but insufficient data were available
to estimate the costs of these other technologies
in Wisconsin.

		



BusinessͲasͲusual
(2%/yrgrowth)

		 Other resources, including biomass and solar,

IncreasesinAnnualElectricCostͲBusinessͲasͲusual(2%/yrGrowth)
2025(RPS=25%),(inmillions2007$)

ReplacesEnergy&
ReplacesEnergyOnly
Capacity
WindCapital
Cost=
$1,650/kW
WindCapital
Cost=
$2,215/kW



Enhanced
Conservation
andEnergy
Efficiency
(0.5%/yrgrowth)

12. Other Factors: The targets of the proposed
Enhanced RPS are consistent with the targets of
the Midwestern Governors Association Energy
Security and Climate Stewardship Platform
adopted in November, 2007, although the
Platform also endorses a 30% by 2030 target not
included in this proposal. Also, for the purposes



		

114

of the MGA targets, the definition of renewable is
somewhat more limited.
Meeting the Enhanced RPS under businessas-usual growth in electric demand will entail
greater difficulty than future scenarios that
include reduced electric demand through energy
conservation and efficiency programs and other
factors.
		 Enabling policies for the Enhanced RPS include
Wind Siting Reform, Great Lakes Wind Study,
Advanced Renewable Tariff Development
and Electric Transmission and Distribution
Improvements.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Incentives for Co-Generation/Combined Heat
and Power (CHP)
Electric Transmission and Distribution
Improvements
Advanced Renewable Tariff Development
Wind Siting Reform
Great Lakes Wind Study

115

Transmission Improvements
1. Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

transmission costs. Additional analysis, however,
is required to actually determine the amount
of transmission that would need to be built
to adequately lower transmission costs for
importation of electricity from projects in these
states, the costs of building this transmission and
Wisconsin’s share of the costs. Wisconsin’s share
of the additional transmission costs could range
from as little as 15% to 80 - 100%, depending
on the policies adopted at FERC and the amount
of benefit Wisconsin would receive from the
interconnections.

2. Policy Name: Electric Streamline Transmission
and Distribution Improvements (Transmission
Improvements)
3. Policy Type: If not already being accomplished
by the Midwestern Governors Association Energy
Security and Climate Stewardship platform efforts
and/or the Midwest Independent Transmission
System Operator (MISO) study efforts, then the
PSC should initiate a study group and/or open a
PSC docket to evaluate changes to the state-wide
and regional electric transmission system that
would facilitate increased electric generation by
renewable and/or low-carbon resources. The
study group and/or PSC docket would also direct
the evaluation and/or participation of Wisconsin in
negotiations with other states, MISO and Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) regarding
regional transmission system expansion and cost
allocation.

		 Changes in generation-transmission
interconnection processes are needed at the
regional level to enable the connection of large
amounts of wind generation. The currently
defined tariffs of MISO for interconnecting
generation are designed in such a way that the
first wind generator to create a need for additional
transmission must pay for the entire project, with
subsequent wind generators being free riders.
This discourages the initial connection of wind
generation. There is an effort underway at MISO to
discuss revising the process. Wisconsin should be
an active participant in that effort if out-of-state
wind generation is to be available to meet native
load.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-sectors: Transmission Utilities, Distribution
Utilities, MISO, FERC
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This policy would not directly reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. It is an enabling
policy to allow the greater expansion of renewable
and lower-carbon generating options.

		 There are also efforts underway to evaluate the
potential impacts of connecting a large amount
of variable (i.e. wind generation) resources onto
the transmission grid. Studies from Minnesota
presented to the work group indicate that
although the issues are significant, large amounts
of variable energy can be accommodated by the
electric generation and transmission system in
that state. There are no comparable studies of the
transmission system in Wisconsin.

6. Estimated Costs: There would be limited
governmental administrative costs associated with
this program. These costs would mostly involve
the state’s involvement in a proceeding to develop
and implement improvements in transmission
support for low-carbon resources.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
PSC should determine the scope of work needed
to implement this policy within one month after
the task force report is accepted by the governor
and implement as soon as possible after this date.

		 Funding Sources: Costs would be met within the
PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Based
on generation costs alone, renewable and/or
low carbon projects (including wind projects)
developed in Minnesota, Iowa, and the Dakotas
are estimated to be cheaper than similar projects
developed in Wisconsin due to higher capacity
factors. However, when actually considering
the importation of electricity to Wisconsin from
projects in these states, the lower generation
costs could be more than offset by higher

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This policy directive is necessary to
evaluate the transmission changes necessary to
meet an Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard
and to enable low-carbon and distributed
generation to displace higher carbon generation
sources.

116

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
minimal administrative costs identified in section
6 will be limited to the completion of this study.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Other than
associated administrative costs, there are no
significant barriers to forming this study group
and/or opening this PSC docket.
12. Other Factors:
•

There are generating facilities in Wisconsin
with GHG emission rates much lower than
conventional baseload coal plants, (i.e.
natural gas combined-cycle plants) that
have transmission constraints which prevent
them from displacing additional high-carbon
emitting generators.

•

Additional policy options recommended by
this and other work groups, such as Advanced
Renewable Tariffs and Co-Generation
incentives, may have different transmission
implications depending on where in the state
they are developed.

•

The magnitude of the GHG reductions being
discussed by the Task Force will require
changes in the electric generation system in
Wisconsin that are greater than the planning
capacity of any single utility.

13. Related Policies:
•

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)

117

Tax Incentives for Renewables
1.		 Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Develop
a new customer program option administered
by a non-profit organization(s) (existing or
new) to allow customers to make potentially
tax deductible donations to fund an increase
in their utility’s renewable energy or to fund
directly additional renewable resource projects
in the state. Utilities would provide customers
information regarding this program through their
bills and other communications to customers, but
the contributions by the customer would be made
to the non-profit organization(s).

2.		 Policy Name: Tax Incentives for Renewable Energy
Development (Tax Incentives for Renewables)
3.		 Policy Type: Redesign of, or additional renewable
electrical energy program, to allow customers to
make tax deductible contributions for renewable
energy development
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility, participating non-profits
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities

		 This program would create incentives for
customers to support the development and use
of additional renewable energy by making the
amounts that they contribute tax deductible,
to the extent allowed by law. A model for this
program already exists: Wisconsin Public Service
Corporation’s SolarWise program. SolarWise
provides funding for the installation of solar panels
on schools with monies collected by a non-profit
501(c)(3) foundation that the company established
for this purpose. Renewable energy that results
from the implementation of this policy would
not count toward Renewable Portfolio Standard
requirements of utilities.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Under this proposal, additional utility
customers would select renewable energy rate
options due to favorable federal, as well as state,
tax treatment, resulting in an increase in the
amount of renewable energy generated in the
state.1 For every additional MWh of energy that
is purchased by the utility from renewable energy
providers, an estimated 1,850 pounds of CO2
emissions are avoided.
6.		 Estimated Costs: The overall annual cost to
develop and implement this policy would be
limited to administrative time of the non-profit
organization(s) that would be responsible for
structuring the funding mechanisms for the
relevant projects. If today’s utility programs
that already exist for customers continue to
be offered, there would be no incremental
administration costs to utilities. However, should
existing utility programs continue, and this policy
be implemented as an additional customer
program, then there would be some additional
utility administrative costs in support of this new
program opportunity.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
This policy could be implemented as soon as a
non-profit organization can be established to
administer the statewide program or separate
non-profit organizations can be established for
each utility. Existing utility programs could be
modified to work through this organization(s).
9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The incremental renewable energy
supply resulting from this policy would reduce
1,850 pounds of CO2 for every MWh contracted
under this program.

		 Funding Sources: Administrative costs of the nonprofit organization(s) would be funded through
revenues collected from customers and renewable
resource suppliers. Any loss of state tax revenues
would have to be absorbed within the state
budget.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
There would be additional administrative costs
for this program associated with the staffing and
functioning of the non-profit organization(s).
These added costs could be collected from the
participating utility customers and renewable
energy suppliers. Efficiencies could be gained
in the collection and distribution of funds to
renewable energy providers by establishing a
single statewide organization for this purpose,
rather than using utility specific program
alternatives and multiple non-profit organizations.

1. This policy template provides incentives for the use and development of renewable electrical energy. After the policy in this
template is implemented, the state should likely evaluate whether
a similar program for biogas and potentially other sources of nonelectrical renewable energy would encourage their development
and use.

118

11. Barriers to Implementation: Some change in
state revenue planning would need to occur to
acknowledge the changes in state and federal tax
collections.
12. Other Factors: The option of continuing to have
local customer programs like SolarWise should be
considered. Also, utilities should have the option
to either participate through a state program or to
participate through their own program.
13. Related Policies: None

119

Renewable Tariffs
1.		 Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

parallel generation tariff or through a negotiated
purchased power agreement.

2.		 Policy Name: Advanced Renewable Tariff
Development (Renewable Tariffs)

		 A utility may apply generation purchased under
these tariffs toward its current RPS or any
successor renewable energy obligation, unless the
output is resold through a voluntary renewable
energy program at retail.

3.		 Policy Type: PSC proceeding and possible
authorizing legislation
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
policy should be developed and implemented
by 2009. If the PSC believes it has the authority
to establish advanced renewable energy tariffs
without legislation, it could convene a proceeding
at any time to determine the production costs of
various distributed renewable resources such as
solar, wind, small hydro, landfill gas, biogas, and
other biomass sources.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: The development of Advanced
Renewable Tariffs is an enabling policy to an
Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) and
so it does not directly lead to any greenhouse gas
(GHG) emission reductions. It would contribute
to the achievement of overall reductions of GHG
emissions in the RPS. It is expected that this policy
would expand the development of smaller scale
projects and that these projects would be brought
to market more quickly with this policy.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The development of Advanced
Renewable Tariffs is an enabling policy to an
enhanced RPS. If the Enhanced RPS is not adopted,
this policy should be done so that smaller scale
renewable projects are encouraged in Wisconsin.
As a stand-alone policy, if utilities supplied 2% of
their sales with distributed renewable resources
by 2020 (above current requirements), and 3% by
2025, this would result in reductions of 1.5 million
metric tons/yr of CO2e by 2020, and 2.25 million
metric tons/yr of CO2e by 2025.

6.		 Estimated Costs: The overall annual cost
to develop this policy would be limited to
administrative time of the PSC and utilities to
establish an implementation approach and cost
recovery treatment for the tariff.
		 Funding Sources: Establishment of these tariffs
would be completed within the PSC operating
budget

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
cost to develop this tariff is administrative only
and can be considered part of traditional utility
ratemaking. The cost to fully implement an
Advanced Renewable Tariff is dependent on tariff
design principles.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
Advanced Renewable Tariff policy should
encompass the following principles:
A. Tariffs should be set according to specific 		
production costs of a particular generation
technology

11. Barriers to Implementation: It is not clear
whether legislation would be required to provide
the PSC with the authority to set advanced
renewable tariffs and impose targets on utilities.

B. The tariffs should include a rate of return
comparable to the utilities’ allowed return

12. Other Factors: It is recognized that Advanced
Renewable Tariffs would likely result in increased
costs per unit of electrical output compared
to utility-scale renewable projects, but that
these costs are justified by the economic and
environmental advantages from encouraging
distributed small-scale generation. Establishing a
single tariff approach across the state may result
in unequal cost impacts to each utility because
of differences in renewable resource potential

C. The tariffs should be fixed over a period of time
that allows for full recovery of capital costs
D. Renewable energy credits acquired through these
tariffs can be rate-based or sold through a utility’s
voluntary renewable energy program
E. When the fixed term of the tariff ends (capital costs
of project have been recovered), the energy from
these systems can be acquired through the utility’s

120

within their service territory boundaries and
other variables. As an example, some utilities
may have lower cost biogas projects due to land
use patterns and existing customer business
choices. Some utilities will be advantaged with
solar project applications due to building sizes and
weather conditions. This policy recommendation
requires an examination of these service territory
inequities. The benefits expected to be achieved
by this proposal will require a solution to these
cost inequities. A cost recovery approach may be
challenging from a PSC rules-and-ratepayer equity
perspective.
13. Related Policies:
•

Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)

121

Modify Nuclear Moratorium
1.		 Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

B. The proposed modifications would:

2.		 Policy Name: Modify Moratorium on Construction
of New Nuclear Plants (Modify Nuclear
Moratorium)

1. Add a new Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) provision
to Section §196.493 (2) (b) Wis. Stats.
requiring that the proposed nuclear plant
must be built to meet Wisconsin electricity
needs at a cost that is reasonable and
advantageous to customers in comparison
with available alternatives, taking account
of emission reductions benefits. If such a
nuclear plant is a plant to be built and owned
by a party other than a Wisconsin utility, the
output would need to be sold to Wisconsin
utilities to meet the needs requirement. In
any event, any new nuclear plant, regardless
of any changes in ownership or operational
responsibility during the life of the plant,
would be subject to regulation by the PSC on
a basis that is comparable to the regulation
that would apply to such a plant if owned and
operated by a Wisconsin public utility.

3.		 Policy Type: Legislation revising statutory
provisions relating to nuclear plants
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and is not
likely to result in any direct greenhouse gas
(GHG) emission reductions prior to the 2022 GHG
emissions reduction goal.
6.		 Estimated Costs: There are minimal costs
associated with this recommendation
		 Funding Sources: Any costs of developing
legislation would be absorbed through state
operating budgets and any resultant PSC action
would be completed within the agency’s operating
budget

2. Replace Section §196.493 (2) (a) Wis. Stats.,
dealing with the requirement of a federally
licensed nuclear waste disposal facility, with
a requirement that to obtain a CPCN, the PSC
must find that the nuclear waste plan for the
plant is economic, reasonable, stringent, and
in the public interest, given the safety and
other risks presented by such waste.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Under
Wisconsin’s current “nuclear moratorium” law (§
196.493, Wis. Stats.) the PSC may not authorize
the construction of a nuclear plant unless it
finds that a federal facility (or facility outside the
country) will be available for the disposal of highlevel waste from all Wisconsin nuclear plants, and
that the proposed nuclear plant is economically
advantageous to ratepayers based on specified
factors.

3. The proposed CPCN requirements for a
nuclear plant would apply to any proposed
nuclear unit regardless of size and include any
replacement of any existing nuclear unit.
4. In addition to the existing right of the PSC
to apply for extension of the 180-day time
limit to act on a CPCN, an additional extension
could be sought by the PSC in the case of a
nuclear plant for a reasonable, but defined
period.

		 This proposal would modify the terms of this
moratorium, as follows:
A. The proposed modifications to the moratorium
would be effective upon the latter of (1)
enactment into law of a 25% by 2025 renewable
portfolio standard consistent with the Task Force’s
Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard template
or (2) final approval by the PSC and, where
required, approval by Joint Finance, of revised
energy efficiency goals, and related spending
and program requirements, consistent with the
Task Force’s Enhanced Conservation and Energy
Efficiency Program template.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
passage of the legislation is contingent upon the
criteria described in section 7.A.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy and is not
likely to result in any direct reductions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Costs
will be borne in the near term.

122

11. Barriers to Implementation: This proposal would
meet the same challenges faced by any legislation
12. Other Factors: This recommendation is not a
recommendation by the Task Force that a new
nuclear plant be built. However, it would allow
utilities to prudently plan and propose that
alternative, if they believe it is the most costeffective and beneficial means to meet GHG
reduction goals and their obligations to serve over
the long term. Whether such plants are built will
depend on the success of the state’s conservation
and efficiency and renewable programs, the
need for new generation driven by actual load
growth and plant retirements, the economics
of nuclear power, the feasibility of alternatives,
and addressing nuclear fuel issues in a manner
acceptable to federal and state regulators.
		 The conditions in section 7.A. are intended
to provide assurance that all cost-effective
conservation and efficiency measures will be
pursued as a first priority and that any need for
a nuclear plant will be determined after taking
account not only of costs and benefits (including
emissions reductions) of available supply-side
alternatives, but also of demand-side reductions
achieved through a comprehensive, aggressive
conservation and efficiency effort, other demandside measures and a challenging renewable
resources requirement.
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard

123

Green Tariff Study
1.		 Work Group: Electric Generation and Supply

Reductions: The results of the study
recommended in this policy, if implemented,
would reduce 1,850 pounds of CO2 for every MWh
contracted under these tariffs.

2.		 Policy Name: Green Tariff Option for Customers –
Feasibility Study (Green Tariff Study)
3.		 Policy Type: Directive to the PSC to study the
feasibility of new renewable tariff approaches
(with legislation, if necessary amending Wis. Stat.
Section 196.192)

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: There
would be limited governmental administrative
costs to conduct the study and implement the
recommendations. There would be administrative
costs for the utilities in the development of the
tariffs and application of the tariff rules for the
customers who want their energy service under
this tariff option.

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy which will
not result in any direct greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission reductions until renewable resources
are developed in accordance with study
recommendations.

11. Barriers to Implementation: It is not clear
whether legislation would be required to provide
the PSC with the authority to establish this tariff
option for retail customers.
12. Other Factors: The tariff option recommended
by this policy requires further study by the PSC.
This policy recommendation is unlike other tariff
proposals because it considers a relationship
between a third party energy provider and the
customer through the utility. It is not clear if this
can be accommodated without changes in utility
law. The purpose of this policy is to encourage
further implementation paths for renewable
energy use by Wisconsin customers and encourage
additional development of renewable resources
in the state. The tariff described in this policy
proposal would provide an option for customers
and renewable energy providers that would not
otherwise be available. The contracting terms,
legal considerations for retail energy marketing
and protection for grid access are just a few of the
reasons that a study is needed.

6.		 Estimated Costs: The overall annual cost to
develop and implement this policy would be
limited to administrative time of the PSC and
utilities to conduct a study and investigate tariff
options, assessing the implementation issues,
including the recommended accounting for the
billing, and cost recovery treatment for the tariff.
		 Funding Sources: The study would be completed
within the PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
development of a green tariff option for customers
is an enabling policy to further encourage the
development of renewable energy in Wisconsin.
This policy directs the PSC to study the feasibility
of market-based pricing options for customers that
would be designed to accommodate individual
contracts between retail customers and renewable
energy providers. These contracts would be
implemented through their utilities and would be
longer-term, fixed price contracts for energy and
capacity. Renewable energy that resulted from the
implementation of these tariff proposals would
not count toward Renewable Portfolio Standard
requirements of utilities.

13. Related Policies: None

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
feasibility study should be conducted in 2008 so
that implementation recommendations could be
considered in 2009.
9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG

124

Rate Mitigation Strategies
1. Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs

implementation of rate mitigation strategies may
require new legislation and/or rule development.
For example, the existing environmental trust
financing mechanism was created through
legislation.

2. Policy Name: Rate Mitigation Strategies
3. Policy Type: PSC investigation
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric Utilities

12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy that would
not directly result in any greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission reductions.

•
•

6. Estimated Costs: To be determined, with the
expectation of minimal administrative costs.
		 Funding Sources: PSC operating budget
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Given
the expected high fixed costs of new baseload
generation and other utility investments required
to meet GHG emission reduction goals, this policy
calls for the PSC to investigate rate mitigation
strategies, such as: (1) levelization of cost recovery
in rates of high capital cost, low-carbon and GHG
reduction projects to avoid early year rate shock;
and (2) on a voluntary basis, securitization of
related debt to lower interest costs and allow
for more highly leveraged capital structures for
particular projects that will not adversely affect
bond ratings. Any such mechanisms must provide
an opportunity for utilities to invest significant
equity capital in such projects. Such mechanisms
should be designed to lower total return costs for
customers and, at the same time, incent utility
investments in low carbon and GHG reduction
projects.
8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
PSC should establish an expeditious time frame for
this activity.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy that would
not directly result in any emission reductions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Administrative costs for this investigation are
expected to be minimal, but a detailed analysis of
the associated costs has not been completed.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Although PSC can
open this investigation on existing authority, actual

125

Improved Rate Designs
Aligning Interests

California Vehicle Emission Standards
1.		 Work Group: Transportation, with revisions by
Task Force Co-Chairs

6.		 Estimated Costs: Average Increase in Vehicle
Price, Lifetime Savings and Payback Time*

2. Policy Name: California Vehicle Emission
Standards (often referred to as California Cars)

Near-term
(2012)
23% GHG
reduction
$300

Mid-term (2016)

$2,362
1.2

$3,253
2.9

3. Policy Type: Legislative action to adopt the
California vehicle emission standards (California
emission standards) rather than continue
participation in the federal Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) program. The California emissions
standard would require greater GHG emission
reductions for on-road passenger vehicles and
light trucks sold in Wisconsin.

Increase in
vehicle price
Lifetime savings
Payback time
(years)

(*Source: California Air Resources Board)

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Car/light truck manufacturers, dealers, parts
manufacturers, auto scrappage and consumers.

The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers
estimates CARB regulations will increase average
vehicle prices by $3000 in 2016.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: The California emission standards would
provide greater vehicle emission reductions than
CAFE (revised as part of the Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007). These emission standard
rules are often referred to as Pavley 1 (affecting
vehicles produced from 2009 - 2016) and Pavley
2 (these rules are still under development and
would establish emission standards for vehicles
produced from 2017-2020).

Funding Sources: Consumers purchasing new
vehicles will bear the increased price, but they will
also benefit from lower fuel consumption.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The Task
Force recommends adoption of the California
Car (CARB) emission standards for the following
reasons:

GHG Reduction from California Emission
Standards*
2020
Pavley 1
2.0 million
metric tons
(MMt)/year
Pavley 1 and 2 2.6 MMt/year

30% GHG
reduction
$790

•

A single, nation-wide set of aggressive vehicle
standards to reduce GHG emissions is desired.
The Task Force recognizes the burden on
automakers and the resulting cost burden
on consumers if industry is required to meet
multiple standards.

•

The California Car (CARB) standards will
materially reduce GHG emissions compared
with the federal CAFE standards.

•

The Task Force has been informed that
automakers will build to a single set of
standards in any event.

•

Those standards should be higher than
CAFE, consistent with the actions of other
industrialized countries.

2024
2.4 MMt/year

3.7 MMt/year

* The additional GHG reduction achieved under the California
emission standards compared to CAFE.

The Transportation work group had two goals: (1)
stabilizing GHG emissions; and (2) reducing sector
GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. Only the
California emission standards (Pavley 1 and 2)
approach the stabilization goal about 2024. The
1990 emissions goal is not achieved by either the
California emission standards or CAFE.

For these reasons, the Task Force recommends
that Wisconsin join with the other states that have
endorsed or adopted the California Car (CARB)
standards in order to help move those standards
forward as the single, consistent set of vehicle
emission standards that will be applied nationally.

126

The Task Force also recommends that the state,
with the Janesville community and other affected
parties, work diligently with General Motors on
a plan of action to convert its Janesville facility to
manufacture highly efficient vehicles in order to
take advantage of the highly skilled labor force in
Janesville and the supply chain that exists, instead
of closing the plant.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The California emission standards are currently
under appeal in the federal courts and consist
of the Pavley 1 rules. If Wisconsin were to adopt
the California emission standards they would
be phased-in over two model years. Pavley 2
regulations now under development would affect
model years 2017-2020.

		 Furthermore, the state should develop a
comprehensive consumer transportation
education and marketing program, to aid
automakers in the sale of highly efficient vehicles.
This effort should be part of the marketing
campaign of the proposed Comprehensive
Initiative to Support Long-Term Voluntary
Greenhouse Gas Emission Reductions.

		 Automakers can implement any combination
of technologies across their passenger vehicle
fleet as long as they achieve the prescribed
CO2-equivalent fleetwide emissions reductions
each year. They are also allowed early emission
reduction credits as appropriate.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Compared to CAFE, the California
emission standards should provide a minimum
reduction of 6% lower annual emissions by 2020
and a maximum reduction of 11% lower annual
emissions by 2024 for the light-duty on-road fleet.
Both the California emission standards and CAFE
regulations slow the growth in GHG emissions, but
increases in the state population and the number
of vehicles plus potential increases in the vehicle
miles traveled indicates multiple policies must be
implemented to actually reduce GHG emissions.

		 The CARB standards establish mandatory
minimum GHG emission standards for passenger
vehicles, light trucks and SUVs. The standards
are achieved through improved vehicle
performance (e.g. engine performance, power
train improvements), use of low global-warmingpotential AC gases and vehicle scrappage.
		 The standards would apply to new motor vehicles
starting two model years after legislative approval
(see section 8 for more detail). These rules would
apply to cars, pickups, minivans, SUVs, and
any other vehicles whose primary use is noncommercial personal transportation. The Pavley
1 reductions (Pavley 2 reductions in parentheses)
would result in new car fleets emitting about 27%
(27%) less GHG emissions than CAFE standards
by 2015 and 24% (35%) less than CAFE standards
by 2020. The California emission standards would
reduce new light truck/SUV fleet emissions 7%
(7%) lower than the revised CAFE standards by
2015 and 4% (21%) lower by 2020.

Both Pavley 1, and Pavley 1 and 2, combined
with the Low Carbon Fuels and Energy Efficient
Communities policies achieve the stabilization and
1990 emissions goals for the on-road fleet prior
to 2015. While Pavley 1 fleet emissions are rising
by 2024, the Pavley 1 and 2 emissions are still
declining. The Pavley 1 and 2 option provides the
deepest and most sustained emission reductions.
CAFE combined with the Low Carbon Fuels and
Energy Efficient Communities policies achieves
stabilization prior to 2015 and the 1990 emissions
goal about 2020. However, by 2024 the light duty
on-road fleet emissions are rising and exceed the
1990 goal.

The California emission standards incorporate
these vehicle emission elements:
•

Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and
nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from operation

•

Refrigerant emissions from air conditioning
system leakage or losses during recharging

•

Vehicle scrappage

•

A separate Transportation policy
recommendation proposing a separate 10%
low carbon fuel requirement is not part of the
California emission standards.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: See
table in section 6
11. Barriers to Implementation: EPA has denied
the California emission standards. California has
appealed this ruling and the major automakers
have challenged the legal authority of a state to
regulate GHG emissions of cars. These challenges
have been denied in the two court rulings to date.

127

		 The application of this rule means Wisconsin
would have to adopt future changes in the
California emission standards as they applied to
GHGs and other pollutants.
		 This rule may affect the availability of certain high
emission vehicles to achieve the desired emission
reduction.
12. Other Factors: California and 12 other states have
adopted these regulations. Those states represent
roughly one third of the U.S. population. The
Illinois and Minnesota global warming advisory
councils also assessed the California emission
standards and the majority of council members
recommended this policy be forwarded for further
state consideration.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•

Electric, Hybrid and Plug-in Hybrid Electric
Vehicle Incentives
Government Fleet Adoption of PHEV
Energy Efficient Communities
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions

128

Off-road Equipment GHG Reductions
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal:

2.		 Policy Name: Off-road Equipment Greenhouse
Gas Emission Reductions (Off-road)

A. Voluntary measures.

3.		 Policy Type: Voluntary and mandatory emission
reduction measures to reduce GHG emissions
from off-road sources.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
This template addresses the off-road nontransportation related construction, agriculture,
lawn/garden care, recreational and industrial/
commercial sectors. It does not address nonroad transportation emissions associated with
interstate rail, aircraft and marine sectors.
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: These voluntary and mandatory measures
could reduce annual emissions an estimated 1.6
million metric tons (MMt) of CO2 in 2020.

•

Allow market forces to drive fuel efficiency
and alternate power sources (e.g. biofuels,
electricity, etc.)

•

Promote public/private sector reductions (e.g.
voluntary relationships)

•

Increase availability of low carbon fuels

•

Promote idling reduction

•

Adopt use of low global warming potential
(GWP) refrigerant gases

•

Develop tax/fiscal incentives to promote the
adoption of low GHG emitting equipment

•

Provide educational material to increase
understanding of the options and
opportunities to reduce both GHGs and
criteria pollutants

6.		 Estimated Costs:
•

•

•

Based on discussion with industry sources,
fuel efficiency improvement costs for
equipment manufacturers are estimated at
1% to 3% of total equipment cost per 1%
increase in fuel efficiency. The increased
purchase cost may be partially to totally offset
by lower fuel costs. The stability of fuel prices
will be a major factor driving fuel efficiency
improvements.

B. Mandatory measures.

Low carbon biofuels (ethanol and biodiesel)
are not commercially competitive and public
subsidies have been provided ($0.50 and
$0.50 - 1.00/gallon respectively). The public
will need to subsidize biofuels until either
market costs for petroleum based fuels exceed
those for biofuels or biofuel production costs
decrease. Current federal biofuels subsidies
cost approximately $8 - 10 billion/year.

•

Public (state) sector purchase of low GHG
emitting/fuel efficient equipment

•

Public sector develops and implements
mandatory idle reduction policies

•

Contracts for state funded projects require
idle reduction provisions

•

Public sector adoption of low GWP refrigerant
gases

•

Preferential purchase of low carbon fuels by
state and local governments

8.		 Timetable, Duration and Stringency of Option:
Industry literature indicates market driven
fuel efficiency increases in the 5 - 20% range
are achievable for different classes of off-road
vehicles/equipment by 2020. These technology
changes will be permanent and the costs to
consumers should decrease over time. Biofuels
currently constitute about 3% of Wisconsin’s
vehicle/equipment fuels. The goal of 10% biofuels
by 2020 is within the targets established by both
the federal and state governments.

Idle reduction is a low to no cost option for
reducing emissions and saving fuel.

		 Funding Sources: The costs of these voluntary
measures are primarily borne by equipment
purchasers and contractors. Incentives and
mandatory measures funded through state
government capital and operating budgets.

129

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The overall estimated emission
reductions of 1.6 MMt achieved through these
policy measures are as follows:

be compatible with and promote GHG emission
reduction activities. State and local governmental/
institutional purchases/contracts could enhance
the adoption and purchase of new off-road
technologies and products with lower GWP. This
policy will require sustained purchasing, education
and voluntary/mandatory efforts to provide the
needed emission reductions.

•

Low carbon fuels: (10% carbon reduction
in diesel and gasoline) 5.7 MMt x 0.1 = 0.57
MMt reduction

•

Reduced idling: (5% reduction) 6.7 MMt x
0.05 = 0.34 MMt reduction

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Not
available

•

Improved fuel efficiency: (10% reduction) 6.4
MMt x 0.1 = 0.64 MMt reduction

11. Barriers to Implementation: Barriers to success
for both voluntary and mandatory initiatives
include the long-life of off-road diesel equipment
(20+ years), technological/ infrastructure/
institutional barriers to improving fuel efficiency,
and the development and marketing of low
carbon fuels and GWP gases. Market and private
sector forces such as fuel prices and other
industry cost control decisions will affect demand
for fuel efficient and low GHG emitting equipment
and products.

		 This is a sizeable reduction, but is still several
hundred thousand metric tons greater than the
2005 stabilization goal. A 27% emission reduction
from the business-as-usual scenario would be
needed to attain the 2005 stabilization goal (4.9
MMt) by 2020. To achieve the 1990 emissions goal
(4.2 MMt) by 2020 would require a 38% reduction
from the 2020 business-as-usual emission
projection.

		 Developing compelling educational and
motivational marketing programs along with the
needed funding for outreach capacity are critical
factors. For example, developing purchasing
guidelines that include meaningful GHG
reductions will require cross sector collaboration
and knowledgeable, dedicated staff to implement
this outreach.

		 Attaining the stabilization and 1990 emission
levels within the 2015 - 2020 timeframe will
require concerted private/public efforts. Market
force (e.g. increasing fuel prices) could provide a
significant incentive for equipment providers to
increase fuel economy (e.g. 15 - 25% by 2020) and
consumers to seek energy efficient construction,
agricultural, recreational and industrial
equipment.

		 Idle reduction will need to focus on operator/
management behavior and project planning.
Technological options already exist for idle
reduction in on-road settings, but this equipment
often has limited applicability to the diversity of
types and uses of off-road equipment.

		 Higher fuel prices and energy security/
independence policies at the federal and state
level will encourage the development of low
carbon biofuels in the 2020 time frame.
		 Targeted fiscal incentives could be used to
promote these trends. Public and private actions
through contracts and purchasing (e.g. requiring/
incentivizing the use of fuel efficient vehicles,
low GHG emitting equipment, idling reduction,
etc.) could help meet these emission targets.
Mandated actions, such as idling reduction
ordinances, could provide additional reductions.

12. Other Factors: Fuel efficiency and technology
improvements may migrate from on-road engines
and components to off-road settings thus reducing
development costs.
		 Market forces (e.g. rising fuel prices) will
foster private/public demand for fuel efficient
equipment. The public sector may need to
lead by purchasing or requiring the use of new
technologies and products with lower GWP,
especially if cost benefit ratios are initially low.

		 Promote GHG emission reductions through
environmental management system and programs
such as DNR Green Tier and Cleaner Air Faster to
facilitate reductions through educational outreach
activities. Efforts to maintain attainment or
achieve attainment for criteria pollutants should

		 Education is an essential element in the adoption
of any voluntary or mandatory programs.

130

		 Low carbon biofuels and freight idling reduction
efforts recommended in other policy templates
will affect this policy. The proposed low carbon
fuels are consistent with existing federal/
state initiatives to produce and consume local
sources of biofuels. How/if off-road engines can
accommodate biofuels, such as E85 and different
grades of biodiesel, is not known. Electric power
may be an alternative energy source for off-road
equipment.
		 Voluntary idling reduction will depend on fuel
costs and owner/operator education.
		 This template relies heavily on substantial
voluntary efforts by both the public and private
sectors to be successful. If stabilization or progress
toward the 1990 emission levels are not achieved
the need for regulatory based reductions (e.g.,
perhaps target years should be established as
trigger points) should be re-examined.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

State Government as Leader
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions

131

Idle Reduction
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Idle Reduction can reduce CO2
emissions from parked over the road freight
trucks by 90%. The US EPA Study of Exhaust
Emissions from Idling Heavy Duty Diesel Trucks
and Commercially Available Idle Reduction Devices
cites average emissions from idling as 144g/hr
NOx, 8224g/hr of CO2 with a fuel consumption rate
of 0.82gal/hr. The same study cited an average
truck idle of 6 - 8 hours per day resulting in 1,500
– 2,400 idle hours per year. Wisconsin Department
of Commerce and DOT staff indicate about
50,000 trucks (using truck registrations) would
be potentially suitable for the idling reduction
technology. It was assumed 25% of the 50,000
trucks would be used in a manner suitable for
installation of idle reduction equipment.

2.		 Policy Name: Freight Idle Reduction (Idle
Reduction)
3. Policy Type: Regulation
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (DOT),
trucking companies, enforcement agencies
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Annual CO2 reduction ~200,000 metric
tons
6.		 Estimated Costs: No net cost impacts]
		 Funding Sources: The cost of signage and
communicating the new policy to truckers
could potentially be offset by penalties for noncompliance.

12500 trucks * 8224g CO2/hr * 1,900 hr/year * 1
ton/1000000g = ~200000 metric tons CO2/year

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Limit
truck idling at depots, over night rest areas and
other long-term parking circumstances. The rule
would limit idling to a maximum 5 minutes except
under the following circumstances:
•

When trucks are on the roadway, held up in
stop and go traffic.

•

During temperature extremes, (<10˚F or >90˚F
ambient temperature)

•

Medical needs requiring engine power to
operate external equipment, (sleep apnea
machines, oxygen generators, etc.)

•

Powering equipment needed to unload freight
(e.g., pumps, compressors, lifts, cranes).

•

During periods when engines are required to
idle to regenerate emission filtration devices

•

For required maintenance procedures, (e.g.
flushing engines, break in period, etc.)

•

Exemptions for trucks with 2007 or newer
engines to reward companies who purchase
the most energy efficient technologies.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: A
number of trucks will be retrofitted through the
existing Commerce auxiliary power unit (APU)
retrofit program http://commerce.wi.gov/bd/BDCA-Diesel-Grant-Program.html that will sunset in
2011. This program is anticipated to have average
annual state costs of $2,000,000 for cost share
grants (50% state funded - 50% owner operator
costs) with $70,000 in annual state personnel
costs.
		 Costs for a mandatory idle reduction program from
2011 onward is anticipated to be revenue neutral
with penalties covering program costs. APU
purchase and installation costs are anticipated
between $6,000 and $12,000 per vehicle. Fuel
savings will also be obtained by the truck owners.
Using the assumptions above the benefit would
be 0.82 gals/hr x 1,900 hours/year x $3/gallon =
$4,600/year
11. Barriers to Implementation: Resistance to this
proposal is anticipated to primarily come from
single owner operators or small fleets (under 10
trucks) with limited fiscal resources and technical
expertise. Large fleets are already considering the
fiscal implications and appropriate technologies
for their fleets.

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Start date of 2011 with full implementation by
2013 and enforcement provided by local and state
police.

		 The freight industry in general is facing significant
cost impacts due to the price associated with Tier
4 emission regulations (e.g. fine particles and NOx

132

emissions). Anti-idling regulations will further add
cost pressure. Operators/companies unable to
absorb the costs will leave the industry, though
growth by more competitive fleets may dampen
employment losses. Drivers may choose to deliver
cargoes and then leave regulated areas to park in
locations where they can idle without restrictions.
This could impact businesses supporting the
trucking industry in Wisconsin.
12. Other Factors: Cost offsets from fuel savings
for Idle Reduction may not be enough to justify
the investment in idle reduction technologies.
Some companies and independent operators
will not be able to afford installing idle reduction
technologies on their trucks. Drivers sleeping in
an uncomfortable environment will likely suffer
fatigue, a major contributor to truck accidents.
13. Related Policies: None

133

Government Fleet Adoption of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

minimum of $14 million dollars.

2.		 Policy Name: Government Fleet Proposal for
Displacement of Petroleum-based Fuels with Plugin Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) (Fleet PHEVs)

Funding Sources: 50% would be borne by
the State and 50% would be borne by the
municipalities from capital and operating budgets.
Some additional costs may be borne by partnering
with private sector companies. We foresee two
possible fundamental funding sources. The Energy
Independence and Security Act of 2007 contains
language directing the Department of Energy to
provide funding for PHEV fleet demonstration
programs. If Congress elects to appropriate funds
for this activity, the cost impact of this proposal
at the state and local levels could be significantly
mitigated. The other funding source would
be appropriations directly from the State and
specified local governments.

3.		 Policy Type: Legislation for achieving: (1) reduction
in consumption of non-renewable motor fuels; and
(2) reduction in the emission of green house gases
(GHG), particularly CO2.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Public and private delivery/service
transportation fleets and electric utilities
Sub-Sector: Electric utilities and petroleum fuel
distributors
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Conservative assumptions yield an
estimated net annual reduction of 314 metric
tons of CO2. Optimistic assumptions lead to an
estimated net annual reduction of 1,584 metric
tons of CO2.

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Governor
Doyle has declared a goal for the state of
Wisconsin to become the nation’s leader in
energy independence and the fight against global
warming. A specific element of the Governor’s
plan is for Wisconsin to derive 25% of its
electricity and 25% of its transportation fuels from
renewable sources by the year 2025. Progress
towards achieving this aggressive and laudable
goal can be assisted by classifying electricity as a
transportation fuel. This classification is valid for
PHEVs and pure Electric Vehicles (EVs) as they both
utilize utility-generated electricity as a primary
fuel. The plug-in is differentiated from the pure
electric in that it also utilizes liquid carbon-based
fuels as a primary energy source.

6. Estimated Costs: Administrative costs will be
minimal (incremental to existing program). The
implementation of a PHEV fleet will require
significant infrastructure investment to provide: (1)
electrical power outlet stations for recharging the
battery pack during vehicle non-use periods; and
(2) service facilities and personnel trained for the
unique maintenance and repair tasks associated
with battery systems. The incremental cost to
provide vehicles with PHEV drive trains is difficult
to precisely forecast. The input from an automotive
OEM is critical to this discussion. Representatives
from Ford Motor Company’s Sustainable Mobility
Technology group attended the Transportation
Work Group meeting October 26th in Madison to
support this proposal. As a guideline, automotive
industry estimates for the incremental cost of
producing an HEV range from approximately $2,000
- $3,500 depending on the vehicle type and HEV
system design.

Any policy aimed at securing sustainable,
environmentally harmonious energy sources
must incorporate a fundamental underpinning
of efficiency. In other words, supply security
and environmental impact are important, but
how efficiently these energy supplies are used is
equally important. Due to their incorporation of
electric drive train systems, both PHEVs and EVs
are very high efficiency vehicles compared to their
standard internal combustion engine counterparts.
In addition to the obvious environmental and
energy security benefits, vehicle efficiency is
important because it goes directly to the degree
of difficulty in achieving the Governor’s goal
for a 25% renewables fraction in transportation
fuels. The 25% fraction will logically be easier
to achieve if total consumption is held constant
or actually reduced. A reduction would require

		 If we assume an average of $2,750 dollars and
a scaling factor of 5 to provide the additional
energy required from a PHEV battery the resultant
additional cost is $13,750 per vehicle. In reality
this number will likely be higher early in the
program due to the relatively low volumes and the
developmental nature of the technology. But for
reference, the total cost to deliver PHEV versions of
the vehicles described in this proposal would be a

134

either improved drive train operating efficiency
without changing driving habits/distances or
a mandate forcing changes in transportation
patterns and habits. The former approach is less
disruptive and is enabled by more efficient power
trains - hybrids. This policy proposal envisions
the issuance of an Executive Order or legislation
signed by the Governor requiring that:

		 Background
Depending on the particular vehicle usage profile,
hybridization of the vehicle powertrain with a
plug-in hybrid battery offers the potential for a
100% reduction in petroleum fuel usage (if the
entire vehicle driving cycle is powered by the
battery-only, for a limited range, e.g. 10 - 40
miles). Typical results will be less than 100%,
but still substantial, i.e. a 50 - 75% improvement
in fuel economy, measured at the tank. The
associated gross reduction in CO2 emissions at the
tailpipe will be an equivalent percentage to the
savings in petroleum fuel consumption.

A. By the year 2012, 25% of the delivery vehicles,
light trucks, and passenger vehicles operated by
the state of Wisconsin have PHEV drive trains.
B. By the year 2012, 25% of delivery vehicles,
light trucks and passenger vehicles operated by
municipalities with populations greater than
100,0001 have PHEV powertrains.

		 Based on fleet composition data obtained
from the State of Wisconsin’s Department of
Administration, the collective gross reduction
in CO2 tailpipe emissions realized by converting
25% of the: (1) state-owned fleets operating in
Green Bay, Madison, and Milwaukee; and (2) the
city-owned vehicles in Milwaukee, Madison, and
Green Bay (not including the police department)
would be approximately 2,854 metric tons
annually. This value assumes a 60% average
improvement in fuel economy due to the Plug-In
hybridization.3

C. To assist in achieving the above requirements,
the State of Wisconsin will provide grants to
the affected municipalities to offset 50% of the
incremental cost of purchasing PHEV vehicles
compared to conventional vehicles of the same
make and model. The energy cost savings
from “fueling” these vehicles overnight to take
advantage of favorable “time of use” rates should
substantially offset the incremental purchase cost
fraction borne by the participating municipalities
and the state. The precise pay-back period is
dependent on fleet make-up, driving distances/
patterns and local utility rates.

		 Greater weight, however, should be assigned
to the net CO2 reductions associated with this
proposal. That is, the emission reductions after
taking into account the CO2 emissions associated
with the generation of electricity for the fleet
PHEVs. The ratio of renewables/non-renewables
in the fuel mix for the utility base will be critical
in deriving a significant total net CO2 emissions
reduction benefit for the introduction of PHEVs.
Examples of renewable energy sources for
electrical generation are: wind, hydro, and solar.
The use of advanced coal-burning technologies
such as Integrated Gasification Combined
Cycle featuring CO2 sequestration would also
help to make PHEVs more attractive from an
environmental standpoint.

D. The State will make available grants to private
company partnerships2 that include vehicle
manufacturers and/or vehicle systems integrators,
e.g. Ford, Chrysler Group, GM, ArvinMeritor,
to accelerate the introduction of PHEV drive
train vehicle types required in items A and B.
Preference will be given to proposals that include
companies that are either headquartered in
Wisconsin or whose employment ranks include a
majority of Wisconsin residents.
8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Grant program duration will be FY 2009-2012

		 As for the case of a coal-fired power plant, the
net reduction in CO2 emissions associated with
petroleum motor fuel displacement is modest.
However, the net CO2 reduction associated with a
scenario assuming an electric generation system
composed of 50% coal and 50% renewable
energy is 1,584 metric tons annually. Please see
Table 1 and the associated calculations below
substantiating this summary. Please note that

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions:
1. Green Bay, Madison, and Milwaukee
2. Private company partnerships are defined as: A legally binding
collaborative agreement between two or more private sector
companies established for a finite time period describing the task,
cost, and IP sharing arrangement between the member companies corresponding to the vehicle performance, delivery and cost
targets for the programs described above.

3. Actual reduction will depend on municipality fleet type and
usage profile.

135

these calculations do not include the impacts
of the Green Bay police fleet, as this data was
unavailable.

drivetrain assuming a 70% efficiency = 4,170,161
kWh
G. Energy Information Agency estimates for CO2
emissions from coal for electricity = 1.34 lbs per
kWh

		 Calculations
		 CO2 emissions reductions at the tailpipe can
be estimated by calculating the reduction in
petroleum fuel usage, based on an assumed
PHEV efficiency advantage and the annual VMT
multiplied by the factor of 8.8 kg of CO2 emitted
per gallon of gasoline consumed in the typical
internal combustion engine. To calculate the
net CO2 impact on the environment, detailed
information/assumptions will be required
concerning: (1) the renewables/non-renewables
fuel mix of the electric utilities serving the
affected municipalities; and (2) the estimated
incremental energy demand on the utilities output
in order to calculate the corresponding increase
in smokestack emissions for fossil-fuel burning
plants; and (3) the CO2 emissions reduction
corresponding to wells-to-wheels delivery of
gasoline to the pump.

H. So, CO2 emission to generate electricity for the
PHEV fleet = 2,540 metric tons annually
I.

NET reduction in CO2 emissions = 314 metric tons
annually

		 Scenario 2: 50% Coal and 50% Non-fossil Energy
generated electricity
A. Reduction in tailpipe CO2 emissions = 2,854 metric
tons annually
B. Gasoline consumption reduction = 324,348 gallons
C. CO2 emissions reduction from the reduced
production of gasoline = 663 metric tons annually
D. Raw energy equivalent of 324,348 gallons of
gasoline = 11,676,518 kWh

		 To demonstrate the sensitivity to the fuel mix
used by the utilities the analysis shown below
in Scenario 1 assumes a 60% fuel economy
improvement and 100% coal-fired electricity
generation and results in a modest decrease in
net annual CO2 emissions. Scenario 2 assumes the
same fuel economy improvement but 50% coal
and 50% renewable energy generation and results
in a net annual decrease of 1,584 metric tons of
CO2.

E. Road energy delivered by 324,348 gallons of
gasoline (assume 25% efficiency) = 2,919,113 kWh
F.

Road energy needed from the electric drivetrain
assuming a 70% efficiency = 4,170,161 kWh

G. EIA estimates for CO2 emissions from coal for
electricity = 1.34 lbs per kWh
H. CO2 emissions to generate 50% of electricity for
PHEV fleet from coal = 1,270 metric tons annually

		 Scenario 1: 100% Coal-generated electricity
A. Reduction in tailpipe CO2 emissions = 2,854 metric
tons annually

I.

B. Gasoline consumption reduction = 324,348 gallons

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Grant program duration will be FY 2009-2012

C. CO2 emissions reduction from the reduced
production4 of gasoline = 663 metric tons annually

11. Barriers to Implementation: The major barrier
to implementation of this policy is the need for
private company partnerships that bring together
the required technology, manufacturing, and
service elements related to providing the PHEV
powertrain vehicle. Battery system and other key
powertrain component suppliers must be able to
partner with credible vehicle OEM and/or drive
train integrators. Without the cooperation and
participation of the OEMs and integrators the
proposed program is not possible. In order for the

D. Raw energy equivalent of 324,348 gallons of
gasoline = 11,676,518 kWh
E. Road energy delivered by 324,348 gallons of
gasoline (assume 25% efficiency) = 2,919,113 kWh
F.

NET reduction in CO2 emissions = 1,584 metric
tons annually

Road energy needed from the electric 		

4. Per EPA Ann Arbor office: 4.5 pounds of CO2 per gallon of gasoline, wells-to-pump, analysis based on Argonne National Laboratory’s GREET model

136

proposed private industry partnerships to work
effectively, clear guidelines concerning Intellectual
Property (IP) ownership and access rights must be
agreed upon prior to program inception.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

“California Car” Standards
State Government as Leader
Incentives to increase market shares of HEVs,
and PHEVs and EVs

137

138

Totals

Municipality Owned Vehicles #
Green Bay
passenger car & mini-vans
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

State Owned Vehicles
Green Bay
passenger car & mini-vans
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

Municipality Owned Vehicles
Milwaukee
passenger car & mini-van
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

State Owned Vehicles
Milwaukee
passenger car & mini-van
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

Municipality Owned Vehicles
Madison
passenger car & mini-van
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

Vehicle Type
Municipality
State Owned Vehicles
Madison
passenger car & mini-van
light truck
heavy duty light truck
service van
heavy truck

9
24
0
12
74
119
4,471

22
13
6
4
2
47

959
259
135
71
229
1,653

45
14
8
44
5
116

192
121
6
0
94
413

1,259
494
99
176
95
2,123

12,900
10,000

est. mileage
14,500
15,300

14,500
15,300
15,300
12,900
8,800

est. mileage
12,000
6,000
6,000
6,000
6,000

14,500
15,300
15,300
12,900
8,800

9,272
7,934
8,527
0
5,162

14,500
15,300
15,300
12,900
8,800

130500
367200
0
154800
740000
1,392,500
53,055,528

319000
198900
91800
51600
17600
678,900

11508000
1554000
810000
426000
1374000
15,672,000

652500
214200
122400
567600
44000
1,600,700

1,780,224
960,014
51,162
0
485228
3,276,628

18255500
7558200
1514700
2270400
836000
30434800

Miles/Year Vehicle - Miles

Vehicles

Total

Ave. or Est.

Number of

17
15
13
13
10
13.6

17
15
13
13
10
13.6

17
15
13
13
10
13.6

17
15
13
13
10
13.6

17
15
13
13
10

17
15
13
13
10

Vehicle*

7676
24480
0
11908
74000
118064
3,459,710

18765
13260
7062
3969
1760
44815

676941
103600
62308
32769
137400
1013018

38382
14280
9415
43662
4400
110139

104719
64001
3936
0
48523
221178

1073853
503880
116515
174646
83600
1952494

gallons

Avg. MPG/ Fuel Consumption

CO2 Emissions @ 60%

Total Tailpipe CO2

68
215
0
105
651
1,039
30,445

165
117
62
35
15
394

5957
912
548
288
1209
8,915

338
126
83
384
39
969

922
563
35
0
427
1946

9450
4434
1025
1537
736
17182

42
135
0
65
407
649
19,028

103
73
39
22
10
246

3723
570
343
180
756
5,572

211
79
52
240
24
606

576
352
22
0
267
1216

5906
2771
641
961
460
10739

25
81
0
39
244
390
11,417

62
44
23
13
6
148

2234
342
206
108
453
3,343

127
47
31
144
15
363

346
211
13
0
160
730

3544
1663
385
576
276
6443

Tailpipe Emissions. FE Improvement(1) (metric tons) Emissions Reduction (metric tons)

Metric tons CO2

Municipal Fleet Composition and CO2 Reduction Potential from PHEV Conversions
CO2 Reduction from a 25%

6
20
0
10
61
97
2,854

15
11
6
3
1
37

558
85
51
27
113
836

32
12
8
36
4
91

86
53
3
0
40
182

886
416
96
144
69
1611

Fleet Conversion (metric tons)

720
2295
0
1116
6938
11069
324,348

1759
1243
662
372
165
4201

63463
9713
5841
3072
12881
94970

3598
1339
883
4093
413
10326

9817
6000
369
0
4549
20735

100674
47239
10923
16373
7838
183046

Reduction (gals)

Gasoline Consumption

Quantity of

2
6
0
3
19
30
1,118

6
3
2
1
1
12

240
65
34
18
57
413

11
4
2
11
1
29

48
30
2
0
24
103

315
124
25
44
24
531

PHEV Vehicles

Table 1: Fleet Composition and CO2 Emissions Reduction

Speed Reduction
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

6.		 Estimated Costs: Administrative costs for strict
enforcement and educational efforts may be offset
by revenues from fines. Savings in gasoline costs
will accrue to motorists.

2.		 Policy Name: Speed of Travel Reduction (Speed
Reduction)

Funding Sources: DOT operating budget

3.		 Policy Type: Strict enforcement of existing 65
mph speed limit, support for a study of potential
future speed limit reductions, and support and
recognition for voluntary measures

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
template recommends strict enforcement of
existing 65 mph speed limit and a state study
of costs and benefits of future speed limit
reductions. Additionally, the state should support
and recognize voluntary policies to reduce fleet
vehicle speed maximums, such as those recently
implemented by Schneider Trucking.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities: All
passenger and some freight motorists using state
and federal highways in Wisconsin.
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Immediate reductions in CO2 emissions
are anticipated on federal and state highways with
a current posted speed of 65 mph due to improved
fuel efficiency (source: Wisconsin Department of
Transportation (DOT)). The projected reduction in
CO2 emissions have been estimated if maximum
speeds of 65 mph, 60 mph and 55 mph can be
achieved. DOT estimates annual vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) on state and federal highways at 15
billion miles (2005 baseline).

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
policy recommends strict enforcement of the 65
mph speed limit to begin as soon as practical. The
transportation work group recommends a study of
further speed limit reductions, to be conducted as
soon as possible, to determine whether significant
additional GHG emission reductions can be
obtained.
9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Strict adherence to the existing
65 mph speed limit should save approximately
210,000 metric tons of CO2 emissions. The other
reductions identified in section 5 assumed the
current actual speed on 65 mph posted highways
is 69.4 mph and 15 billion vehicle miles are driven
annually on these roads. The CO2 reductions were
estimated using the Center for Clean Air Policy
analysis spreadsheet program http://www.ccap.
org/trans.html

Upon adoption, measured in CO2:
Strict adherence to 65 mph: 210,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $79 million)
Strict adherence to 60 mph: 400,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $158 million)
Strict adherence to 55 mph: 570,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $238 million)

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Cumulative savings to motorists of up to $238
million annually based on $3 a gallon gasoline.
A comprehensive public education campaign
would require an undetermined amount of
funds. Expanded enforcement might also require
additional funding.

Year 2020, measured in CO2:
Strict adherence to 65 mph: 250,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $94 million)
Strict adherence to 60 mph: 470,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $187 million)
Strict adherence to 55 mph: 680,000 metric tons
annually (gas savings of $281 million)
(All savings projected on $3 a gallon gasoline)

		 Additional law enforcement costs are anticipated
for state and local police. The state police
expenses are not recouped because speeding fines
are distributed to the state school fund and city/
county entities.

139

11. Barriers to Implementation: Public (passenger
and freight) resistance to lower speeds on
interstate and divided lane highways. Time
delays and inconvenience are anticipated to be
significant complaints.
12. Other Factors: Drivers would have improved
fuel efficiency thus saving on fuel costs. Reduced
fuel consumption also reduces dependence on
imported oil for transportation in Wisconsin
and the US. Incidental benefits include reduced
accidents, deaths, personal injury and property
damage.
13. Related Policies:
•

Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions

140

Incentives for Electric, Hybrid and Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

		 Also, PHEVs are not yet available for the light
duty vehicle market. And the manufacturers will
first make these vehicles available for heavier
“fleet” vehicles. Thus this suggests that a policy to
increase the market for these two types of vehicles
should be staged. The policy recommendation
is to provide both incentives for Wisconsinites to
purchase HEVs and EVs and to educate the public
on the value of purchasing these vehicles. This
education component should also encourage
businesses to allocate favorable parking for
employees who drive these vehicles to work.

2.		 Policy Name: Incentives to Increase Market
Shares of HEVs, and PHEVs and EVs ((P)(H)EV
Incentives)
3. Policy Type: Provide education and incentives for
purchasing Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV), Plugin Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) and Electric
Vehicles (EV).
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Transportation, Electric Generation
Sub-Sector: Automobile Manufacturers

		 Rebates, or tax credits, should start at about $500
and graduate based on the EPA mileage of the HEV
and PHEV models compared to the non-hybrid
version of the same model. Using this approach
the HEV or PHEV would have to get at least 20%
greater MPG than the non-hybrid version. For
example, the Lexus GS 450h gets 21% greater MPG
than the non-hybrid version – so the purchase
would be eligible for a $500 incentive. The other
tiers might be $1,000 for a vehicle that gets 30%
greater MPG, and $1,500 for a vehicle that gets
40% greater MPG, and $2,000 for a vehicle that
gets 50% or more MPG than the non-hybrid
version. For vehicles that do not have a non-hybrid
version, such as the Prius, the program would
determine a comparable offering by the same
manufacturer (or another if necessary) to compare
MPG. When the EV and PHEV incentives are
introduced, the incentives would be based on a
proxy MPG calibrated to the decrease in CO2 and/
or other emissions.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reduction in 2020 of 303,000 metric tons
of CO2 compared to business-as-usual.
6. Estimated Costs: Costs are based on
implementing an education program, developing
infrastructure and providing financial incentives
for purchasing vehicles. The cost is estimated to be
$32,000,000 in 2020 and $0 after 2020.
		 Funding Sources: None specifically recommended
at this time. Options include feebates, fuel tax, or
carbon tax.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The policy
would include the following components:
A. Deliver education programs around the state to
accelerate the purchase of HEVs, PHEVs and EVs.
B. Provide rebates or state-tax credits for purchasing
HEVs immediately and PHEVs and EVs later.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The initial component would be the education
campaign. The education campaign would begin
ahead of the fall 2010 new car model rollout.
The HEV campaign would be continued six years
– adjusted annually to be current. If the market
share goals are met earlier and other programs
have met or exceeded goals, the education
program would be ended sooner. Conversely, if
goals of this or other programs are not being met,
the education would continue for a longer period.
This education campaign may be a component of
the proposed Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions.

C. Provide rebates or state-tax credits for PHEVs at a
later date.
D. Provide rebates or state-tax credits for EVs a
couple of years after starting the HEV incentives.
		 HEVs, PHEVs and EVs have been shown to provide
significant reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in both the near and long term. With
the current mix of electric generation plants in
Wisconsin, the HEVs provide greater reductions
in GHGs than PHEVs and EVs – however, as the
generation mix becomes cleaner, the PHEVs and
EVs will at some point provide greater GHG savings
than HEVs.

		 Rebates would be made available for the fall
2010 model year rollout of HEVs. The rebates

		

141

would be offered at first with a sunset-unlessrenewed period of six years to ensure accelerated
early adoption while the incremental cost of the
vehicles is high. During the six years, if market
penetration is increasing faster or slower then
proposed, the rebate level could be adjusted.

12. Other Factors: The definitive early works used to
frame this analysis show clearly that there should
be a phased in approach to increasing market
penetrations of HEVs and PHEVs. The present mix
of generation nationally and in Wisconsin results
in lower GHG emissions reductions from PHEVs
when compared to HEVs for five to ten years.
This also applies somewhat to EVs with a twist.
There is a growing movement both to change
transportation rules, and for citizens to purchase
small EVs for in-town driving. Also, there are a
growing number of companies selling small EVs
for this situation – selling commercially available,
albeit expensive, vehicles.

		 When the manufacturers offer at least two models
of either, the PHEV and EV markets should be
developed in earnest. This program is estimated
to start about when the 2015 models are offered.
However, if PHEV and EV vehicles are offered by
several manufacturers significantly before this
time and the penetration/demand is significant,
the program should be moved up from this date.
As with the HEV program, this program would
sunset-unless-renewed in six years after starting.

		 While there are some efforts afoot to develop
both OEM PHEV vehicles and HEV conversion
systems, the PHEV technology is not currently
mass market ready. However, it is likely that this
development will accelerate – especially if funding
is made available for research to both improve
battery capacity/reliability and develop the
vehicles to utilize these batteries. Likewise, the
“cleanliness” of the present mix of generation is
shown to be inadequate for expecting early GHG
reductions by utilizing PHEVs. This too is poised to
be changed by other Task Force work groups and
similar efforts in other states. Furthermore, the
present national vision is that the earliest target
markets for PHEVs are fleet vehicles – delivery
vans, shuttle buses, maintenance vehicles, etc.
Finally, there is another policy offered by the
Transportation work group that suggests state
fleet vehicles purchased in the future be a mix
that includes accelerating purchase of “fleet”
PHEVs. If this policy is implemented, this will
improve the likelihood and timing of introduction
of PHEVs for light duty vehicles (cars) as addressed
in this proposal.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The annual emissions reductions in
the year 2020 are estimated to be 303,000 metric
tons CO2. This is based on a six year program for
HEVs that precedes, and overlaps in one year
(2015), a six year PHEV and EV program.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
cost of the program would start in 2010 (for 2011
model year) and peak in 2015 – the year the
incentives for HEVs, PHEVs and EVs overlaps. The
total incentive costs are determined by the mix
of models purchased commensurate with MPG
above the baseline models. As the technologies
mature the amount provided to each vehicle
segment would shift.
		 The analysis assumes that incentives are provided
at the previously identified four efficiency tiers.
The incentives for the PHEVs would have a similar
efficiency tier graduation and would begin about
six years after the start of the HEV program and
end after 6 years. The program cost would rise to
a peak of $48,000,000 in 2015, then drop and rise
again to $32,000,000 in 2020.

13. Related Policies:
•
•

11. Barriers to Implementation: The major barrier
to implementation of this policy is the need for
legislation to develop a taxing mechanism –
feebates, fuel tax, carbon tax, etc. – to support
the program costs. Opposition may come from
legislators and citizens unwilling to invest in GHG
mitigation, from oil companies and dealers. With
regard to the PHEV and EV option, the program
could be delayed if the necessary research to
improve battery capacity with reliability is not
funded adequately, and if efforts to increase
the “cleanliness” of the generation mix are not
adequately achieved.

•

“California Car” Standards
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions (education component)
Government Fleet Adoption of PHEVsand
PHEVs and EVs

		 1. Report by NRDC and EPRI: “NRDC PHEV Report Vol 1.pdf”
2. Analysis spreadsheet: “HEV PHEV & EV Policy Analysis 15k
revised 100707.xls”

142

E85 Infrastructure Development & Pricing Incentives
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

price competitive with regular unleaded fuel
on a MPG-adjusted basis, until availability
increased to 50% of retail outlets (2020).

2.		 Policy Name: E85 Infrastructure Development &
Pricing Incentives (E85)

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency
Option: The timetable is implicit in this policy
recommendation. Duration is until changed by
law.

3.		 Policy Type: Legislation (1) supporting the further
development of Wisconsin’s E85 infrastructure
to provide satisfactory availability; and (2)
creating retail E85 pricing incentives to make
E85 competitive with regular gasoline on a MPGadjusted basis.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The American Lung Association
of the Upper Midwest recently contracted
with the University of North Dakota Energy &
Environmental Research Center and Minnesota
State University-Mankato to perform emissions
modeling using EPA specifications. This study,
which also reviewed lifecycle GHG emissions
conducted by Argonne National Laboratory,
concluded that E85 reduces lifecycle CO2 emissions
by 242 grams/mile.

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Transportation
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Well-to-wheels analysis indicates the
initial savings will be equivalent to about 26% of
the carbon emissions from each gallon of gasoline
replaced by E85, based on corn-based ethanol. CO2
reductions in 2020 are accounted for in the low
carbon fuel policy emission reductions. As ethanol
from new sources is introduced, such as cellulosic
ethanol, the savings would increase to 70% or
more. To the extent that fuels exceed the 10% low
carbon fuel reduction there would be additional
emission reductions. These reductions would be
proportional to the increased decarbonization
of the fuel and the carbon neutrality of the life
cycle production process. Estimates of reductions
or business-as-usual of CO2 in 2050 were not
calculated.

			For example, a Flexible Fuel Vehicle burning E85,
driving 15,000 miles per year, at 15 MPG, would
emit some four tons of CO2 less than the same
vehicle, under otherwise identical circumstances,
burning conventional gasoline.
General Motors estimates that corn-derived
E85 reduces CO2 emissions by 20% compared to
regular unleaded gasoline, while cellulosic E85
reduces CO2 emissions by nearly 75%. These
numbers roughly comport with those estimated
in an EPA Emissions Facts paper published in
April 2007: Corn ethanol reduces CO2 emissions
on average by 21.8% versus 90.0% for cellulosic
ethanol. The EPA paper, Greenhouse Gas Impacts
of Expanded Renewable and Alternative Fuels Use,
bases its results on Argonne’s GREET (Greenhouse
gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in
Transportation) full life-cycle model.

6.		 Estimated Costs: $25,000 towards the conversion
of 1 pump per station, plus an estimated $0.329
per gallon of E85 sold; total cost proportionate
to the number of gallons of E85 used through
2020. The actual amount per gallon would be a
“studied” amount; currently estimating $0.329 per
gallon (the equivalent amount of a full state tax
exemption).

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
cost to convert the first 500 stations would be
$11M (500 stations – existing 61 X $25,000).
Additional support would be needed for upstream
ethanol terminals (e.g. - $3M to create 4 terminals
and rail) and a “general fund subsidy” to make E85
retail price competitive with gasoline on a MPGadjusted basis. The latter would be proportionate
to total gallons of E85 used at an estimated $0.329
per gallon.

		 Funding Sources: Subsidy from general fund
7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
•

E85 Infrastructure – increased availability from
current 61 stations to 500 stations by 2015
(subsidized) and 50% of all outlets by 2020
(unsubsidized).

•

E85 Flex Fuel Price Subsidy – a general fund
subsidy equal to the current level of taxation
on E85 ($0.329 per gallon) to make E85

143

11. Barriers to Implementation: Ethanol price and
oil price fluctuations and differentials as well as
competing demands for ethanol as a blending
agent (e.g. E10), food stock and animal feed.
12. Other Factors: Public outreach and education
are essential to explain the benefits of using
E85, where it can be purchased and address fuel
efficiency concerns versus gasoline.
13. Related Policies:
•

Low Carbon Fuel Standard

144

Low Carbon Fuel Standard
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

		 Each fuel provider will need to demonstrate, on
an annual basis, that the fuel mix provided to the
market met the standard, including, if necessary,
by using credits previously banked or purchased.
Providers of fuel that exceed the standard for
the compliance period will be able to generate
credits that could be banked or sold. Penalties for
noncompliance will need to be determined.

2.		 Policy Name: Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS)
3.		 Policy Type: Legislation with regulatory
implementation and enforcement.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Transportation, Fuel Producers and Marketers,
Vehicle Manufacturers, Agriculture and Electric
Utilities.

		 The LCFS will be performance and market-based.
It will not dictate the mix of fuels delivered. Fuel
providers can meet the LCFS by providing a salesweighted average meeting the standard. The
market will determine the most cost-effective
and consumer-responsive outcome. For example,
providers could meet the standard by blending
ethanol (corn/cellulosic) with gasoline, blending
biodiesel with diesel, purchasing credits from
electric utilities providing renewable electricity
for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, improved
efficiency in the exploration, processing and
distribution of petroleum fuels or using strategies
yet to be developed.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: The LCFS seeks to reduce life-cycle
carbon emissions from transportation fuels. Under
business-as-usual fuel consumption and carbonintensity of fuels scenarios Wisconsin could be
generating 40 - 43 million metric tons (MMt) CO2
by 2020 and 43.2 - 50.4 MMt CO2 by 2030 from
on- and off-road sources. A 10% standard could
reduce 2020 CO2 emissions by 4.0 - 4.3 MMt
per year. A 20% standard by 2030 could result in
reductions of 8.6 - 9.9 MMt per year.
6.		 Estimated Costs: The net cost is difficult to
determine. It will depend on the future cost of
petroleum, improvements in refining technology
and operations and biofuels economics. A LCFS
would involve public administrative costs to set
and enforce a standard and private/marketplace
costs for low-carbon fuels.

		 The regulatory body overseeing the standard will
need to develop a process to determine baseline
for fuel carbon-intensity, the life-cycle carbon
content of fuels, award credits and provide a
trading platform for them.
8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
LCFS legislation would signal the fuel markets
to develop decarbonized fuels. Carbon-intensity
evaluation and compliance systems could take 1
to 2 years to develop. A 10% reduction by 2020 is
realistic given the policies in place at the state and
federal level. The standard could be made
increasingly stringent (e.g., 20% by 2030) with
further increases either defined in contemporary
legislation or revisited at a future date.

		 There may well be macroeconomic benefits
derived from an LCFS as well. For example,
substitution of petroleum imports with domestic
biofuels could improve balance of payments
and enhance domestic capital investment and
employment.
Funding Sources: Administrative costs funded
through state government operating budget.
Any increase in fuel costs would be paid by all
consumers.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The GHG emission impact will
depend on the mandated level of reduction and
overall fuel use at that time. It should be noted the
standard applies to life-cycle GHG emissions due
to fuel production and use. A significant fraction
of a petroleum life cycle emission reduction would
probably occur outside of Wisconsin. Calculating
these emission reductions and how to apply them
against the LCFS goal would need resolution.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Fuel
providers (producers, importers, refiners and
blenders) would need to sell product with a
declining greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions profile
measured in CO2-equivalent gram per unit of fuel
energy (BTUs). The standard will be measured on
a life-cycle basis in order to include all emissions
from fuel consumption and production, including
upstream emissions.

		

145

•
•

		 In-state production of biofuels and vehicles
powered by renewable in-state electric generation
would favorably shift this balance toward in-state
emission reductions.

•

		 Two important factors affecting potential emission
reductions include vehicle fuel efficiency and
fuel use growth across the economy. The Energy
Information Agency estimates growth at 0.9%/
year while 2007 Wisconsin Energy Statistics
indicate petroleum fuel growth has flattened, but
fuels increasingly contain ethanol and biodiesel.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Undetermined at this time and will depend on
petroleum, electric and biofuel production and
distribution costs.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Legislation will
be required to enact a standard. Opposition
may come from producers and marketers
of petroleum-derived transportation fuels.
Administrative costs, uncertainty regarding the
future price and availability of credits, and/or
production of products meeting the standard are
potential barriers. The lack of certainty regarding
low-carbon fuels costs may result in confusion
over what variables and cost estimators should be
used.
		 Funding will be needed for state implementation.
Implementation will require determination of lifecycle carbon intensity of fuels from well-to-tank or
field-to-tank. This will be a complicated endeavor
with varied stakeholders seeking to influence
the outcome. These barriers may be reduced by
using models or certification systems developed in
other jurisdictions or in cooperation with them.
12. Other Factors: A LCFS in Wisconsin could
harmonize with regional and/or national LCFS
and biofuel policies. It would incentivize research,
development and commercialization of new
technologies. These diverse new sources of
transportation fuels will provide a hedge against
price volatility of petroleum products due to
geopolitical instability, natural occurrence or
geologic depletion.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•

Off-Road Equipment
E85 Infrastructure
Cap and Trade Program
Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization

146

“California Car” Standards
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions (education component)
Government Fleet Adoption of PHEVsand
PHEVs and EVs

Carbon-Audited Transportation Investment
1. Work Group: Transportation

		 To provide an economic evaluation of projects,
standard dollar values (which may change over
time, according to best available science in
estimating social costs, and market rates for
carbon credits are introduced and evolve) must
be assigned to both emitted carbon, and that
going into the project infrastructure itself. These
figures will be included in projects’ cost-benefit
analyses. The role of cost-benefit analysis in the
decision-making process will remain informative,
not ultimately decisive, but the carbon footprint
will become a consideration with assumptions
regarding its assigned dollar value clearly stated.

2. Policy Name: Carbon Audited Transportation
Investment (Carbon Audit)
3. Policy Type: Carbon Audit / Transportation
funding reform
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (DOT)
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reduction estimated at ~1.7 million
metric tons (MMt) of CO2 compared to businessas-usual by 2020 and ~2.0 MMt of CO2 in 2025.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Would require Executive Order and/or
administrative rule changes.

		 The transportation sector currently contributes
about 29.9 MMt of CO2 equivalents per annum.
If growth trends continue a potential increase
in emissions of 33% by 2025 would probably
require a substantial increase in maintenance and
expansion of existing infrastructure.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Literature and/or anecdotal values
for estimating the associated emission reductions
of this policy are not available. It is assumed this
process requirement achieves a 5% net reduction
(~ 2.0 million of an estimated 40.0 MMt of CO2
equivalents business-as-usual emissions scenario)
by 2025.

6. Estimated Costs: Nominal increase in the cost of
planning and evaluating transportation projects
(all modes).
Funding Sources: DOT operating budget

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Carbon audits that reveal high levels of induced
VMT would favor dismissal of the proposed
project, compared to the status quo. Audits that
reveal substantial relief of congestion would favor
project approval. While congestion is not already a
major problem on the majority of Wisconsin roadmiles, the policy would, on the whole, favor net
cost savings to the State as projects become more
selective with fewer proposals demonstrating a
net benefit.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy is intended to inform and promote
energy-effective transportation infrastructure
choices. It would require a carbon audit for all
state funded transportation projects, including
carbon footprints for all DOT Environmental
Impact Statements (EIS). This would internalize
associated social costs by including their assigned
value on the balance sheet for transportation
proposals. Providing this information may impact
infrastructure project decisions, influence driving
patterns and habits (vehicle miles traveled - VMT)
and/or reduce congestion.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Needs a discussion
of how dollar values should be determined
and assigned, particularly those outside of an
established carbon-trading context. It is asserted
that even the most conservative values would
serve to establish a desirable process framework.

A carbon audit would estimate greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions based on three elements: (1)
forecasts of added/reduced VMT resulting from
the proposed project; (2) increased/reduced
emissions associated with congestion or its
alleviation; and (3) life cycle GHG emissions
required for the construction and maintenance
of the facilities/infrastructure. The carbon audit
would be reported by DOT through project related
EIS evaluations or permit analyses.

12. Other Factors: Guiding attention towards reducing
GHG emissions and more energy-effective
transportation investments is preferable to
making transportation investments more difficult
altogether. The policy requires the consideration
of unfunded depreciation and maintenance
costs typically not considered when evaluating

147

transportation projects. They represent a clear
liability to the State of Wisconsin, which is
addressed by existing GASB341 legislation. While
the legislation addresses what is primarily an
ongoing fiscal concern, it should be noted that
stricter enforcement of GASB34, requiring all
depreciation and maintenance costs being funded
upon project approval, would similarly internalize
a (financial) cost which is presently borne by the
state at-large. This would, secondarily, serve to
reduce VMT induced by transportation projects.
While any associated sacrifice in transportation
goals may prove contentious, GASB34 aligns fiscal
accountability with desired environmental goals.
This Carbon-Audit proposal does more, squarely
addressing carbon footprint itself, without
presenting a serious challenge to transportation
objectives in general.
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Energy Efficient Communities
Transit Enhancement and Travel Demand
Management

1. General Accounting Standards Board – directive 34

148

Energy Efficient Communities
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

		 Currently, most residents in Wisconsin have
little choice in travel mode. Communities have
developed in ways that discourage walking,
bicycling or taking transit to local destinations.
The proposed policies are designed to encourage
development patterns that are compatible
with transit development as well as walkable
destinations. It is important to note that the
policies are intended to encourage development
patterns that reduce dependency on automobiles
by providing viable alternatives for mobility,
such as walking and transit options. None of the
policies prohibit driving nor do they make driving
more expensive nor do they make driving less
convenient. They simply promote the opportunity
to use options to driving alone.

2.		 Policy Name: Energy Efficient Communities
3.		 Policy Type: Regulatory, technical assistance,
funding reform
4 . Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors or Entities: State
and local government including city, county,
municipal planning organizations and regional
planning agencies.
5 . Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Avoided annual emissions will depend on
the vehicle emission scenario selected:
•
•

6.2 million metric tons (MMt) CO2 annual
emissions by 2020 under CAFE1

		 The Energy Efficient Communities are designed to
promote community mobility options in two ways:

5.4 MMt CO2 annual emissions by 2020 under
CARB

1. Existing developments will optimize vehicular,
transit and walking/biking options

		 Net CO2 emission reductions would be greater
under CARB regulations because of greater fuel
efficiency (see California Cars policy template).

2. New developments will be added where
compatible with transit usage and increased
capacity to walk/bicycle to destinations.

6 . Estimated Costs: Net costs should be small.
In many cases the policies, such as marketbased pricing for parking, will actually produce
net increases in revenues for local units of
government.

Energy Efficient Communities do not make it
more difficult or more expensive to drive, they
simply make it possible to have desirable, efficient
alternatives to driving. As energy prices increase
and levels of congestion increase, the use of
alternatives will increase at a higher rate than the
increase use of automobiles.

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
		 Background
		 Vehicle miles traveled (VMT), both aggregate
and per capita, have risen dramatically in
recent decades in Wisconsin. Strategies relying
on technology improvements cannot create
permanent emission reductions without also
reducing VMT. A recent study in the Seattle metro
area estimated that even if new car mileage were
increased to 94.5 mpg and the carbon content
of fuels reduced by 40%, it would still require an
18% reduction in VMT to meet the region’s goal
of cutting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from
transportation by 80%. The magnitude of needed
VMT reduction may be different in Wisconsin, but
the principle is the same.

The recommended policies will require
cooperation across levels of government and will
be sensitive to the quality of their implementation.
State government (e.g., Office of Energy
Independence, Department of Administration,
Department of Transportation (DOT), etc.) should
evaluate VMT and transportation emissions
annually to determine whether the actions taken
are providing the needed reductions. If not,
recommendations to meet the emission reduction
targets should be proposed to decision makers.
		 Proposal
		 The following list of policies should be pursued to
the greatest extent feasible:

1. CAFE and CARB are two common acronyms used in the template. CARB refers to the emission standards developed by the California Air Resources Board. CAFE refers to the mileage standards
established under the federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy.

A. Transportation funding for compact development.
Special transportation funding for areas zoned

149

for traditional neighborhood design. This could
be accomplished by reinstating Wisconsin DOT
funding of $1 million per year for comprehensive
planning. This funding could be used to fund the
“Smart Growth Dividend.”

F.

B. Complete streets. To the greatest extent feasible,
road projects should include safety provisions for
pedestrians, bicyclists, and (where applicable)
transit vehicles. Such improvements should
include safe facilities for non-automobile modes
both along and across corridors being improved.

Economic development. State economic
development funding should consider project
related VMT as a major factor. Projects that
reduce or generate low levels of VMT should be
given preference over those with high levels per
employee. Rules on Tax Increment Financing (TIF)
should be revisited to discourage use of TIF that
increase GHG emissions.

G. Fix-it-first. Wisconsin should strengthen its fix-itfirst policy on roadways to place a higher priority
on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure over
adding new lane-miles.

C. Development impact transparency and
concurrency. Before any property is rezoned to
facilitate new development (that receives state
economic development assistance) or before
any project to expand state roadway capacity
is authorized, VMT- and GHG-impacts should
be carefully evaluated. Projects that will cause
a roadway to exceed its rated capacity – or will
further strain a roadway already above capacity –
are not eligible for state economic development
unless capacity improvements will be completed
within one year of the development’s opening
– either through the course of scheduled
transportation improvements or through a
payment for the improvement by the developer
over a period not to exceed 20 years.

H. Growth accommodation. The Wisconsin
Department of Commerce should develop
incentives for local governments to allow compact
development and redevelopment.
8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: All
actions should be undertaken immediately and
assessed against VMT targets annually. If targets
are not being met, stringency must be increased,
for example by replacing incentives to local
government with mandates.
9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Population increases (post-2005)
are anticipated to increase VMT under businessas-usual conditions. However, the policies
described in this template can restrain sprawl
and substantially decrease growth in VMT. The
calculation factors used to estimate avoided
emissions are from the following sources:

D. Parking. A model parking ordinance should be
developed by state and local stakeholders to
institute market pricing principles, reconsider
mandatory minimum requirements for retailers
and pricing of street parking. This model
ordinance should incorporate parking standards
for technology and market changes, such as small
parking spaces for microcars.
E. Planning methodology. DOT and Metropolitan
Planning Organization planning should emphasize
multimodal (i.e. automobile, pedestrian and
bicycling) accessibility as the highest goal rather
than roadway mobility. At the local and metro
area level, modeling should be parcel-based,
(rather than transportation analysis zones–based)
across the street pattern, in order to capture
walking and bicycling accessibility. Roadway
capacity increases should be modeled for longterm “induced demand” and the resulting
increase in GHG emissions, and their value as
transportation solutions discounted accordingly.

•

Center for Clean Air Policy http://www.ccap.
org/trans.htm emission calculator and a scan
of literature on policy effect on VMT from
new developments - VMT-from-growth by
50%, and the remaining VMT by 25%. Freight
travel (~10% of VMT) is not anticipated to be
affected by this policy.

•

DOT VMT and population (9.5% in 2020 and
11.9% in 2025) projections.

•

EPA Mobile 6.2 model emission factors.

		 A spreadsheet has been developed to estimate
the emission reductions under both the CAFE and
CARB emission reduction scenarios.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Transportation money should be redistributed
from processes and programs that raise VMT to

150

those that lower VMT, so no major source of new
funds should be required. If local governments
enact market pricing for street parking, they
should see small revenue gains.
11. Barriers to Implementation: This multifaceted
policy faces a variety of barriers. Land use
decisions are made by local units of government.
The state currently has no agency committed to
working with local units of government to assist
in the implementation of these policies. The DNR
and the Office of Energy Independence are logical
agencies to help coordinate these policies and
to assist local governments in becoming Energy
Efficient Communities.
		 These policies will require the state to work
cooperatively with private stakeholders, local
governments and citizens to develop local land
use and transportation planning policies that
encourage low VMT developments. These policies
should not pre-empt local decision-making
that does not affect statewide GHG reduction
goals. It should emphasize incentive-based
approaches for local governments and private
entities rather than add new requirements.
Institutional resistance to altering transportation
and land use planning paradigms that previously
emphasized mobility (rather than accessibility) is
anticipated. This institutional inertia (i.e., private
and public sectors) should be addressed with
strong leadership, bi-partisan analysis and open
discussion with affected stakeholders.
12. Other Factors: The goals in this policy assume
that reductions in VMT will be affected through
other means as well. If this is not the case, the
stringency and extent of actions here must be
radically increased.
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Carbon Audited Transportation Investment
Transit Enhancement and Travel Demand
Management

151

Transit Enhancement and Travel Demand Management
1.		 Work Group: Transportation

•

Regional Transit Authority: Granted authority
to levy a local sales tax of up to one half cent

2.		 Policy Name: Transit Enhancement and Travel
Demand Management (Transit Enhancement)

•

Voluntary Travel Demand Management:
Employers bear costs

3.		 Policy Type: Legislation establishing three
separate funding programs for transit and a
voluntary program to promote transportation
alternatives by employers of over 100 employees
(in areas with mass transit and ride share
capabilities – Milwaukee, Madison and Fox Valley
metropolitan areas).

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
template integrates three transit alternatives to
create and fund broader regional transit options.
These transit funding options are Intercity Rail,
Transit Trust and a Regional Transit Authority.
These funds can be applied to both public and
private transit alternatives within the affected
areas. The fourth element of this template is a
Travel Demand Management policy that applies to
all employers with greater than 100 employees at
a given facility in the affected regions. These rules
apply to both private and public sector employers.

4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Funding programs would provide financial
assistance to state and local units of government
that operate transit systems. Policies promoting
transit usage could affect major employers
(facilities with more than 100 employees) in
designated urban growth areas.

A.

Intercity Rail. Currently, the federal government
authorizes expenditures of up to 80% of the capital
costs of eligible intercity Amtrak rail projects.
Actual expenditures have been unable to meet
demand for these projects. This proposal increases
the non-federal share to a level that will provide
greater leverage to access limited federal funding.
Up to $120 million is recommended to implement
the proposed Chicago-Milwaukee-Madison high
speed rail improvements to Eau Claire and the
Twin Cities. (The state has already pledged $80
million for the Amtrak improvements between
Milwaukee and Madison.).

B.

Transit Trust Fund. Currently, local commuter rail
projects are eligible for a 50% federal matching
grant. Limited funds have put most proposed
projects out of reach in Wisconsin. This proposal
provides local units of government with up to a
50% state match for local rail projects. Examples
of projects that might be funded include the
Kenosha-Racine-Milwaukee and Dane 2020 rail
options.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Transit funding and travel demand
management policies are anticipated to achieve
annual reductions of 1.2 – 1.4 million metric tons
(MMt) of CO2 compared to business-as-usual in
2020.
6.		 Estimated Costs: Respective program costs:
• Intercity Rail: Up to $120 million, depending
on federal support
• Transit Trust Fund: Up to $200 million
• Regional Transit Authority: costs vary by
region
• Voluntary Travel Demand Management
programs by employers of more than 100
employees: Estimated costs for employers
may range from very little cost to distribute
educational material to about $1 - 2 per day to
encourage an employee to switch workplace
commute modes. Costs will vary depending on
the extent and size of the program.

C. Regional Transit Authority. Currently transit
systems are funded by farebox recovery and
limited state and federal funds. Those funds
have not allowed transit systems to keep up
with inflation. This proposal allows local units of
government to fund transit operations through a
local sales tax of up to one half cent.

Funding Sources:
• Intercity Rail: Additional 20 year state general
obligation (GO) bonds
• Transit Trust Fund: 20 year state general
obligation (GO) bonds

152

D. Travel Demand Management. Promote Commute
Trip Reduction programs for employees to reduce
single-occupant vehicle use for workplace travel.
Key factors in successful programs include:
•

Providing incentives for alternate modes

•

Consider parking supply constrictions/parking
pricing mechanisms

•

Tailoring support and incentives to those
suited for specific work site

•

Combining programs that inform employees
of commuting options with supporting
services and incentives

•

Making a wide range of commuting
alternatives available

		
B. Transit Trust Fund. Annual CO2 reductions up
to 100,000 metric tons by 2020 compared to
business-as-usual.
C. Regional Transit Authority. This analysis assumed
a 2% shift from single occupant vehicle to mass
transit. The Kenosha-Racine-Milwaukee Connector
is assumed to attract 1.6 million trips per year in
southeast WI (out of 39,682,000 trips – Southeast
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission –
SEWRPC) and result in a 50,000 ton CO2 reduction
by 2012. Annual CO2 reduction of 110,000 metric
tons by 2020 compared to business-as-usual.
D. Travel Demand Management. Annual CO2
reduction of 900,000 metric tons by 2020
compared to business-as-usual.
		 The Center for Clean Air Policy (CCAP) online calculator tool was used to estimate CO2
reductions http://www.ccap.org/trans.htm.

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: All
funding would need to be long-term and should
be funded as soon as reasonably feasible to
achieve the emission reduction and other transit
improvement goals. Funding needs are estimated
to be long-term to support the infrastructure and
capitalization needs of mass transit programs.
Employee commute option programs could be
funded through existing programs (i.e. transit
education efforts) or perhaps through other
private or public revenue streams including global
warming related initiatives.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Assumes continued federal support of existing
transit programs to state and local governing
bodies.
		 A GO bond for $320 million with 20 year
repayment and a 5% interest rate would cost in
total $506.8 million ($25.3 million annually).
		 A local sales tax of one half cent devoted to a
Regional Transit Authority could potentially yield
$60 - 65 million/year in Milwaukee County, $40 45 million/year in Dane County, $20 - 22 million/
year in Brown County and $16 - 18 million/year in
Outagamie County.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: These policies seek to displace
approximately 5% of all automobile trips within
their respective corridors (Milwaukee, Madison
and Fox Valley Metropolitan areas). The total
anticipated annual CO2 emission reductions are
1.4 MMt in 2020. A breakdown of anticipated
reductions for each element of the proposal
follows:
		
A. Intercity Rail. Wisconsin Department of
Transportation (DOT) estimates 500,000
passenger rail trips are made annually in the
Milwaukee - Chicago corridor. Expanding the
rail system in Madison is projected to gain
another 500,000 riders (displacing 500,000 auto
trips of approximately 33 miles each). Annual
CO2 reduction of 190,000 metric tons by 2020
compared to business-as-usual.

11. Barriers to Implementation: The barriers to
implementation for the transit funding options
include the availability of funding and political
support for these funding options. Intercity Rail
and Transit Trust would rely on state funding
so broad state level support will be needed to
implement. The Regional Transit Authority will
require state passage of authorizing legislation
and local support for the sales tax increases.
		 Employment commuter traffic constitutes about
20% of all passenger vehicle trips. Employer
policies of providing free/reduced fare parking

153

costs for employees will affect the success of
employment based programs.

income streams though some new costs should
probably be anticipated. Reduced emissions of
other criteria air pollutants (e.g. VOC, NOx, toxics),
reduced traffic on roads and cost savings should
also be considered.

		 About 80% of all passenger vehicle trips are for
family related activities (e.g. shopping, recreation,
etc.). Creating attractive transportation options
on weekends and evenings for these types of trips
will be needed to reduce the preponderance of
passenger vehicle trips, especially in cold weather
periods. Reducing VMT and emissions from these
trips will be critical for substantially reducing
transportation emissions.

13. Related Policies:
•
•

		 Education at schools, workplaces and home
regarding specific activities (e.g. efficient trip
management, telecommuting, etc.) and general
awareness of the transportation implications on
global warming (e.g. sustainability issues) will
be an essential element for these policies to be
successful.
		 Local units of government and businesses may
embrace or ignore a voluntary travel demand
management program depending on perceptions
of costs compared to benefits. The specifics of the
program requirements and funding mechanisms
and incentives (e.g. grants, loans or tax breaks)
will affect overall support.
12. Other Factors: A critical factor in the success
of these policy options is the availability of a
comprehensive and integrated set of transit
alternatives (e.g. carpooling, Rideshare, bike/
pedestrian, buses, light/commuter rail, trains,
etc.). Regions lacking a full suite of transit
alternatives have reduced potential to achieve the
emission reductions noted above.
		 Funding for these proposals will depend in
significant part on reallocation of existing
funding sources or development of new sources.
Incentives will also depend on tax policy and other
state/local incentives. Federal rules and policies
may also be a factor in the effectiveness of these
initiatives.
		 These policies will have additional costs and
benefits that may be difficult to estimate.
Costs associated with increased public/private
infrastructure and staff needed for these facilities
and services need to be considered. A proportion
of these costs may be met by reallocating existing

154

Carbon Audited Transportation Investment
Reform Planning and Funding Policies to
Reduce VMT

Biomass and Biofuel
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

capable of co-firing biomass material with coal,
unless such new generation results in substantially
lower carbon and other emissions than other
available technologies, such as natural gas
facilities.

2. Policy Name: Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization (Biomass and
Biofuel)
3. Policy Type: Fiscal measure, legislation, marketbased mechanism

The carbon emissions, environmental effects, and
market viability of bioenergy sources are uncertain
and continue to evolve with technology, fossil
energy prices, and markets. It is therefore also
the intent of this policy proposal to encourage
flexibility among researchers, regulators, and
businesses.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Forest products industry, transportation,
recreation, utilities, agriculture, private
landowners, government, small business
5.

Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Emission reduction estimates were not
developed for this policy

Certain policies related to bioenergy are being
considered by other workgroups, these include
policies related to standards for low-carbon
transportation fuels, availability of E85 fueling
stations, carbon cap-and-trade programs (which
may support demand for low-carbon bioenergy),
industrial biomass utilization, and regulation of
electricity generation in general. The agriculture
and forestry workgroup is aware of these policies
and supports their goal of increasing low-carbon
bioenergy.

6. Estimated Costs: Cost estimates were not
developed for this policy
Funding Sources: Funding for this policy
recommendation could come in the form of state
and federal grants to support the supply based
incentives and Energy Crop Reserve Program.
Existing state funding would be utilized purchase
biomass and other bioenergy sources.

For the purpose of this policy, bioenergy is heat,
electricity and other fuels produced from biomass.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
Background
The goal of this policy proposal is to increase the
availability and use of renewable bioenergy for
electricity, heat, and transportation. Energy from
biological sources can reduce lifecycle carbon
emissions, if the amount of fossil fuel used in
obtaining and processing the feedstock is not
excessive.

Policies
This policy proposal recommends action in two
main areas: (1) increasing the supply of low-carbon
bioenergy and (2) increasing the use of bioenergy
by state and local governments. This proposal
includes various supporting recommendations
including research and education.
A. Supply of Bioenergy. To increase the supply
of low-carbon bioenergy in Wisconsin, we
recommend these steps:

Some bioenergy feedstocks, conversion
technologies, and end uses have lower life-cycle
carbon emissions than others. It is therefore the
intent of this policy proposal to promote those
bioenergy sources with the most favorable lifecycle carbon emissions. In crafting specific policies,
the relative efficiency and carbon emission impact
of biomass must be evaluated. For example, it
is important to be careful not to provide undue
incentives to new coal-fired generation, if it is

•

155

Create a state Energy Crop Reserve Program.
This program would pay an incentive to
landowners to grow perennial grasses and
energy crops on marginal land that would
otherwise be at risk of intensive cropping. The
program would target land previously enrolled
in the federal Conservation Reserve Program

(CRP) and would have similar soil, water, and
habitat standards, while allowing harvest of
qualified energy crops. This program would
have a target enrollment of 10% of the land
that would otherwise come out of a CRP
contract. This policy recommendation is
further developed in the “Preservation of
Existing Vegetative Cover Carbon Sinks on CRP
Lands” template.
•

a showcase for advanced technologies, build
technical expertise within the state, and bolster
demand for biomass. We recommend three steps:

Provide financial support to biomass
producers for the purchase of new equipment
and technology needed to harvest, process
and transport biomass feedstocks. The
support can take the form of direct grants,
loan assistance, or tax incentives. This
recommendation will also have a side benefit
of replacing older equipment or introducing
more energy efficient equipment and will
result in reduced carbon emissions.

•

Provide financial support to reduce risk and
uncertainty for biomass producers, including
modifications to crop insurance programs,
direct grants and loan guarantees.

•

Provide support for biomass aggregators and
infrastructure such as transportation, storage
and processing. Support can include:

•

Utilize solid/liquid/gaseous fuels derived from
biomass to provide 25% of the energy needs
for state owned or occupied facilities by
2025. This goal would be met through a tier
approach of providing 10% of energy by 2010,
15% by 2015, 20% by 2020 and 25% by 2025.
Facilities and agencies that are able to exceed
these targets will receive special recognition.

•

Provide incentives to school districts that use
biomass for heat or electricity by excluding
the capital cost of biomass systems, fuel,
maintenance, and any purchase cost of heat
or electricity from revenue limits under the
school aid formula.

•

Exclude the cost of biomass systems, biomass
fuel, maintenance and any purchase cost of
heat or energy from biomass from municipal
and county levy limits.

C.

•
•
•
•
•

Other Recommendations. We also
recommend the following supporting policies:
•

Encourage and support the UW System,
through the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research
Center, to research biomass technology
for the production of heat, electricity,
transportation fuels, chemicals, and other
products. In particular, encourage research
on advanced bioenergy sources - with greater
carbon, energy, and environmental benefits
- such as cellulosic ethanol and advanced
hybrid trees and grasses.

•

Develop new permitting standards and
procedures to facilitate regulatory certainty,
environmental safety, and rapid evaluation of
new bioenergy technologies.

•

Promote a wide ranging outreach and
education program to educate landowners,
businesses, cooperatives, regulators, and
others about the production and use of
bioenergy.

Development of biomass harvesting
guidelines
Pilot projects
Promotion of commodity markets and
exchanges
Outreach to producers and users
Direct grants to cooperatives

Specific policies should be designed to ensure
incentives are provided for all eligible entities with
consideration of the tax liabilities each faces. For
entities that have different tax liability structures,
grants could be considered or the incentives
could be designed with the ability to transfer the
incentive through an intermediary.
B. State Bioenergy Use. The state should assume
a leadership role in the use of biomass for heat
and electricity production. This will provide

156

•

Support the development of advanced
biomass, biofuel, and related renewable
energy degree programs by the UW System,
UW campuses, and Technical Colleges.

•

Develop awards and prizes for the innovations
in the bioenergy. This will increase the
visibility and offer credibility to new
businesses and markets.

12. Other Factors: Wisconsin is a biomass
powerhouse with 15.9 million acres in forestland
and 15.4 million acres in agriculture. Although
the total amount of power or heat generated
from biomass is currently fairly small, it has
the opportunity to provide a growing source of
energy. Biomass makes up the largest percentage
of renewable energy providing 4% of the total
electricity supply in Wisconsin versus 0.1% for
wind and solar combined.1 There are over 200
industrial and commercial systems in Wisconsin
using wood or biomass fuels for power and/or
space heat.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The implementation and duration of the
incentives should be somewhat flexible to
facilitate the sun setting of ineffective incentives
and the initiation of new incentives as the
markets/conditions/requirements change.
Initial incentives should focus on expanding
the end markets and stabilizing the fuel supply.
When demand for biomass for energy and biofuel
production has grown to allow competitive
market, the incentives are no longer necessary.

Changes in the wood marketplace’s supply/
demand equation present serious risks of
disrupting existing and productive businesses
in Wisconsin dependent on those supplies.
Extraordinary caution needs to be invested
by policy-makers, particularly, to assure that
government created or endorsed programs
encourage the availability of forest resources
for bioenergy objectives without harming the
availability of forest resources currently utilized
by the state’s forest products industry. The work
group recognizes the benefit from providing
demand side incentives to promote the use of
biomass in addition to the supply side incentives
within this template. The work group was not
able to obtain consensus on the specific policy
recommendations to address demand side
incentives and encourages more discussion on this
topic.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Emission reduction estimates were
not developed for this policy
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Cost
estimates were not developed for this policy
11. Barriers to Implementation: Primary barriers to
implementation are the difficulties in stabilizing
the supply of adequate feedstocks and the high
cost and risk associated with advanced biomass
and biofuel technologies.
Additional barriers include:
• Potential conflict between various land uses
• Regulatory uncertainty regarding new
technologies
• Lack of quality standards and classifications
for biomass
• Uncertainty of supply and cost fluctuations
• High relative handling and transportation
costs
• Lack of training technical workforce to
construct, operate and maintain advanced
biomass systems and processes.

Nonetheless, the opportunity - perhaps once
in a lifetime - to access currently non-utilized
and under-utilized resources for the production
of bioenergy is perceived by the forest and
agricultural products industry not only as a
contributor to global warming initiatives, but also
as a significant opportunity to markedly improve
forest health - through increased management for
productivity and sustainability - in the state.
Co-Benefits. This policy would have the additional
benefit of promoting small businesswithin
the state and assist in the development of the
1. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.doe.gov
and Renewable Energy Policy Project http://www.repp.org/bioenergy/link6.htm

157

emerging Green Business and Green Technology
sectors. Environmental co-benefits could be
achieved with biomass. Some biomass production
has a lower impact to wildlife habitat, and air
and water quality than other land uses. Biomass
production can also sequester carbon and may be
compatible with the tourism industry and wood
products industry if the incentives are targeted
the right way.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•
•

State Government as Leader
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
Preservation of Existing Vegetative Cover
Carbon Sinks on CRP Lands
Industrial Boiler Fuel Switching
Wood Waste
Co-Generation Incentives and/or Mandates
for Construction, Upgrades and Replacement

158

Afforestation and Reforestation
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

through incentives and technical assistance until
emerging carbon markets provide the economic
environment where state sponsored financial
incentives are no longer needed.

2. Policy Name: Incentives for Afforestation and
Reforestation (Afforestation and Reforestation)

A. Enhancement of existing state programs. Existing
state programs may be enhanced to provide
additional afforestation incentives for landowners.
These enhancements may require legislative
rule changes, fiscal measures, or manual code
adjustments.

3. Policy Type: Legislation, market-based
incentives, fiscal measure, public education
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Forest products industry, state, county, private
forest programs, agriculture (example: idle
agricultural lands, non-operating farms/
pasture lands) and other private landowners,
municipalities, utilities, industry
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reduction Impact: There is potential for a
large amount of carbon sequestration to occur
through afforestation. The actual amount of
carbon sequestration achieved under this
recommendation depends on participation
and transaction costs. Further analysis is being
conducted to refine the cost estimates associated
with carbon driven afforestation in Wisconsin.

•

The Managed Forest Law (MFL) currently
allows landowners to enter into this program
without 80% of the involved land forested
as required, as long as the 80% is achieved
within a certain period of time. This policy
would change that requirement and allow
landowners that enroll into MFL the ability to
enroll non-forested lands with a longer term
requirement for mandatory afforestation
practices within the first five years.

•

This policy proposes increasing the funding
available to private landowners for a variety
of management actions under the Wisconsin
Forest Landowner Grant Program. This is a
successful and flexible program that can be
used for afforestation activities in addition
to many of the other actions in the Forestry
policy recommendations. This program is
currently operating, but is fully subscribed
with no additional capacity.

6. Estimated Costs: Cost of the program would be
dependant upon the specific policy chosen and the
participation rates. See further explanation below.
Funding Sources: See section 12 for a discussion
of potential funding sources and implications.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This policy
proposal involves a variety of recommendations
designed to encourage afforestation and
reforestation through a variety of incentives and
education/assistance programs. There are many
existing state and federal programs designed
to encourage afforestation, reforestation and
other forest management. These programs are
mature and robust and have the additive benefit
of promoting carbon sequestration among the
many public values these programs provide.
Opportunities exist to enhance these programs
to promote additional participation and carbon
sequestration.
		
The goal of the policy recommendations in this
proposal is to encourage afforestation practices

B. Increased education and assistance. Additional
afforestation and reforestation could be achieved
through increased education and assistance. The
increased effort would require direction through
the development of a communication strategy and
fiscal measures to provide the additional resources
needed at the state level to implement this plan.
Specific policy recommendations are:

159

•

Develop a statewide communication
strategy for carbon sequestration efforts
and opportunities. This recommendation
should be combined with other similar
recommendations to promote forest
management, forest health and carbon
sequestration.

•

Increase the amount of technical forestry
assistance available to non-industrial private

landowners. This can be accomplished
through increased public sector resources or
through increased grants available to off-set
the cost of private sector forestry assistance.
•

•

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Further cost estimates are being developed.
All costs are estimated in present value (2007)
dollars.

Enhancement of existing programs, or
creation of new programs, which provide
education, outreach, and promotion of
climate change programs and options to
private landowners. This education and
outreach program could be focused on the
State Technical College system or using the
UW Basin Educator model.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Barriers to
afforestation and reforestation include:
•
•
•

Develop standards and protocols for
monitoring and measurement of carbon
sequestration on forests in WI. This would
help to reduce the transaction cost associated
with bringing carbon credits to market.

•
•

		 Specific policies should be designed to ensure
incentives are provided for all eligible entities with
consideration of the tax liabilities each faces. For
entities that have different tax liability structures,
grants could be considered or the incentives
could be designed with the ability to transfer the
incentive through an intermediary.

Competing land-use (e.g. farming,
development)
Lack of funding available to assist with initial
cost of planting
Lack of awareness by landowners of existing
programs and assistance
Lack of professional assistance available to
landowners
Low price of carbon on existing carbon
commodity markets and lack of mandatory
cap and trade program

12. Other Factors: This policy option will need to be
carefully compared and aligned with other policy
options that address land-use issues. For example
this policy may compete with policies and other
market pressures to encourage conversion, or
use of land, for corn based ethanol. Biomass
for energy production and technologies such as
cellulosic ethanol production are compatible with
carbon sequestration practices.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
New incentive programs, or incentives provided
under existing programs, would need to provide
long-term assurances to property owners and
be eligible for any existing or emerging carbon
market. These policies would need to be reviewed
after 5 years to determine if the policy objectives
are being met, or if adjustments need to be made.
Attention should be paid to emerging carbon
markets with respect to determining whether
state sponsored financial incentives are no longer
needed.

A. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates propose paying
landowners and farmers to adopt practices that
offset GHG emissions. These payments could
come from the state directly, or from participants
in a cap-and-trade program, who may need to buy
offsets to meet their emissions limits. If a cap-andtrade program is available, using it to fund offsets
would offer three benefits over a state-funded
program (in addition to saving state taxpayer
dollars).

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Reforestation is estimated to have a
carbon sequestration rate of 0.3 – 2.1 metric tons
of carbon per acre per year and afforestation is
estimated to have a carbon sequestration rate of
0.6 – 2.6 metric tons of carbon per acre per year. 1

First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.
Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option. This
would enhance the primary benefit of a cap-and-

1. Birdsey, R.A. (1996) regional Estimates of Timber Volume and
Forest Carbon for Fully Stocked Timberland, Average Management
After Final Clearcut Harvest. In Forests and Global Chang: Volume
2, Forest management Opportunities for Mitigating Carbon Emissions, eds. R.N. Sampson and D. hair, American Forests, Washington, DC.

160

trade program, which is uncovering efficient and
low-cost options to reduce GHG emissions.
Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,
which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.
B. Co-Benefits. There are significant co-benefits
associated with afforestation and reforestation.
Forested lands provide ecosystem services such
as increased water quality, soil stabilization and
erosion control, biodiversity and habitat and other
social benefits.
Estimates have shown that wood based industries
and tourism sensitive sectors account for 12%
of the Gross State Product and 18% of the
jobs in Wisconsin. The wood products industry
contributes approximately $20 billion each year.
The tourism sensitive sector has an estimated
output of over $13 billion and employs almost
450,000 people in the state. State resident s alone
spent over $5.5 billion per year on goods and
services associated with forest based recreation
during 1996. The majority of this spending was
done in local regions within close proximity to the
recreational site.2
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Sustainable Forest Management
Urban Forestry

2. Forests and Regional Development: Economic impacts of woodland use for recreation and timber in Wisconsin. D. Marcouiller
and T. Mace. 1999 University of Wisconsin System, Cooperative
Extension Publications

161

Forest Loss Prevention
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

parcelization of forested land. However, these
changes are likely to raise political concerns from
local communities and citizens, as well as potential
legal challenges.

2. Policy Name: Develop a state-level program to
prevent loss of forest through parcelization or
conversion out of forestry (Forest Loss Prevention)

A. Incentives can also be used to reduce the loss of
forest land through conversion and parcelization.
This policy recommends that Wisconsin develop a
Forest Legacy Program similar to the Federal USDA
Forest Legacy Program. Under this state Forest
Legacy Program, matching funds would be made
available to land trusts and local communities to
allow the voluntary placement of conservation
easements for forest lands. This program would
target 8,000 acres of forest a year for a total of
136,000 acres by 2025.

3. Policy Type: Legislation and changes to existing
state programs and rules affecting forests
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Forestry land owners, tribes, land trusts, property
developers, local government, and potential
greenhouse gas (GHG) emitters
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Approximately 6.0 MMt (Million Metric
tons) of avoided CO2 by 2025. This figure does
not include an estimate of increased carbon
sequestration, which would also result from this
policy.

Consistent with the USDA Forest Legacy Program,
the state Forest Legacy Program could provide
75% of the funding and require a 25% match by
land trusts, local governments, or tribes. The
match could also be from donated easements
over a portion of the land. Also, the program
could seek federal grants from programs such as
the USDA Forest Legacy Program or the Natural
Resources Conservation Service Environmental
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) to purchase
conservation easements. The program could also
accept donations and reduced-priced sales of
conservation easements against forested lands.

6. Estimated Costs: The estimated annual cost of the
proposed program is a minimum of $4,000,000
annually for the acquisition of easements and
additional program and administrative overhead.
The cost would be reduced by administering this
program in conjunction with existing programs.
Funding Sources: This funding could come
from a variety of sources such as federal grants,
private donations, and the state. An additional
source could be funds raised from the sale of
allowances under a cap-and-trade program and/
or monies raised via a carbon tax. See section 12
for a discussion of potential funding sources and
implications. Other options include the imposition
of small fees against green-field developments or
building permits, or requiring that developments
off-set the carbon sequestration potential of the
land parcel being developed, however these would
most likely face significant opposition.

The state Forest Legacy Program would determine
the most effective use of its budget and, in
particular, the sites that are most important to
protect from conversion or parcelization. This
program would provide many public benefits such
as enhance water and air quality, wildlife habitat
and public access for hunting and fishing. The
additional and continual carbon storage capacity
of these lands would be an additive benefit of this
program. This program would need to be designed
to allow participation by tribal entities through
the creation of carbon sequestration contracts or
similar mechanisms through the State.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: A
number of methods could be used to help to
decrease the loss of forests due to conversion and
parcelization. For example, the state could require
changes to local zoning and related requirements
that discourage or prevent the conversion or

B. This policy also recommends the creation of a
Forest Planning Grant Program which would assist
local governments with ensuring that planned

162

growth maintains or increases forests. This would
allow communities and municipal governments to
have resources available to assess the cumulative
public value of the forest lands within their
jurisdiction and make appropriate planning and
zoning decisions.

12. Other Factors:
A. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates propose paying
landowners and farmers to adopt practices that
offset GHG emissions. These payments could
come from the state directly, or from participants
in a cap-and-trade program, who may need to buy
offsets to meet their emissions limits. If a cap-andtrade program is available, using it to fund offsets
would offer three benefits over a state-funded
program (in addition to saving state taxpayer
dollars).

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
programs would commence as soon as legislation
gives authorization and funds are made available.
Accordingly, its timing may likely be tied to the
implementation of a cap-and-trade program, a
carbon tax, or other funding sources. The Forest
Legacy Program would not require any particular
land owners to place conservation easements
against their land, but would allow for voluntary
transactions. Once easements are put in place,
they would be legally enforceable against the
property owner.

First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.
Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option. This
would enhance the primary benefit of a cap-andtrade program, which is uncovering efficient and
low-cost options to reduce GHG emissions.
Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,
which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The estimate of 6.0 MMt of avoided
CO2 by 2025 assumes that the forest that would
otherwise be converted contain between 54
and 82 tons CO2/acre. While this estimate is
speculative, it provides a basis for decision
making. This estimate is consistent with the
estimate used by Winrock International in the
Report Submitted to the DNR, Forest Carbon
Baseline for Wisconsin, Draft Report November
2007.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
estimated annual cost of the proposed Forest
Legacy Program is a minimum of $4,000,000
annually for the acquisition of easements and
additional program and administrative overhead.
These costs could be minimized by having the
program run in concert with the present State
Stewardship Program and through partnerships
with land trusts, which would both provide some
matching funds and potentially help to enforce
restrictive covenants against forestry parcels.
These costs are estimated in present value
($2007).

B. Co-Benefits. Estimates have shown that wood
based industries or tourism sensitive sectors
account for 12% of the Gross State Product
and 18% of the jobs in Wisconsin. The tourism
sensitive sector has an estimated output of over
$13 billion and employs almost 450,000 people in
the state. State residents alone spent over $5.5
billion per year on goods and services associated
with forest based recreation during 1996. The
majority of this spending was done in local regions
within close proximity to the recreational site.1

11. Barriers to Implementation: The largest barrier
to implementation would be the determination of
the appropriate method for funding the program.

1. Forests and Regional Development: Economic impacts of woodland use for recreation and timber in Wisconsin. D. Marcouiller
and T. Mace. 1999 University of Wisconsin System, Cooperative
Extension Publications

163

There are other significant co-benefits associated
with Wisconsin’s forest lands. In additional to
supporting Wisconsin businesses and tourism
there are a variety of ecosystem services that
forests provide. Wisconsin’s forest provide habitat
for a diverse assortment of plants and animals,
protect the states soil from erosion, enhance
water and air quality and provide hunting and
fishing opportunities.
13. Related Policies:
•

Sustainable Forest Management

164

Sustainable Forest Management
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

Outreach, Education and Technical assistance
Approximately 55% of Wisconsin forest land is
owned by at least 260,000 individuals, families,
and small non-commercial entities. There are
many more who own from one to ten acres since
the 260,000 figure includes only ownerships of
ten acres or more. Technical assistance to such
landowners is provided by DNR foresters, private
consultants and foresters in the employ of the
forest products industry. To better communicate
with and engage these landowners this proposal
recommends the following:

2. Policy Name: Engage Private Forest Landowners
in Sustainable Forest Management Activities to
Enhance Carbon Sequestration (Sustainable Forest
Management)
3. Policy Type: Market-based initiatives, legislation,
fiscal measures, program development
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Landowners, forest products industry, DNR, and
small businesses

A. Develop systems to contact private forest
landowners with information about eligible
programs, technical assistance and other
resources.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This policy is expected to result in an
increase of carbon sequestration on forest lands.
Estimates for the potential of carbon storage
increases are provided in the Report submitted
to the DNR by Winrock International titled:
“Terrestrial Carbon Sequestration in Wisconsin:
Quantities and Costs.”

The biggest challenge to engaging effectively with
private forest landowners is the lack of systems
and processes to contact these landowners. An
outreach and education strategy which would
include the creation of systems to identify, contact
and reach-out to landowners is necessary to
provide information and technical assistance on
carbon sequestering forest management practices.

6. Estimated Costs: Cost of providing incentives
under this program will range with the
participation and the extent of incentives provided
to the landowners. See Winrock report for further
details.

B. Promote certainty and consistency of offset
project transaction costs of marketing carbon
credits by supporting and participating in the
development of standards and protocols for
carbon offset projects.

Funding Sources: See section 12 for a discussion
of potential funding sources and implications.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy would create incentives for private
landowners to engage in sustainable forest
management techniques and other sequestration
enhancement practices. These practices increase
the carbon storage potential of their forests and
provide significant benefits to water quality,
wildlife habitat and other ecosystem services.
An outreach and education program would be
necessary to communicate with the many forest
landowners in the state who could participate
in this program. The success of this policy would
also require the development of standards for
participation in carbon sequestration programs
and the appropriate silvicultural practices.

The transaction costs associated with marketing
and selling carbon can be a significant hurdle for
many private landowners. The state would help to
off-set this transaction cost until the market can
mature and support a higher cost of carbon. This
would be accomplished by the state supporting
the development standards and practices
for monitoring and measurement of carbon
sequestration and protocols for voluntary carbon
accounting on forestlands. These standards,
collectively known as “offset protocols” are
being considered by various state, regional and
national efforts. WI should provide leadership and
assistance in developing these offset protocols
with by participating in the Midwest Greenhouse

165

Gas Accord and The Climate Registry efforts.

each individual program could not.

C. Increase technical resource availability to
landowners through additional staff and grant
funding.

Specific policies should be designed to ensure
incentives are provided for all eligible entities with
consideration of the tax liabilities each faces. For
entities that have different tax liability structures,
grants could be considered or the incentives
could be designed with the ability to transfer the
incentive through an intermediary.

The state could provide increased technical
resources to landowners to encourage sustainable
management practices consistent with carbon
sequestration and provide assistance in marketing
the associated carbon credits. Technical assistance
would be provided directly by the DNR through
the addition of committed staff, or through
increased grant funding available through the
Wisconsin Forest Landowner Grant Program
(WFLGP).

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
This program could be implemented immediately
and would need to be reviewed after five years
to determine if the policy objectives were being
met, or if adjustments are necessary. Immediate
tasks would involve the creation of appropriate
silvicultural practices and standards, as well as an
outreach and education program. In the second
year of implementation, increased technical
resources and assistance through state staff and
grants would be made available based on funding.
The development of the CSTIP would be
dependent upon legislation and would likely begin
in 2009.

Financial Incentives
This proposal suggests three forms of specific
incentives for private landowners:
A. Identify opportunities within existing programs
such as Wisconsin Forest Landowner Grant
program where incentives can be added.
B. Development of a new short term incentive
program called the Carbon Sequestration Tax
Incentive Program (CSTIP).

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Changes in forest management
techniques are estimated to represent a carbon
sequestration rate of 0.2 metric tons of carbon per
acre per year.1

This program would provide property tax relief
similar to the Managed Forest Law (MFL), but
would involve a “carbon lease” to the state
for a short period than a contract under MFL.
The program would require the landowner to
develop a forest management plan and commit
to sustainable forest management activities that
increase the carbon sequestration potential of the
forest.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Cost
estimates were not developed
11. Barriers to Implementation: Once decisions are
made on what sustainable forest management
practices should be recommended, these could
be incorporated into forest management plans.
Requiring revisions to existing plans would impose
an additional cost of property owners. Adoption
of these practices, unless made mandatory, would
then be up to landowners. The lack of direct
contact between landowners, even those enrolled
in MFL, Tree Farm, and professional foresters
is the largest barrier to adoption of forest
management activities.

C. Allow property owners to take part in multiple
programs by developing rules and guidance for
landowners and the state.
Under this option, property owners that are
enrolled in MFL would be allowed to also
participate in a carbon sequestration incentive
program. This hybrid approach would recognize
additional carbon sequestration promoted by
landowners and provide additional incentives that

1. IPCC (2000) Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and
Forestry, R.T. Watson et al. (eds.), Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, p. 184.

166

Creating an effective mechanism to reach the
majority of landowners, not enrolled in MFL
or Tree Farm, would be difficult, but crucial to
success.

health of the state’s forests which would enable
to better resist pests as Gypsy Moth, Emerald Ash
Borer and Jack Pine Budworm and invasive species
such as garlic mustard and glossy buckthorn.
The forest industry in Wisconsin employed over
72,000 people in 2005 at over 1400 companies.
The value of shipments from the forest industries
in 2002 was over $19 billion. Increasing
the number of private landowners actively
participating in sustainable forest management
will help ensure a constant resource for the forest
industry and the developing bioenergy and biofuel
industries.

12. Other Factors:
A. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates propose paying
landowners and farmers to adopt practices that
offset GHG emissions. These payments could
come from the state directly, or from participants
in a cap-and-trade program, who may need to buy
offsets to meet their emissions limits. If a cap-andtrade program is available, using it to fund offsets
would offer three benefits over a state-funded
program (in addition to saving state taxpayer
dollars).

The tourism industry in Wisconsin is also affected
greatly by Wisconsin’s forest lands. It is estimated
that in 1996 state residents alone spent over $5.5
billion on goods and services associated with
forest-based recreation.2

First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.
Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option. This
would enhance the primary benefit of a cap-andtrade program, which is uncovering efficient and
low-cost options to reduce GHG emissions.

Co-benefits associated with this policy option
include an increase in forest health around the
state. Other benefits include the development of
significant expertise within the state surrounding
carbon sequestration practices and the promotion
of economic activity supporting carbon
sequestration.
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Afforestation and Reforestation
Forest Loss Prevention

Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,
which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.
B. Co-Benefits. Wisconsin’s forestlands provide
a wide variety of public value to the residents
and businesses of the state. In addition to
carbon sequestration, the forests provide many
valuable ecosystem services including habitat,
soil stabilization, water quality and recreation.
Additionally, the increase in sustainable forest
management activities would increase over all

2. Forests and Regional Development: Economic impacts of woodland use for recreation and timber in Wisconsin. D. Marcouiller
and T. Mace. 1999. University of Wisconsin System, Cooperative
Extension Publications.

167

Urban Forestry
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry,
Conservation and Energy Efficiency

costs, carbon storage, and air pollution removal
costs to Wisconsin residents of $11,600,000
annually by 2020. This cost savings is estimated
to increase proportionally with the increase in
number and growth of urban trees. Managing
just the new trees over 50 years will result in an
estimated annual cost savings of $91 million in
carbon storage, energy and air pollution alone.
Managing the existing trees as well, would more
than double that savings.

2. Policy Name: Enhance Carbon Sequestration and
Energy Efficiency in Urban Environments Through
Increased Tree Planting and Management (Urban
Forestry)
3. Policy Type: Fiscal measure, legislation, market
based mechanism
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Forestry and green industry, local governments,
businesses/corporations, utilities, non-profits,
sewerage districts, schools/colleges, private
landowners, residents

Funding Sources: See section 12 for a discussion
of potential funding sources and implications
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
Wisconsin Urban Forestry Council is proposing a
“20 million by 2020” private-public initiative that
would add 20 million urban trees on private and
public land and preserve the estimated 27 million
already in the state.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Additional carbon storage from new
urban trees is estimated at only 292,718 tons
CO2e in 2020, but increases to 6,985,322 million
tons CO2e in 50 years. The annual rate of carbon
sequestration of the new trees is estimated to
increase by 103,117 tons CO2e per year in 2020,
and increase to 153,012 tons CO2e per year in
50 years. Annual avoided carbon emissions are
estimated to increase 29,937 tons CO2e by 2020
and would increase to 123,075 tons CO2e in 50
years.1 These estimates do not account for the
increased carbon storage, increased carbon
sequestration rates and avoided carbon emission
that would result from managing and maintaining
existing urban trees, which this policy also calls for.

In support of this initiative this proposal
recommends an increase in state funding of
the Urban Forestry Grant Program to provide
incentives and startup cost-sharing to local
governments and nonprofits, and an increase in
additional state support resources for monitoring
and long-term success. The program will be
incentive and market based with voluntary
participation.
The statewide initiative would engage all sectors
to plant and manage urban trees on private
and public property to maximize urban forest
contributions for greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction.
On average, 85% of land in communities is
privately held so the vast majority of the tree
production, planting and maintenance would be
done by private industry and private property
owners through private investment. This initiative
would target specific audiences (e.g. public
officials, businesses, land owners, educators) and
messages (e.g. 3:1 pay back for municipalities;
you can do your part to address climate change).
Planting urban trees could be used by industrial
emitters as a carbon emission offset.

6. Estimated Costs: At 2007 prices, the value of
heating and cooling savings to Wisconsin ratepayers owing to current urban trees is $24.3
million annually. State costs associated with
facilitating establishment of the proposed
initiative, an increase in the Urban Forest Grant
Program to provide incentives and startup costsharing to local governments and nonprofits, and
additional support for monitoring and long-term
success are estimated to be $2,871,000 annually.
This expenditure is offset by the estimated
additional savings from the new trees on energy
1. The carbon storage and sequestration are estimates from
UFORE model projections, and avoided emissions figures are proportional estimates based on UFORE canopy cover projections.

168

Increased Urban Forestry Grants and state level
resources would facilitate and provide incentives
for partnerships needed by local governments
and urban property owners to accomplish the 20
Million by 2020 Initiative goals, foster integrated
efforts between the Wisconsin Urban Forestry
Council, UW Extension, teachers, professional
associations, private sector, non-profit
organizations, universities/tech colleges, nature
centers, and local governments, monitor urban
forest impact on carbon and energy reduction
and expand research on improving urban forest
contribution to reducing GHGs.

campaign. All estimates are in 2007 dollars and do
not include any adjustment for inflation or other
increases.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Barriers include a
lack of diverse tree stock and a limited awareness
regarding the benefits of urban forests and their
need for management. Public officials often are
not aware of the entire benefit/cost associated
with the urban forest (the investment pays off at a
3:1 rate), the private sector does not yet associate
urban forestry or tree planting programs with a
positive impact on climate change or reducing
energy demand and a commodity-based carbon
offset value has not been established for urban
trees.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
Urban Forestry Grant Program is already in place
within the DNR and within many communities
around the state. This program would be
evaluated every five years to determine progress
towards goals and make adjustments if needed.

12. Other Factors: This policy collaborates with
forest health initiatives in preserving existing
carbon stores through disease, pest management,
and invasive species programs. In addition, the
introduction or spread of forest pests, such as the
emerald ash borer, could have significant negative
impacts on carbon storage/sequestration capacity.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Current estimates indicate that urban
forests in Wisconsin have a 2002 base year carbon
storage of 6,147,000 tons CO2e. Additional carbon
sequestration rates are estimated at 400,000 tons
CO2e annually. Avoided carbon emissions are
estimated to be 50,000 tons CO2e annually due to
reduced energy demand for heating and cooling.
Within the Midwest, large trees provide over 7
times the benefits of small trees.2
The estimates of additional carbon sequestration
and green house gas reduction resulting from
the new trees are conservative, and based upon
accepted and peer reviewed methodology
developed by the USDA Forest Service.

A. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates propose paying
landowners and farmers to adopt practices that
offset GHG emissions. These payments could
come from the state directly, or from participants
in a cap-and-trade program, who may need to buy
offsets to meet their emissions limits. If a cap-andtrade program is available, using it to fund offsets
would offer three benefits over a state-funded
program (in addition to saving state taxpayer
dollars).

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Cost estimated based upon a statistically valid
independent study conducted for the DNR Urban
Forestry Program. This estimate includes the
additional grants that would be provided directly
to Wisconsin communities, an estimate of the
additional resource needs to support the “20
million by 2020” initiative, and the development
and continued implementation of an action

First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.
Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option. This
would enhance the primary benefit of a cap-and-

2. Calculated as a ratio from the Midwest Community Tree Guide:
Benefits, Costs, and Strategic Planting, E.G. McPherson et al.,
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, General
Technical Report PSW-GTR-199, November 2006.

169

trade program, which is uncovering efficient and
low-cost options to reduce GHG emissions.
Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,
which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.
B. Co-Benefits. Not included in the estimated cost
savings are the savings to municipal sewerage
districts due to the off-set in storm water
discharge to sewer systems and treatment
facilities and health care savings associated with
increase air quality and specifically the reduction
in urban particulate matter. In addition, benefits
such as property value, aesthetics, tourism and
business development have not been estimated.
The policy would also provide economic
stimulation in the form of jobs, sales and service
to the expanding Wisconsin green industry,
which currently has an annual impact of over
$2,700,000,000.
13. Related Policies:
•

Afforestation and Reforestation

170

Methane Reduction through Ruminant Nutrition
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

and outreach program; technical resources and
assistance through state staff; grants.

2. Policy Name: Decrease Enteric Methane (CH4)
Emissions Through Ruminant Nutrition (Methane
Reduction Through Ruminant Nutrition)

Provide financial incentives to cooperatively
and privately-owned animal nutritionists to
support the training of livestock managers in
the use of best management animal nutrition
practices. These incentives could be provided
through a grant program at DATCP to specific feed
supply cooperatives and privately-owned feed
suppliers or to representatives of those suppliers.

3. Policy Type: Creation of R&D and fiscal measures
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Cattle producers, nutritionists, feed & supplement
producers, milk distributors, meat processors, UW
System, Wisconsin Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection (DATCP)

Development of appropriate best management
practices and standards including (1) forage and
grazing; (2) feed adjustments to aide digestion
efficiency; (3) feed adjustments to increase fatty
acids; (4) increased use of growth hormones
to reduce CH4 production by ruminant animals.
These practices would also improve animal health
meaning cows stay in the herd longer and fewer
replacements are needed.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Potential emission reductions resulting
from modifying four management practices are
identified below. Note that these reductions are
not additive.
•

Grazed Livestock = 0.25 MMt (million metric
tons) CO2e/yr

•

Feed Adjustments = 1.0 – 1.5 MMt CO2e/yr

•

Dietary Fats = 1.2 MMt CO2e/yr

•

Growth accelerators = 0.27 MMT CO2e/yr

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: This
program could be implemented immediately with
creation of discussed practices and standards, as
well as the outreach and education program. In
the second year of implementation, increased
technical resources and assistance through state
staff and grants would be made available based
on funding. After five years the program would
need to be reviewed to determine if the policy
objectives were being met, or if adjustments
would be necessary.
The development of the research and incentives
programs would be dependent upon legislation
and would likely begin in 2009.

6. Estimated Costs: $950,000
Funding Sources: Funding may come from state
general funds
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Provide
incentives for research into the development
of best management practices for animal
nutrition that will reduce the production of
methane. Research financial incentives could be
provided to the College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences at UW-Madison, as well as UW-Platteville
and UW-River Falls. This research should include
analysis of appropriate forage crops that have
a lower carbon impact and animal production
management practices that are found to yield a
relative carbon savings over existing practices.
Promote management of intensive grazing and
other best management practices on existing
grazed animal operations to increase soil fertility,
plant vigor, and quality. Creation of an education

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Dairy cows typically produce 118
kg CH4/year/cow (2.5 metric tons of CO2e/yr/
cow).1 Beef cattle produce significantly less at
approximately 40 kg CH4/year/cow (0.84 metric
tons of CO2e/yr/cow).1 Methods to reduce CH4
production by ruminant animals and potential
GHG impacts are listed below.

1. O’Mara, Frank. 2004. Greenhouse Gas Production from Dairying: Reducing Methane Production. Advances in Dairy Technology.
16:256.

171

A. Grazed Livestock. High quality forages obtained
through managed grazing or proper timing for hay
cutting, increases feed efficiencies and reduces
CH4 emissions by about 20%.2 Beef cattle grazing
on grass-alfalfa pasture produce 25% less CH4 per
cow than cattle grazed on grass-only pasture.2 =
0.25 MMt CO2e/yr

11. Barriers to Implementation: There are interaction
effects from changing animal diets that the
research and on-farm use of practices will help
elucidate.
12. Other Factors: Concentrates and additives
have a CO2 production/emission cost for their
manufacture that is unquantifiable for this
template.

B. Feed Adjustments. Potential adjustments include
manipulating the crude protein and energy
(carbohydrate and fat) content of the diet to
enhance the availability of amino acids, reducing
dietary protein and supplementing amino acids,
or implementation of phase feeding and/or splitsex feeding can all increase productivity and have
positive impacts on CH4 emissions. Increasing
a cow’s consumption of fermented brewer
and distillery grain results in 33%-50% less CH4
production per cow than animals fed common
feedstuffs.2 = 1.0 – 1.5 MMt CO2e/yr

Increased productivity and/or growth rare
through the use of growth accelerators can
cause increased feed requirements and manure
production and the associated GHG concerns
related to N2O and CH4 emissions from manure
handling, storage and land application.
Increased productivity may also mean a higher
feed requirement to sustain the animal, resulting
in greater nutrient inputs to cropland, nitrogen
volatilization, and energy expenditure to grow and
harvest the feed.

C. Dietary Fats. Additions of unsaturated fatty acids
to ruminant diets may reduce CH4 by up to 40%.2
Increasing dietary fats by adding 4% canola oil to
animal diets can reduce CH4 by 33%.2 = 1.2 MMt
CO2e/yr

13. Related Policies: None

D. Growth accelerators decrease the time between
birth and slaughter of beef cattle, and therefore
reduce the amount CH4 each animal produces.
Likewise, growth accelerators may reduce the
time required to bring dairy cattle up to the size
desired for calving, and therefore reduce CH4
production per animal. Recombinant bovine
somatotropin (rBST) can increase milk production
by 13%, which can result in decreased CH4
emissions for that herd by 9%. = 0.27 MMT CO2e/
yr
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
An annual state allocation of $950,000 for
research and incentive payments. ($450,000 for
a competitive research grants program; $500,000
for the incentive payments program).

2. Boadi D. and K. Wittenberg. 2004. Feeding Practices can reduce
CH4 production from cattle operations. Farmers Independent
Weekly. University of Manitoba. Department of Agriculture and
Food Sciences. March 4, 2004.

172

Production, Capture and Use of Animal Methane
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

used to produce energy. Generation of additional
methane through digesters or similar technology,
if used to offset fossil fuel use, would reduce GHG
emissions from avoided fossil fuel combustion.
This proposal suggests the following policy options

2. Policy Name: Production, Capture and Use of
Animal Methane
3. Policy Type: Multiple options including market
based mechanisms, fiscal measures and regulatory
action

A. Demand Generation
•

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Animal operations, electric utilities and
cooperatives (particularly those serving rural
areas), transmission line owners, digester,
generator, and related equipment manufacturers,
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection (DATCP)

•

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reduction estimates depend on the
breadth of operations contributing feed stock
(methane) to the digesters and range from 0.43
Million Metric tons (MMt) CO2e/year to 3.0 MMt
CO2e/year. An estimate for emissions reduction
based on methane flaring yields 0.78 MMt CO2e/
year.

Establish a cap-and-trade program to increase
demand for electricity and biogas from
digesters.
Establish a voluntary consumer payment
program for electricity or biogas produced
from manure. Allow consumers to pay a
higher rate and require the additional funds
be paid for electricity or biogas from digesters.
This program could be adopted by each utility
and structured similarly to current renewable
energy programs.

B. State Payments
• Grant a tax credit for production of electricity or
biogas from manure.
• Propose a new 50% state tax credit for the
construction of a manure digester up to $1
million that can be carried forward up to eight
(8) years.
• Provide a state subsidy for digester capital
costs, interest costs, or to cover risk incurred
by private lenders for digester projects;
establishing the new state subsidy program
through the PSC or DATCP (likely the latter
since electric cooperatives are not regulated
by the PSC). Additionally, create a 90%
loan guarantee program at DATCP for the
construction of manure digesters – these
guarantees would be provided to the Farm
Credit System and private banks that provide
financing for the digesters.
• Create a state fund for incentives for utilities
to pay a higher rate for electricity or biogas
supplied from manure digesters.

6. Estimated Costs: Direct costs to the state may
reach approximately $132.5 million annually.
Indirect costs for manure digesters range from
$139.5 million to $890 million (includes only
capital costs of digesters; does not consider
varying market prices, profitability of digesters,
federal grants, etc.)
Funding Sources: Direct costs may be funded by
state general revenues. See section 12 for further
discussion of funding sources. Indirect costs may
be borne by digester owners.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
goal of this policy is to increase the production,
capture, and use of animal methane for electricity
or heat, and to reduce current methane emissions.
Existing animal-agriculture operations release
methane into the atmosphere. Capture and use
of currently generated methane would directly
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This is
true even if the methane is only flared and not

C. Research
•

173

Increase the economic viability of wasteto-energy systems generally. In particular,
research to develop digesters systems that
are economical for livestock operations

and to allow use of other carbon sources
(such as yard waste, food waste, and
cheese production) and research on how to
efficiently bring waste-to-energy systems
to the market including through farmerowned cooperatives. Provide $500,000 in
annual research funding over three years
to the UW-Madison College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences to research the application
of manure digester technologies to smaller
livestock operations.

simply reducing the direct emission of methane) is
estimated using high figures for biogas, electricity
generation and other numbers.
A. Assuming Use of Manure from All Dairy Cows.
Wisconsin has roughly 1.2 million dairy cows and
the manure from a single cow can generate up
to 109 ft3 of biogas per day1, or up to 65,400 Btu/
day. When burned, up to 35% of this energy can
be recovered as electricity, yielding 6.7 kWh/
day of electricity. All Wisconsin dairy cows
could therefore generate 2.93 million MWh of
electricity/year. Coal-fired electricity generation in
the United States yields an average of 2,249 lbs of
CO2/MWh.2 Therefore, offsetting coal by digester
electricity would reduce CO2 emissions by 3.0
MMT/year.3 This is 2.4% of the 123.1 MMT of CO2e
emitted in WI/year.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The amount of GHG offset possible from animal
methane can grow only as fast as manure
digesters and methane capture technology can be
installed. This rate will increase with research.
Installation of digester systems is time consuming,
requiring at least one year for completion of
a single system. There are currently under 30
manure digesters in Wisconsin. Given the need
for more efficient and cost-effective digester
technology, installation of more than 60 new
digesters in the next five to ten years is unlikely.
For illustration, to install 242 new digesters (the
number of dairy operations with over 500 head
in section 9 below) in 10 years would require
construction of 24 digesters per year. Installation
of digesters on 12,000 dairies (most dairies in
Wisconsin) in 50 years would require construction
of 240 digesters per year.
Once installed, digesters’ productive lives are
limited by equipment and maintenance issues and
can continue a stable rate of offset indefinitely.
All of the policy options proposed would rely
on existing regulatory and tax administration
mechanisms. None would involve monitoring or
enforcement of prohibited behavior.

B. Assuming Use of Manure on Operations Over
500 Head. According to Alliant Energy’s 2006
study,4 the nearly 200,000 animals in the 242
Wisconsin herds over 500 head could generate
39 MW of electricity per hour through manure
digestion. Operated at 100% capacity collectively,
these unites would generate 423,597 MWh of
electricity/year5,6 and offset CO2 emissions by
0.43 MMT CO2e/year or 0.35% of WI’s annual CO2
emissions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Establishment of the 50% state tax credit will
reduce state revenues by $132 million annually.
Research grants will be funded at $500,000/year
for each of three (3) years for at total of $1.5
million.
1. Larry Krom, Focus on Energy Renewable Energy Program. “Biogas Production on Wisconsin Farms,” 2nd Annual Bio-Conversion
Conference, Madison, Wisconsin.
2. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Air Emissions. Available
at http://www.epa.gov/solar/emissions.htm.
3
There are 2,200 pounds in a metric ton.
4. Alliant Energy. Anaerobic digesters and methane production in
the agricultural sector of states served by Alliant Energy. Technical
report, Alliant Energy, 2006. http://www.alliantenergy.com/docs/
groups/public/documents/pub/p013122.pdf
5. 273,312 = 0.8 × 39 MW × 24 hours per day × 365 days per year.
6. For comparison, applying the method of parts a and b, but using low end productivity estimates, we estimate annual electricity
generation from herds over 500 head at 287,700 MWh per year.
7
Methane combustion yields some CO2. Net savings are a factor of
1.15 smaller than gross savings.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Use of methane would affect GHG
emissions by (1) offsetting use of fossil fuels in
electricity or heat generation; and (2) reducing
direct emissions of methane.
In order to develop the upper bound of GHG
emission reduction potential from use of
methane, the reductions from offsetting use of
fossil fuels in electricity or heat generation (which
would yield greater GHG emission reductions than

174

A. Methane Digesters. The costs of digester and
generator installation vary, but a recent rough
estimate is $700 per animal for installations on
operations of over 1,000 head.4 The cost per head
is likely to be much higher on smaller operations.
At that price, installing digesters to handle the
nearly 200,000 animals on operations over 500
head would cost $139.5 million. A per-animal cost
for all 1.2 million dairy cows would amount to
$840 million.

B. The energy offset quantified here could be
counted twice if the energy sector also takes these
offsets to fossil fuel energy generation.
C. Nutrient management and storage issues are
still present. The overall volume of animal waste
is not reduced significantly and land disposal of
liquid fraction must still occur. There is potential
for farmers to irrigate with the liquid effluent and
therefore be able to apply during the growing
season, however public/neighbor perception of
brown water irrigation may inhibit this practice
from becoming mainstream.

B. Methane Flaring. Work group members estimate
that it costs $1.00–1.50/ft2 to cover a lagoon. This
is roughly consistent with the amount of costsharing offered under the federal EQIP program
($0.70/ft2).7

D. Chicago Climate Exchange is currently trading
credits from methane digesters at a rate equal to
the amount of methane that would be emitted in
the absence of the capture system.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Manure digesters
are capital and maintenance intensive, particularly
when coupled with a generator to produce
electricity from the biogas generated. The large
initial capital costs must be covered either through
grants or through sale of electricity or biogas. The
largest barrier to adoption of manure digesters at
present is the gap between the cost of installation
on the one hand and the revenue from electricity
sales on the other.

E. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates propose paying
landowners and farmers to adopt practices that
offset GHG emissions. These payments could
come from the state directly, or from participants
in a cap-and-trade program, who may need to buy
offsets to meet their emissions limits. If a cap-andtrade program is available, using it to fund offsets
would offer three benefits over a state-funded
program (in addition to saving state taxpayer
dollars).

In addition, some installations would require
extension of three-phase power lines or gas
pipelines to the installation, another large capital
cost.

First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.

Finally, current regulations on animal waste
storage and use of other waste streams as
digester inputs limit flexibility of digester
operation. (These rules were established before
interest in digesters and could be modified.)

Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option. This
would enhance the primary benefit of a cap-andtrade program, which is uncovering efficient and
low-cost options to reduce GHG emissions.

12. Other Factors:
A. Co-Benefits. Numerous co-benefits exist in regard
to methane digesters including: odor reduction
and numerous value-added products derived from
solids (compost for resale, bedding for on-farm or
resale use, others).

Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,

7. EQIP cost-share policy 367, waste facility cover. Cost-sharing
is one-time, but requires a 15-year commitment to maintain the
cover.

175

which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.
13. Related Policies: None

176

Nutrient and Manure Management
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

proposals do not contemplate reducing crop yields
significantly.

2. Policy Name: Nutrient and Manure Management
to Reduce Nitrous Oxide (N2O) and Methane
Emissions (Nutrient and Manure Management)

A. Increase state cost-sharing for nutrient
management planning to increase adoption of
nutrient management plans by farmers.

3. Policy Type: Government incentives and
mandates

B. Require the adoption and implementation
of nutrient management plans. (A mandate
would need to be tied to adequate funding and
incentives.)

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Farmers, county land conservation departments,
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection (DATCP), DNR, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, Cooperatives, private
agricultural consultants, the UW System, fertilizer
dealers and manufacturers

C. Increase funding for education on manure
handling, nutrient management, use of N
inhibitors, and other practices that reduce N2O
emissions.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact:
•

Nutrient Management Planning: 0.97 Million
Metric tons (MMt) CO2e/yr

•

CO2 emissions eliminated by not
manufacturing the amount of nitrogen (N)
that is over applied in Wisconsin annually:
0.62 MMt CO2e/yr

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
At the funding rate suggested in this template,
the goal of achieving nutrient management
compliance would occur within 5 years from the
date of initiation of the policy.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: N2O emissions from fertilizer
application (both commercial and manure) to crop
soils range from 1% to 5% of applied N.1 Most
research in the Midwest identifies an emission rate
of 1.5% N2O loss of N applied.1 Wisconsin livestock
produce a large amount of manure (~64.5 million
tons) which should be utilized as a nutrient source
for crops. Legumes are often grown in Wisconsin
crop rotations and the N those plants fix from the
atmosphere is available to the next two years of
non-legume crops. This N is credited the crop year
after the legume is killed.

6. Estimated Costs: Costs to the state for the
incentive program to optimize fertilizer application
are estimated to be $44.8 million annually for
5 years or a total of $224 million. Savings from
optimizing fertilizer application are estimated to
be $229,706,000 annually.
Funding Sources: funding may come from state
general funds

Additional N fertilizer is needed above this amount
of manure to sustain the crops Wisconsin grows
each year, however, a considerable amount of N
is over applied. While approximately 600 million
pounds of N is needed to sustain each year’s
crop, over 1 billion pounds of N is provided to
agricultural lands either as manure N, commercial
fertilizer, or through biological fixation of N by
legumes.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
goal of this policy is to reduce over application
of N to fields (whether from manure or chemical
fertilizers) and reduce the overall use of chemical
fertilizers. Reduction of N application would
reduce emissions of N2O from fields. Reduced use
of chemical fertilizers would reduce emission of
CO2 in the manufacturing process.

1. Grant et al. 2006. Modeling the effects of fertilizer application
rate on nitrous oxide emissions. Soil Science Society of America
Journal. 70:235-248.

This proposal suggests three options, the first
two of which could be combined. Note that the

177

This results in an estimated over-application
of nearly 460 million pounds of N per year
in Wisconsin. If 1.5% of available N is lost
as N2O, then 0.97 MMt CO2e/yr are emitted
from Wisconsin agricultural soils due to overapplication of N.

excessive N applications can significantly reduce
the operating cost on farms especially at times
when N fertilizer is expensive.
Reduced synthetic N application to farmland
may result in revenue loss for fertilizer dealers;
however dealers have the potential to sell other
nutrient related services, such as soil sampling
and nutrient management plan development.
Nutrient management plans require reduction
of soil loss to tolerable levels which will thus
conserve soil and sequester carbon.

In addition to N2O losses from over-application,
manufacturing of N fertilizer generates large
amounts of CO2. Approximately 3 pounds of CO2
are generated per pound of N fertilizer produced
(includes emissions generated from processing,
manufacturing, and transporting the fertilizer).2
If N over application was eliminated, the CO2
emission reduction by not manufacturing that
quantity of N fertilizer would be 0.62 MMt CO2e/
year.

Other supporting practices:

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
With respect to nutrient management planning,
Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP 50 requires
all cropped acres to have a nutrient management
plan by January 1, 2008; however enforcement
is contingent on an offer of cost sharing at a rate
of $7/acre/year for 4 years ($28/acre). In order
to achieve total compliance in 5 years, annual
funding would need to be $44.8 million and would
increase nutrient management plan adoption by
1.6 million acres each year.

•

Injecting or incorporating manure soon after
application can reduce N2O volatilization
by about 90% compared to normal surface
spreading

•

Manure stacking or composting: Between
20 - 30% of N is lost when manure is hauled
daily. Piling manure results in 10 - 20% N
losses, while composting of manure results
in the least N loss at 5 - 15%. Currently 7% of
Wisconsin dairy manure is stacked and 45% is
put directly in the spreader.2

•

Nitrification inhibitors reduce N2O emissions
by 50 - 72%.

13. Related Policies: None

This estimate includes only state costs of costshare funding. It excludes private costs and does
not consider net gains to farmers from avoiding
fertilizer waste.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Nutrient
management planning is viewed by some
producers as too complicated, however most
producers find that a nutrient management plan
actually saves them money through reduced
fertilizer inputs.
Under current law, nutrient management plan
adoption is cost-share contingent, making state
funding a requirement for full participation.
12. Other Factors: The efficient use of N fertilizer
reduces N runoff into surface water and reduces
the amount of N entering ground water. Avoiding

2. Turnquist, A., J. Foltz, and C. Roth. Manure Management on
Wisconsin Farms. PATS Report No. 15. January 2006.

178

Encourage Prairie Plantings
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

systems. This grant program could be administered
by the DNR or DATCP.

2. Policy Name: Increase Carbon Sequestration
Through Prairie Restoration (Encourage Prairie
Plantings)

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Tax incentives would occur annually with a
sunset on the program of 20 years. Cost share
reimbursements would be administered as a
lump sum payment with the amount equal to
70% of the cost of the project and dependent
on the duration of the contract period, which is
typically 10 years for current programs. Lesser
contract periods of 5 years could be established
under the cost-share program as well. Extended
contract periods of 25 years would also be a new
alternative to further increase carbon storage
pools and lifespan. The competitive grant program
would be funded annually on a continuing basis
through the legislature appropriations process.

3. Policy Type: Fiscal measures and voluntary R&D
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Landowners, developers, DNR, Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
(DATCP), the UW System, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS), county land
conservation departments, Resource Conservation
and Development (RC&D) programs, researchers,
EPA
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: 7.2 MMt (million metric tons) CO2 over 25
years

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Carbon storage in soils decreases
over time as the soil builds its carbon pool. The
first 5 years of prairie restoration sequester carbon
at a higher rate than the subsequent 5 years.1 For
prairies that are 1 - 5 years old (or years since the
restoration was initiated), a rate of sequestration
of 70g carbon/m2/year can be assumed (1.04
metric tons CO2/acre); 6 - 10 years old, 45g
carbon/m2/year (0.67 metric tons CO2/acre); for
10+ years old, assume 15g carbon/m2/year (0.22
metric tons CO2/acre). Converting soil carbon to
CO2 requires a 3.667 conversion factor.
There are currently 600,000 acres of land
enrolled in Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)
in Wisconsin. Retaining this land in prairie is a
reasonable goal for prairie planting acreage.
These assumptions allow for the following
estimations of prairie restoration sequestration. A
maximum contract length of 25 years is suggested;
contracts could also be structured for 10 or 5
years. Estimated sequestration amounts are
arranged by length of contract:
• 25 year contract: 12 metric tons CO2/acre over
25 years * 600,000 acres = 7.2 MMt CO2
• 10 year contract: 8.5 metric tons CO2/acre
over 10 years * 600,000 acres = 5.1 MMt CO2

6. Estimated Costs: The estimate of prairie
restoration cost-sharing ranges from $11.5 70 million. The proposal recommends annual
prairie carbon sequestration research funding of
$450,000.
Funding Sources: State funds
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy proposes two complementary programs
to incentivize the expansion of Wisconsin’s
native prairies. Initiation of a tax credit
program for establishment and maintenance
of prairie plantings would be administered as
an annual credit through the state income tax
system, similar to the homestead tax credit or
farmland preservation tax credit. Additionally,
supplementation of the existing NRCS cost-share
grant program, which reimburses landowners for
a portion of the establishment and maintenance
costs to prairie plantings, with state dollars
would effectively increase the rate of prairie
establishment and therefore substantially increase
carbon sequestration. Lastly, this policy proposes
providing $450,000/year toward a competitive
research grant program for investigation of
carbon sequestration rates and longevity in prairie

1. Kucharik. Personal Communication. September 4, 2007.

179

•

5 year contract: 5.2 metric tons CO2/acre over
5 years * 600,000 acres= 3.1 MMt CO2

Prairies require significantly less maintenance
than conventional lawns; mowing frequency and
herbicide and fertilizer inputs are significantly
reduced if not eliminated.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Costshare is available through the federal Natural
Resources Conservation Service Wildlife Habitat
Improvement Program (WHIP) and Grassland
Reserve Programs. WHIP will reimburse $40/acre
for brush management, $85 or $170/acre for cool
and warm season plant mixtures respectively,
and $60/acre for prescribed burning, all of which
are potentially necessary for proper prairie site
preparation, restoration and maintenance. The
cost-share available through WHIP totals $185/
acre for cool season plantings and $270/acre for
warm season plantings. In Fiscal Year 2007 WHIP
cost-sharing was $590,562 for all WHIP practices.
The Grassland Reserve Program will cost-share
up to 90% of the restoration if the land has never
been plowed and up to 75% if the land was once
in crops (cost-share based on actual receipts
generated during project).

There are a few factors to consider with the
acreage estimate. Currently, there are 600,000
acres of CRP land in Wisconsin. This land is
already in prairie, and a reasonable public policy
goal would be to retain it in prairie. (Note that
the longest lived CRP land is probably showing a
lower rate of annual sequestration than for newly
established prairie.)
A higher, but more costly goal would be to convert
currently cropped highly erodible land to prairie.
There are 1.8 million acres of cropped land
with an erodibility index over 15 and 1.3 million
acres with an erodibility index between 8 and
15. Converting this land to prairie would yield
sequestration of 3.2 MMt CO2 per year for the first
five years, a total that is seven times higher than
the total for CRP only land. An even higher goal
would be to convert all highly erodible land to
prairie, not just that currently being cropped.

At WHIP cost-share rates for 100,000 acres, the
cost would range between $18.5 - 27 million. The
current WHIP program would only support cost
share on approximately 3,000 acres/year. Adding
$1.3 million dollars of annual state funding to
this pool would allow for 10,000 acres of prairie
establishment each year, over a 3-fold increase in
establishment and maintenance.

13. Related Policies:
•

11. Barriers to Implementation: Landowners are
often reluctant to sign long term contracts.
Consequently the proposal suggests maximum
contract duration of 25 years. Contracts could also
be structured for 10 or 5 year time frames.
There is a concern that working lands would be
taken out of production for prairie restoration
projects, or that these projects may compete with
land use for energy crop production.
12. Other Factors: Prairie plantings provide excellent
wildlife habitat and numerous water quality
benefits. Prairies provide permanent vegetation
cover which reduces soil erosion. The long
rooted nature of prairie species increases water
infiltration, thereby reducing the likelihood
of stormwater runoff issues such as flooding.

180

Preservation of Existing Vegetative Cover
Carbon Sinks on CRP Lands

Soil Management Practices
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

effective by research.
Specific policies should be designed to ensure
incentives are provided for all eligible entities with
consideration of the tax liabilities each faces. For
entities that have different tax liability structures,
grants could be considered or the incentives
could be designed with the ability to transfer the
incentive through an intermediary.
The proposal is to make adoption of such practices
financially worthwhile through one or more of
three policies:

2. Policy Name: Increase Carbon Stores in
Agricultural Soils Through Adoption of Soil
Management Practices (Soil Management
Practices)
3. Policy Type: Four alternatives: (1) Government
payment for adoption of practices; (2) Tradable
emissions cap (see comment on last page); (3)
Mandate adoption of practices; (4) Research
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Farmers, county land conservation departments,
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection (DATCP), DNR, manure haulers,
National Resource Conservation Service, private
agricultural consultants, the UW System

A. Increase government payments to farmers for
adoption of the practices. (Various federal,
state, and local programs already provide such
payments; increasing payment amounts available
through all programs would bolster this practice.)
B. Establish a general carbon cap-and-trade
system to increase market demand for carbonsequestering soil management practices from
participants in the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX)
or similar entities.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: 0.5 to 5.0 Million Metric tons (MMt) CO2/
year
6. Estimated Costs:
• Placeholder cost range: $18.5 million to
$185.0 million per year for a state program.
• No estimate made for costs to purchasers
under a cap-and-trade program.
• No estimate made for enforcement costs
under a mandate.
• No estimate made for costs of research or
negotiation with CCX.

C. Require farmer compliance with the practices.
(State law includes a set of required practices,
which are only enforceable if cost-sharing is
offered. A mandate would need to be tied to
adequate funding and incentives)
In addition to these methods, the state should:
D. Increase funding for research on the most effective
soil management practices for sequestering
carbon, particularly the role of manure
incorporation and dairy rotations.

Funding Sources: See section 12 for a discussion
of potential funding sources and implications.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
goal of this policy is to increase carbon stores in
agricultural soils by 10% over the next 25 years,
or by an average of 0.5 metric ton CO2/acre/year.
In the opinion of the work group members, and
with the support of current research, that is a high
but physically attainable goal. For this per acre
rate to have a large total carbon sequestration,
a significant number of farmers must adopt
agricultural practices such as reduced tillage, notillage, cover cropping, incorporation of organic
matter, and other practices demonstrated to be

E. Negotiate with the CCX to allow credits for
increasing of organic matter in soils. (Currently,
CCX offers credits for tillage practices independent
of measured soil organic matter. Dairy rotations
are ineligible for extended no-till, even though
some reduced till manure injection practices may
be able to increase soil organic matter.)
8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: Soil
carbon sequestration begins in the first year of
modified tillage, progresses rapidly for roughly

181

ten to twenty years, and eventually plateaus.
Unfortunately, soil carbon loss occurs over only a
few years when soil is disturbed. Since Wisconsin
dairy rotations require some soil disturbance
periodically (see section 11), more research is
required to determine how much and what form
of soil disturbance would be acceptable. Note
that existing state soil conservation programs
do not include significant penalty provisions for
intermittent tillage.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
A. State payment program. The cost to the state
of a voluntary state payment program depends
on the reservation price of those who would
participate in the program. Participation carries
various possible costs to participants including
yield losses, capital costs for new equipment,
pesticides costs, and opportunity costs of
alternative land-use practices. Sequestration
tillage can carry benefits to the participant
including reduced equipment use, which would
offset these costs. Furthermore, the payment
rate would need to increase as the number of
participants increases (those most willing and able
to adopt sequestration practices will do so first,
at lower payment rates). An estimate of the cost
curve for sequestration practices will be made as
part of Winrock International’s work. Note that
Winrock’s estimate will only reflect direct costs of
farmer participation, not aggregate social costs,
estimation of which requires general equilibrium
modeling of the type performed by ICF.

Existing soil sequestration programs, such as that
run by the CCX, require specific tillage practices
and monitor compliance on a random sample
basis. This approach would be acceptable for a
state payments program. However, it would be
preferable to base payments on actual organic
matter increases. This would require research
into sampling and analysis methods, particularly
research into soil sampling error rates.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Wisconsin agricultural soils average
about 2% organic matter content, roughly
50% of pre-settlement levels. Increasing soil
organic matter content, and thus soil carbon,
can only occur gradually over several decades.
Sequestration is most rapid in early years and
eventually plateaus.

In the interim, a rough estimate for the cost of
a state payment program can be drawn from
payments under existing state and federal
programs. Cost-sharing from federal and state
programs for conservation tillage ranges from
$15/acre/year for a three-year contract under the
federal EQIP program to $18.50/acre/year for a
four-year contract under the Wisconsin program.
Extending sequestration tillage practices to an
additional 1.0 million to 10.0 million acres at
$18.50/acre/year cost-sharing would require
payment to farmers totaling from $18.5 million to
$185.0 million dollars per year. However, despite
current payment rates, the conversion of existing
lands to no-till is relatively small, approximately
10,000 acres/year in WI. This implies that even
$18.50/acre/year will be inadequate to hasten
the adoption of sequestration tillage practices to
achieve the 1.0 million to 10 million acres sought
under this policy proposal, and that the actual
cost will be higher.

UW researchers estimate that a 10% increase in
soil carbon is possible in 25 years, equivalent to an
average of 0.5 metric ton CO2/acre/year. Note that
this estimate is within the range accepted by the
CCX: 0.2 to 0.6 metric ton CO2/acre/year.1
Roughly 15% of agricultural fields are now under
no-till, and a significant increase in acreage
is possible, especially in western and southcentral Wisconsin because of topography, soils,
and cropping patterns. Sequestration practices
could reasonably be extended to an additional
1.0 million acres.
The highest rate possible would require extending
sequestration tillage practices to all of Wisconsin’s
roughly 10 million acres that are currently
either cropped or grazed. At an average rate of
sequestration of 0.5 metric ton CO2/acre/year,
Wisconsin’s agricultural soils could sequester
between 0.5 and 5.0 MMt CO2/year.
1. Christopher Kucharik, personal communication.

In addition to payments to participants, a
state program would entail administrative
expenses. The existing federal National Resource
Conservation Service conservation program,
EQIP, along with the Wisconsin non-point source
pollution program, provides the administrative
support for local implementation of soil

182

conservation practices through County Land and
Water Conservation programs and local NRCS
offices.

12. Other Factors:
A. Co-Benefits. Practicing conservation tillage and
incorporating organic matter has considerable
environmental co-benefits. Conservation tillage
results in dramatically reduced soil erosion and
phosphorus run-off to water resources. Soil
quality is increased through increased soil organic
material. Incorporating manure has considerable
surface water quality benefits.

B. Payments induced by a cap-and-trade program.
Establishment of a cap-and-trade program would
create demand for carbon sequestration from
carbon emitters, such as power plants. Those
entities with carbon emissions limited by the capand-trade program would purchase sequestration
(or other offsets) from various sources, including
farmers engaged in sequestration practices. The
total amount paid to farmers, and indeed the
amount of sequestration bought from farmers,
would depend on market conditions that cannot
be predicted in isolation. Currently, the price
of agricultural soil sequestration on the CCX is
roughly $1.60/acre/year. This value has been
as high as $2.10 in the last nine months. As is
the case with a state payment program, the
price paid by offset-purchasers would have to
rise dramatically before significant voluntary
sequestration practices would be adopted.

B. Potential funding sources and implications.
Several of the templates, including this one,
propose paying landowners and farmers to
adopt practices that offset GHG emissions. These
payments could come from the state directly, or
from participants in a cap-and-trade program,
who may need to buy offsets to meet their
emissions limits. If a cap-and-trade program is
available, using it to fund offsets would offer three
benefits over a state-funded program (in addition
to saving state taxpayer dollars).
First, if a cap-and-trade program were enacted,
and as its cap were reduced to more stringent
levels, the price paid for offsets would be likely to
rise. In the long run, the benefits to landowners
and farmers may be higher under a cap-and-trade
program than under a state funded program.
Second, paying for forestry and agricultural offsets
through a cap-and-trade program would benefit
emitters, who would be able to meet some of
their obligations through a lower-cost option.
This would enhance the primary benefit of a capand-trade program, which is uncovering efficient
and low-cost options to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.

C. Requirements, research and CCX. No estimate
is made of the cost enforcement, of additional
research, or of negotiation with the CCX.
11. Barriers to Implementation: The Wisconsin
agriculture sector includes nearly 16,000 dairy
operations, whose crop rotation most often
includes four years of corn grain/silage followed
by three or more years of alfalfa hay. The main
nutrient source for these crops is the animal waste
those operations generate. The need to turn
over the alfalfa hay at the end of its productive
“life” and to incorporate manure to increase
nutrient uptake and reduce nutrient losses to
water and atmospheric resources are why some
Wisconsin dairy operations may be reluctant to
practice conservation tillage, especially no-till.
Additionally, the CCX payment of between $1.602.20/acre may not be high enough to offset the
cost for new equipment and potential lower yields
during conservation tillage establishment. More
limiting is the CCX requirement for no-till, striptill, or ridge-till, and a minimum 5 year continuous
commitment.

Finally, forestry and agriculture offsets provide
additional environmental benefits, including
surface water protection and wildlife habitat,
which other offset methods may not. Making
forestry and agriculture offsets eligible under a
cap-and-trade program would bring the power of
climate markets to support general environmental
goals connected to the land.
13. Related Policies: None

183

Preserve Existing Carbon Sequestration in CRP
1. Work Group: Agriculture and Forestry

Funding Sources: Funding for these programs may
be obtained from state general funds, treated as
an offset under a cap and trade program or from
the proceeds of an auction of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions credits under a cap and trade
program, if applicable.

2. Policy Name: Preservation of Existing Vegetative
Cover Carbon Sinks on Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP) Lands (Preserve Existing Carbon
Sequestration in CRP)
3. Policy Type: Incentive programs

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
proposal suggests the following policies:

The Agriculture and Forestry work group
recommends only the consideration of financial
incentives for this template because of the
inability of agricultural producers to shift potential
mandate-related costs on to commodity
purchasers. Given this, mandating producer
actions through greater regulatory burdens on
producers would result in vertical and horizontal
integration of Wisconsin agriculture in corporate
operations and the loss of the Wisconsin family
farm.

A. Create a state Energy Crop Reserve Program. This
program would pay an incentive to landowners
to grow perennial grasses and energy crops on
marginal land that would otherwise be at risk of
intensive cropping. The program would target land
previously enrolled in the federal CRP and would
have similar soil, water, and habitat standards,
while allowing harvest of qualified energy crops.
B. Provide a tax incentive for maintenance of
existing vegetative cover on CRP lands or other
agricultural lands, including native grasslands,
perennial grasses, and prairies, administered as a
credit through the state income tax, similar to the
homestead tax credit or farmland preservation tax
credit.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Landowners currently enrolled in CRP, NRCS,
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection (DATCP), DNR, Wisconsin Department
of Revenue (DOR).
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: No emission reductions would occur as a
result of this proposal. Instead, the proposal aims
to avoid the release of CO2.

C. Modify the use-value assessment law and/or
rules to allow grasslands to be eligible for lowered
assessments even if no longer enrolled in the
CRP. (Under use-value, productive agricultural
land is assessed for property tax purposes at its
agricultural value, rather than its development
value. Land enrolled in CRP is treated as
agricultural land under Department of Revenue
rules. However, other grassland apparently is
subject to higher assessments.)

Avoided release amounts would range from
approximately 0.76 - 1.9 MMt (Million Metric tons)
of CO2 through roughly 2028.
6. Estimated Costs: No estimate has been prepared
of the cost of avoided emissions under this
proposal. Winrock International prepared
estimates of the cost of sequestering carbon
through converting cropland to grassland. This
estimate is a first approximation of the cost of
maintaining vegetative cover against alternative
land uses.

D. Establish a Carbon Conservation Easement
Program within DATCP to purchase easements
restricting the disturbance of existing vegetative
cover carbon sinks.
8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Program creation(s) would occur immediately.
Contract terms for the Energy Crop Reserve
Program and the Carbon Conservation Easement
Program would be 10 years.

Winrock’s estimate of the cost of converting
cropland to grassland in Wisconsin averages
around $19.20 per ton of CO­2 per year for a tenyear conversion period and $17.90 per ton per
year for a twenty-year period. The cost varies by
county from a high of $50 per acre per year to
$10 per acre per year. See the Winrock report for
details.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: No emissions reductions would occur
as a result of these policies. Instead, the policies
are aimed at avoiding release of stored carbon.

184

Year
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Total

Estimating CO2 emissions from CRP land converted
to crops is difficult. There are two unknowns:
(1) the amount of carbon released per acre, which
depends on how long the CRP land in question has
been in vegetative cover; and (2) the number of
acres of CRP land converted to crops. Additionally,
incomplete and limited land use and land cover
data about Wisconsin complicate the exercise
further.
A rough estimate of the carbon emission rate
has been suggested by Dr. Chris Kucharik of the
UW - Madison Nelson Institute. Assume a long
term rate of sequestration on CRP land of 0.3707
metric tons of CO2 per acre per year.1 Assume also
that CRP land with expiring contracts has been
enrolled for at least 10 years. Disturbance of CRP
land with these assumptions will release 9.1605
metric tons of CO2 per acre, gradually over a
period of roughly ten years.

Acres Expiring
83,171
43,848
58,192
44,464
69,058
76,284
22,239
33,302
18,326
51,816
15,349
516,049

personal communication) then approximately 0.76
million tons of CO2 would be emitted over the
same period.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
The cost figures below are based on the figures
presented above, assuming a rate of 50% of
expiring acres are reenrolled in any of the above
programs.

As of January 25, 2008, the USDA Farm Service
Agency reports that Wisconsin has 533,830 acres
enrolled in CRP.2 Of these acres, the following are
scheduled to expire over the
next ten years.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Sufficient funding
must be provided to incentivize a landowner
of sensitive or highly erodible land that it is
economically feasible to not place the land back
into active commodity crop production, but rather
enroll it in the state Energy Crop Reserve Program
or Carbon Conservation Easement Program. This
funding amount will vary depending on the
price of commodities and the value that can be
obtained by producing perennial grasses and
energy crops.

How many of these acres will be reenrolled is
unclear. Nor is it clear how many released acres
will be disturbed. If all of the expiring acres were
disturbed, the total release of CO2 would be
roughly equal to 1.9 million metric tons within a
few years after 2018.
On the low end, if half of expiring acres are
reenrolled, and if 80% of the remaining acres are
disturbed (both approximations suggested by
county conservation experts in Wisconsin through

12. Other Factors: Wisconsin, like other places,
already has a significant quantity of carbon
sequestered in soil organic matter, below-ground
plant material (both living and dead), and aboveground plant material (living only). When aboveground plant materials are destroyed or when
organic soils are disturbed, the sequestered
carbon is released to the atmosphere through
decomposition. The rate and magnitude of this
release depends on the nature of the plant
material and of the disturbance. Total releases can
be significant if large land areas are affected.

1. Dr. Kucharik estimates a long term rate of sequestration of
0.25 metric tons of carbon per hectare per year. This is equivalent
to 0.1012 metric tons of carbon per acre per year (one hectare
equals 2.4711 acres) and to 0.3707 metric tons of CO2 per acre
per year (release of one unit mass of carbon yields 3.6642 units
mass of carbon dioxide; the additional mass provided by oxygen
from the atmosphere).
2. USDA FAS report available at http://content.fsa.usda.gov/crpstorpt/rmepegg/MEPEGGR1.HTM.

185

The lands in question are privately owned,
and therefore the disposition of those lands
is a private decision. Some of the factors that
influence a landowner are the returns available
from alternative use (such as sale prices offered
by developers or rental prices offered by crop
growers), incentive payments available (such

The amount of fallow land drawn into crop
production is difficult to project. Harvested
cropland varies significantly year-to-year and
is in a long-run downward trend. However, it
is likely that some fallow land will be drawn
in to production, including land currently in
conservation programs. Preliminary estimates
from conservationists in Wisconsin project that
roughly one-third to one-half of expiring CRP
contracts will not be renewed. Of those that are
not renewed, roughly 80% will be planted in row
crops. In addition, there is substantial uncertainty
over program details for CRP under the next
federal budget.

Year AcreageGoal 10ͲyrContracts 20ͲyrContracts
2008

41585.5

$910,722.45

$715,270.60

2009

21924

$480,135.60

$377,092.80

2010

29096

$637,202.40

$500,451.20

2011

22232

$486,880.80

$382,390.40

2012

34529

$756,185.10

$593,898.80

2013

38142

$835,309.80

$656,042.40

2014

11119.5

$243,517.05

$191,255.40

2015

16651

$364,656.90

$286,397.20

2016

9163

$200,669.70

$157,603.60

2017

25908

$567,385.20

$445,617.60

2018

7674.5

$168,071.55

$132,001.40

Total

The four policies recommended here rely on
incentive payments to landowners. Landowners
in Wisconsin have broad latitude to control the
management and use of their land, whether as
forest, prairie, pasture, or cropland. Any policy
that mandated a particular land use would face
significant political and constitutional challenges.
Regarding CRP land, enrollment in CRP is
voluntary and contractual. Participants in the
program agreed to certain temporary land use
practices in exchange for rental payments from
the federal government. The goal of the policies
in this template is to expand the benefits of this
voluntary program.

258024.5 $5,650,736.55 $4,438,021.40

as payments under the federal CRP), and
the landowner’s nonmonetary goals such as
recreation and habitat preservation.

13. Related Policies:
•

The returns available from alternative uses are
subject to market forces and are continually
changing. However, the prices available for land
development and for crop production have risen
in recent years. One of the changes of greatest
public concern is the increase in rental rates
offered for cropland. Growing demand for corn
and soybeans due to ethanol production and
world demand; and a reduction in U.S. harvested
crop acres in 2006, have raised the returns to crop
production and thus the value of land used for
cropping.

•

In general, rising crop prices will draw currently
fallow land into crop production. This includes CRP
land whose contracts are expiring. (Land in CRP
receives an annual rental payment for a limited
term, in exchange for the landowner limiting
disturbance of the land through grass planting and
other practices.)

186

Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization
Encourage Prairie Plantings

Boiler Efficiency Improvements
1. Work Group: Industry

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:

2. Policy Name: Incentives for Industrial Boiler
Efficiency Improvements (Boiler Efficiency
Improvements)

A. Regulatory Incentives. To the extent allowed
under federal regulations, permit streamlining
incentives (e.g. expedited permit approvals)
should be provided to offset the regulatory
barriers that could be associated with boiler
efficiency projects.

3. Policy Type: Regulatory and financial incentives
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Industrial facilities

B. Financial Incentives. Annual funding of $5 million
for grants and loans should be provided through
the Focus on Energy Program. Funding purposes
should include technical assistance, equipment
purchases and installation costs. Alternatively,
a larger one-time revolving low-interest loan
program could be established.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Evaluation of six boiler efficiency options
covering a range of fuels and boiler types showed
potential CO2 emission reductions of between
6,000 and 25,000 metric tons per year for a model
facility. Actual reductions may be higher or lower,
but would probably be lower because most boilers
are smaller than assumed in the model facility.
The estimated universe of industrial boilers in
Wisconsin is approximately 3,000. Due to the
facility-specific nature of the boiler efficiency
options, it is not possible to accurately predict
potential statewide CO2 emission reductions.
However making some assumptions allows for a
very rough estimate. These assumptions include:
(1) 20% program utilization (600 boilers); and (2)
average reduction of 15,000 metric tons of CO2
per year per facility. The result is a very rough
statewide emission reduction estimate of 9 million
metric tons of CO2 annually.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Regulatory incentives could take several years to
put in place, depending on the need to modify
rules and statutes, and to address any legal
challenges to regulatory incentives. The duration
is dependent on future federal regulatory actions,
but should be permanent, if possible. Financial
incentives, if provided through the Focus on
Energy Program, could be accomplished within a
year.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Estimates are based on analysis of
several boiler efficiency improvement options
which included: (1) preheating demineralized
water with secondary heat before steam heating;
(2) installation of a steam accumulator to facilitate
efficient control of steam header pressure; (3)
installation of an ash reinjection system in a hog
fuel boiler; (4) installation of a bark press or dryer
to increase utilization of biofuels; (5) installation
of additional heat recovery systems to lower
losses with flue gases; and (6) implementation of
an energy management system. This information
came from “Technologies for Reducing Carbon
Dioxide Emissions: A Resource Manual for Pulp,
Paper, and Wood Products Manufacturers,”
December 2001, NCASI and EKONO, Inc. The
estimate in section 6 of statewide boiler base
came from Department of Commerce records.

6. Estimated Costs: Evaluation of six boiler efficiency
improvement options showed:
A. Capital costs are variable because they are
dependent on site-specific conditions, which are
variable.
B. Operational cost savings range between $205,000
and $845,000 annually for a model facility. Actual
cost savings could be higher or lower.
C. Regulatory compliance costs could range from
insignificant for small boilers at minor sources to
significant for boilers at major sources regulated
by the Prevention of Significant Deterioration /
New Source Review program.

work group. These two templates would help provide for: (1) an
adequately funded Focus on Energy program dealing with boilers utilizing regulated fuels (e.g. natural gas) for projects such as
efficiency improvements or fuel switching; and (2) an adequately
funded non-regulated fuel (e.g. propane, coal) program (presumably an additional part of Focus on Energy, and as such sharing the
name) dealing with boilers utilizing these fuels.

Funding Sources: Financial incentives should be
provided through the Focus on Energy Program1
1. This template assumes that both the Enhanced Conservation
and Energy Efficiency Program template and the Non-regulated
Fuels Efficiency and Conservation template are implemented
as recommended by the Conservation and Energy Efficiency

187

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
Annual funding of $5 million for grants and loans
11. Barriers to Implementation:
•

Potential limitations on regulatory incentives
for major sources due to federal pre-emption

•

State government costs for incentives

•

Availability of engineering contractors and
equipment suppliers if initiative is expanded
to a larger scale

12. Other Factors: Focus on Energy should examine
whether a single project should be eligible for
funding from multiple programs, specifically,
the Boiler Fuel Switching and Boiler Efficiency
Improvement programs.
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•
•

Industrial Boiler Fuel Switching
Non-Regulated Fuels Efficiency and
Conservation
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
General Incentives for Industrial Energy
Conservation and Efficiency
Co-Generation Incentives and/or Mandates
for Construction, Upgrades and Replacement

188

Industrial Efficiency Incentives
1.		 Work Group: Industry

expenditures that will result in quantifiable energy
savings. The percentage of the credit could be flat,
or set to a sliding scale based upon the expected
efficiency savings, or a combination thereof.
In addition, provide manufacturing transition
tax credits to assist companies that redesign
production facilities to produce new, cutting-age
technologies. Tax credits would be given for a
percent of the value of the equipment bought or
facilities built to produce the new product, and
would be targeted to companies that transition
to the manufacturing of technology with fewer
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Similarly, these
credits could be used to provide incentives for
component part manufacturers that already
produce parts that can be used in clean energy
systems to transition to producing mainly for those
industries.

2.		 Policy Name: General incentives for (1) industrial
conservation and energy efficiency; (2) to help
Wisconsin companies transition to become
suppliers to the new energy economy (Industrial
Efficiency Incentives)
3.		 Policy Type: Incentives: monetary, tax, and
environmental permitting, loan program and bond
program
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Industrial sector
5 . Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Reductions will depend upon the breadth
and scope of implementation of industrial
conservation and energy efficiency projects. If
conservation and efficiency incentives were able
to achieve a total net 5% reduction in both direct
and indirect industrial emissions by the year 2020,
that would result in an annual reduction of 1.84
million metric tons (MMt) of CO2 equivalents.

C. Environmental permitting incentives. Provide fast
track permitting for retrofit and/or equipment
replacement projects that would otherwise
proceed on a traditional permitting path, if the
equipment will result in conservation or energy
efficiency savings. Examples might include the
expanded use of commence construction waivers,
expanded application of Registration Construction
Permits and Registration Operation Permits for
sources above 25 tons per year actual emissions,
and exemptions from construction permitting at
true minor sources. Emphasis should be given to
providing permitting incentives on a project basis.

6. Estimated Costs: Unknown, as funding levels
would be determined by the Legislature. Funding
level of $15 million per year suggested.
		 Funding Sources: State budget appropriation
7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Establish
incentives for industrial sector businesses to
implement conservation and energy efficiency
projects, practices and measures resulting in
reduced energy consumption from non-renewable
sources, with an emphasis on funding for projects
that are not feasible within the constraints of
existing programs such as Focus on Energy. The
following incentives are intended to achieve
these goals, as well as assist Wisconsin companies
transitioning to become suppliers in a “new energy
economy.”

D. Loan program. Create an energy efficiency loan
program to offer low-interest or no-interest loans
for large capital expenditures intended to reduce
energy consumption, and thereby make possible
projects that may otherwise be economically
infeasible.
E. Industrial development bonds. There are huge
potential benefits in manufacturing and other
heavy industrial firms as we move into a new
energy economy, because these firms are in
a good position to produce the component
parts that are the backbone of many renewable
energy and energy efficiency systems. Industrial
development bonds (IDBs) are a form of conduit
financing whereby private investors provide
loans to companies through the state or local
government. Under the arrangement, the
government sells bonds to investors and uses the
proceeds to make loans to private businesses,

A. Monetary incentives. These could take the form
of cash grants for the purpose of (1) conducting
comprehensive energy audits and implementing
corresponding measures to improve energy
efficiency or to conserve energy; or (2) purchasing
replacement or retrofit equipment that is more
energy efficient.
B. Tax incentives. Provide a refundable tax credit
for the purchase of equipment or other capital

189

generally for the acquisition, construction, or
expansion/rehabilitation of manufacturing
facilities. Interest income from the bonds is tax
free, allowing the loans to be low interest. These
loans require some showing of public benefit
– though this is usually expressed in economic
terms, the benefits can also be measured through
clean energy production. For example, Wisconsin
could target a portion of existing IDB financing to
businesses that do any of the following:
•
•
•
•
•

		 The estimated reduction of 1.84 MMt of CO2
equivalents is based on the following:

Begin manufacturing energy efficient fixtures,
metering equipment and/or appliances
Begin manufacturing renewable energy
products and/or components
Install renewable power generators in their
facilities
Begin manufacturing component parts for
renewable fuel or hybrid/flex-fuel vehicle
operations
Transition from manufacturing traditional
vehicles to manufacturing hybrids, advanced
diesel, flex-fuel and other advanced drive
train vehicles and related components.

•

World Resources Institute data suggests 21
MMt of CO2 equivalents are attributable
to the industrial sector annually as indirect
emissions due to electricity consumption, and
15.9 MMt of CO2 equivalents are attributable
annually as direct emissions.

•

A 5% reduction in indirect emissions yields
1.05 MMt of CO2 equivalents (21 MMt X .05 =
1.05 MMt).

•

A 5% reduction in direct emissions yields .795
MMt of CO2 equivalents (15.9 MMt X .05 =
.795 MMt).

•

1.05 MMt + .795 MMt = 1.84 MMt of CO2
equivalents

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: To
maximize the attractiveness and energy-saving
potential of the incentives, and to provide a broad
spectrum of incentives available to meet the need
of small, medium and large companies, a funding
level in the range of at least $15 million per year
should be considered.

8.		 Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Implementation of incentive policies is dependant
upon legislative approval, and the availability of
state revenue. Under a very optimistic scenario,
legislation could be passed in the 2009 legislative
session and funding appropriated for the
fiscal year beginning July 1, 2009. To maximize
effectiveness, the incentives should be considered
as continuous ongoing appropriations. To be
effective, these programs should be relatively
long term – perhaps a 10 year lifespan with the
possibility of renewal.

11. Barriers to Implementation: The incentives
would require legislative approval, including the
appropriation of state revenue during a time
when the budget is tight. There would also need
to be an administrative component to each of
these incentives, including, in some cases, the
likelihood of a competitive application process
or the certification of tax credits. Also, as noted
above, the incremental benefit of conservation
and energy efficiency is uncertain given that lean
manufacturing and other market-driven forces
have caused many industrial sector businesses
to implement conservation and energy efficiency
measures already.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The estimated emission reductions,
based on energy savings of 5% below baseline
levels by 2020, represents an estimate of what
can occur given that many industrial energy users
have already undertaken conservation and energy
efficiency measures that were driven by the rising
cost of energy.

12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•

		 It is assumed that the availability and
attractiveness of the incentives will directly impact
the extent to which conservation and efficiency
projects are implemented.

•
•

		

190

Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
Industrial Boiler Efficiency Improvements
Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions

Boiler Fuel Switching
1. Work Group: Industry

left behind during logging and management
operations. Forest residues do not include
pulpwood, saw logs, and other wood used as raw
material in the forest products industry. Non-wood
biomass would include switchgrass and other
similar crops, but not wood. Financial assistance
could be provided in the form of grants and
low-interest loans to loggers for the purchase of
equipment to collect and transport forest residues
to market, and for other technical assistance.
It is also recommended that voluntary best
management practices for the recovery of forest
residues be developed between the DNR and the
forest products industry.

2. Policy Name: Incentives for Industrial Boiler Fuel
Switching (Boiler Fuel Switching)
3. Policy Type: fiscal, regulatory, or technical
assistance incentives
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Industrial facilities, primarily in the forest products
industry
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: A recent analysis set the amount of forest
residues generated in Wisconsin at between
609,000 and 2,325,000 dry tons per year. Every
100,000 tons of forest residues that displace coal
yield an emission reduction of almost 120,000
metric tons of CO2 equivalents. A 50% recovery
and use goal, if realized and if displacing coal,
would reduce GHG emissions by between
approximately 365,000 tons and 1,400,000
tons of CO2 equivalents annually. However, this
figure would be reduced by the amount of GHG
emissions associated with collection and transport
for use (life-cycle analysis).

B. Demand-side Incentives. Provide incentives to
industrial boiler owners to increase the amount
of non-wood biomass and noncommercial forest
residues used as fuel. Financial assistance could
be provided in the form of grants and low-interest
loans to industrial owners of wood-fired boilers to
make physical plant changes necessary to increase
the utilization of forest residues or non-wood
biomass as fuel (increase wood handling capacity,
etc.). Financial assistance could also be provided
in the form of a fuel cost subsidy for industrial
owners of wood-fired boilers. It is important
that market supply and demand balance be
maintained in order to avoid driving up the price
of commercial stem wood used as raw material
in the pulp, paper, and wood products industries.
In addition, to the extent allowed under federal
regulations, permit streamlining incentives should
be provided to offset the regulatory barriers that
could be associated with boiler projects.

6. Estimated Costs: Costs for incentives would be
dependent on available government funds and
legislative will to provide additional funding.
Funding Sources: possibilities include the Focus
on Energy Program1
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
A. Supply-side Incentives. Provide incentives
intended to increase the supply of non-wood
biomass and noncommercial forest residues
available for use as biofuels. A goal of 50%
recovery and use of forest residue for biofuels is
recommended. Forest residues include defective
portions of trees, unmerchantable trunks, trees
removed for purposes of thinning, and materials

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Incentives could take about one year to put in
place, if through the Focus on Energy Program.
It would likely take a couple of years to put
incentives into place through other mechanisms.
It would then likely take some time before
companies began to utilize the incentives and
make related changes.

1. This template assumes that both the Enhanced Conservation
and Energy Efficiency Program template and the Non-regulated
Fuels Efficiency and Conservation template are implemented
as recommended by the Conservation and Energy Efficiency
work group. These two templates would help provide for: (1) an
adequately funded Focus on Energy program dealing with boilers utilizing regulated fuels (e.g. natural gas) for projects such as
efficiency improvements or fuel switching; and (2) an adequately
funded non-regulated fuel (e.g. propane, coal) program (presumably an additional part of Focus on Energy, and as such sharing the
name) dealing with boilers utilizing these fuels.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Conversion factor developed by
National Council for Air and Stream Improvement
based on commonly used emission factors. From
the study: “Technologies for Reducing Carbon
Dioxide Emissions: A Resource Manual for Pulp,
Paper, and Wood Products Manufacturers,”
December 2001, NCASI and EKONO, Inc.

191

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: For
supply-side incentives the recommended funding
level is $1 million per year for three years, with
future funding determined by the Focus on Energy
Program based on demand. For demand-side
incentives the recommended funding level is $1.5
million annually in grants for three years and $1.5
million in low interest loans for three years. Future
funding levels should be determined by the Focus
on Energy Program based on demand.

AEI). Pulp and paper industry is almost 70%
of total, or somewhat under 7 million tons.
About 70% of pulp and paper CO2 emissions
are associated with fossil fuel combustion,
or a little under 5 million tons. Assume more
reductions if extrapolated to all industry.
Assume less reduction due to a boiler size
limit below which conversion would not be
required. Assume the increases and decreases
offset, resulting in an approximate 5 million
ton maximum reduction potential.)

11. Barriers to Implementation:
•

State government costs for incentives

•

Environmental permitting and compliance
costs that could negatively impact the costeffectiveness of projects. For example, federal
Prevention of Significant Deterioration / New
Source Review and New Source Performance
Standard regulation could come into play.

•

12. Other Factors: The operation of environmental
emission controls would result in the combustion
of fossil fuels or additional energy usage, which
would need to be subtracted from total GHG
reduction estimates.
Two additional options were examined: (1) a
mandate that all fossil fuel boilers switch to
biofuels; and (2) a mandate that all coal-fired
boilers switch to natural gas. These options are
not recommended because of the significantly
implementation costs, operational costs, and the
potential lack of available biomass and natural
gas to support a statewide conversion in fuel use.
It is understood that other policy decisions could
drive fuel switching on a site-specific basis. The
costs and benefits of fuel switching should be
evaluated further within the context of that policy
discussion.

The following are very rough, ballpark
estimates of the general magnitude of
costs that might be expected with 100%
implementation this mandate. Based on a
rough estimate in the pulp and paper industry,
the capital costs for boiler conversions alone
might be expected to approach $2 billion. The
capital costs for related facility changes and
pollution controls are unknown, but could
approach $1 to $2 billion, based on anecdotal
evidence. This would bring total capital
costs into the $3-4 billion range, subject to
other caveats noted below. Operation costs
could increase or decrease, depending on
site-specific conditions. (There were 83 pulp
and paper industry boilers listed in the 2005
DNR AEI. Assume 15 boiler replacements at
$33 million each and 45 boiler rebuilds at
$23 million each. Total pulp and paper costs
would exceed $1.5 billion. Extrapolate to
all industry and costs could be expected to
approach $2 billion. Costs are in 2001 dollars,
so actual costs would be higher. Costs are for
a model boiler based on steam demand. The
model boiler is toward the small end of the
boiler size spectrum, so costs must be scaled
(most likely up) to account for actual steam
demand.)

Mandate that all fossil fuel boilers switch to
biofuels

Mandate that all coal-fired boilers switch to
natural gas

•

•

The following is a very rough, ballpark
estimate of the general magnitude of
emission reduction that might be expected
with 100% implementation of this mandate.
Based on a rough estimate in the pulp and
paper industry, the maximum statewide
reduction might be in the vicinity of 50% from
2005 levels, or approximately 5 million tons.
(Total industry sector CO2 emissions in 2005
were approximately 10 million tons (DNR

192

The following is a very rough, ballpark
estimate of the general magnitude of
emission reduction that might be expected
with 100% implementation of this mandate.
Based on a rough estimate in the pulp and
paper industry, the maximum statewide
reduction might be in the vicinity of 18%
from 2005 levels, or approximately 1.8 million
tons. (Approximately 55%, or about 3.8
million tons, of pulp and paper CO2 emissions

•

in 2005 associated with coal combustion.
Assume natural gas emissions are 59% of
coal emissions, adjusted for efficiency. Paper
industry maximum potential reduction of
approximately 1.6 million tons. Extrapolate
to all industry, but assume few coal-fired
boilers outside of pulp and paper, resulting
in approximately 1.8 million ton maximum
reduction potential. This would need to be
adjusted for life-cycle emissions (e.g., if CHP
units lose efficiency, then purchased power
may increase.)
•

•

The following are very rough, ballpark
estimates of the general magnitude of
costs that might be expected with 100%
implementation of this mandate. Capital
costs are unknown, but would be substantial.
Energy operation costs could be expected to
increase by a factor of about 3.5, based on
the average annual price differential between
coal and natural gas in 2005 as reported
in Wisconsin Energy Statistics 2006. More
specifically, according to Wisconsin Energy
Statistics 2006:
•

Industry used 47.2 TBtu of energy
from coal

•

The price premium for natural gas is
$6.86/MBtu ($9.41 - $2.55)

•

The total cost of switching from coal
to gas would be $323,792,000

•

The paper industry accounts for
93.5% of industry coal purchases

•

$302,745,520 of the total cost would
be born by the paper industry

•

This does not include consideration
of a boiler efficiency penalty of 2-4%
for switching to gas

13. Related Policies:
•
•
•
•

Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization
Co-Generation Incentives and/or Mandates
for Construction, Upgrades and Replacement
Non-regulated Fuels Efficiency and
Conservation
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program

193

General Incentives for Industrial Energy
Conservation and Efficiency
Waste Materials Recovery and Disposal –
Wood Waste

Energy Intensity Reduction with Feebates
1. Work Group: Industry and Task Force Co-Chairs
Through the Strawman Proposal

business metric can be expressed as a production
factor, dollar of sales, number of employees or
some other agreed upon standard within each
sector. The goal is to reduce energy intensity
for each sector by 2% each year. In addition,
a feebate would be structured so that below
average performers pay a fee that would be fed
back to above average performers (or the sector)
to reimburse clean energy portfolio and carbon
footprint reduction costs.

2. Policy Name: Sector Based 2% Energy Intensity
Reduction with Feebate Provision (Energy Intensity
Reduction With Feebates)
3. Policy Type: Exploratory action
4		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Make available to a broad range of sectors and
entities

		
		 “Feebates” are economic instruments based upon
the principle that efficient use of resources should
be rewarded by the inefficient. Under this policy
option, a fee and a rebate would be combined in
such a way that the incentive drives reductions
in energy intensity while generating a source of
funds for clean energy portfolio investments that
help offset growth in sector energy demand. It
is important to note that feebates are revenueneutral, with sector fees paying the rebates, rather
than as a tax or budgetary item.
		
		 A sector based feebate might work something
like this: Each sector business or entity would
establish its’ baseline energy intensity per unit
of production (expressed as a ratio). This ratio is
adjusted each year by the average overall percent
reduction among all companies in the sector.
Companies whose ratio is below the average
percentage pay the feebate rate and those funds
are fed back to above average performers (or the
sector). The feebate “rate” might be based on
the state average electricity and natural gas rates.
For example, if the average overall percentage
reduction among all companies in a sector is
4% and a company’s reduction is only 3%, the
company pays a feebate equal to the difference
(1%) of their total annual energy bill.

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy and would
not result in any direct greenhouse gas (GHG)
reductions. An estimate of potential shows that
if Wisconsin industrial facilities reduced electric
energy use by 2%, it would result in an estimated
408,234 metric ton reduction in GHG emissions.
6. Estimated Costs: No additional costs in exploring
the level of interest in establishing Feebate
agreements under Green Tier.
		 Funding Sources: Exploration of this policy would
be completed within the DNR operating budget.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
DNR should explore the Sector Based 2% Energy
Intensity Reduction with Feebate Provision
proposal, as described below, with its advocates
and Green Tier participants. If there is significant
interest among Green Tier participants in pursuing
the proposal, they, together with the DNR, should
develop the program as part of Green Tier.
		 This proposal essentially combines two ideas:
First, that “everyone does their part” through a
minimum sector-wide 2% annual reduction in
energy intensity. Second, that we accommodate
growth in sector energy demand with further
investments in energy efficiency, renewable
technologies and other carbon footprint reducing
activities.

		 If the average overall percent reduction among
all companies in a sector in a particular year is
less than 2%, then each company would pay a
feebate equal to the difference between their
performance and the 2% reduction requirement.
Again, feebates would be earmarked to fund clean
energy and carbon footprint reduction projects
within each sector.
		

		 Each participating sector business or entity will be
required to reduce its energy intensity/electricity/
natural gas use per unit of output by at least 2%
per year on a continuing basis. The unit of output/

194

Specific Policy Options:
• Implement based upon 2007 benchmarked
energy use and production outputs.
• Provide a “Good Actor Clause” for those
sector companies with an exemplary track
record of energy efficiency so as to opt out of
the 2% requirement.
• Moreover, credit those companies that
already meet some threshold of energy
efficiency performance including: provisions
for energy audits, process efficiency
improvements, lighting retrofits and
continuous improvement.
• Provide opportunities for energy efficiency
mentoring by large companies for small
companies within sectors. Provide
participating companies with additional
regulatory flexibility or incentives for their
mentoring efforts.
• Provide marketing, promotion and branding
benefits for participating sectors and for the
state as a whole because of innovative energy
management and superior environmental
performance.
• Eventually fold into Midwestern Governor’s
Association goal requiring 2% in energy
efficiency improvements each year after 2015.

408,233.9625 metric tons. So, a 2% reduction in
2003 Wisconsin Industrial electricity sales would
yield an estimated 408,234 metric ton reduction
in GHGs.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Any
costs associated with DNR exploration of this
proposal will likely be limited to the near term.
		
If interest in the proposal warrants Green
Tier agreements, costs would include the
administration costs to negotiate sector
agreements, program start-up and ramp-up.
Sector management of goal setting, performance
tracking and reporting requirements will reduce
public administration costs. Utility feebate
collection and distribution would also reduce
public costs. Some third-party oversight of
sector performance will be required. A portion
of the fees collected may be allocated for public
outreach, marketing and promotional activities
to highlight best practices and recognize top
performers within sectors. An annual feebate
payment will be required for below average
performers. As an example: 1% - 2% of all
industrial electricity expenditures were $13 - $26
million in 2005. 1% - 2% of all industrial natural
gas expenditures were also about $13 - $26
million in 2005.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
The DNR should explore the proposal as soon as
practical.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Any barriers will
likely be identified during the exploration of this
proposal. These may include the following: (1)
some sectors may resist the idea of a feebate that
raises the price of below average performance
and lowers the price of above average
performance; (2) sectors must make energy
efficiency determinations that are meaningful and
account for large and small businesses within each
sector.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy and
would not result in any direct GHG reductions.
However, an estimate of potential GHG reductions
can be found looking at a theoretical 2%
reduction in 2003 Wisconsin industrial electricity
use. According to the Energy Information
Administration 2003 Wisconsin Industrial
Electricity Sales were 25,821,248 MWhs. 2%
of this total is roughly 516,425 MWhs. (That’s
25,821,248 MWhs X .02 = 516,424.96 MWhs)
		 Best practice for GHG estimates from electricity
consumption is to multiply total consumption by
the EPA eGrid electricity sub region emissions
rate average. An average of Wisconsin’s 3 sub
region averages generates an emissions factor
of approximately 0.7905 metric tons/MWh.
Therefore, we have the following calculation:
		 0.7905 metric tons/MWh X 516,425 MWhs =

12. Other Factors: If any Green Tier agreements are
developed utilizing this proposal, attention should
be given to any mandatory cap and trade program
that includes industrial sources to ensure that no
industrial sources are subject to both the cap and
trade policy and this policy over the same time
period.
13. Related Policies: None

195

Training for Green Jobs
1.		 Work Group: Industry
2.		 Policy Name: Training for Green Jobs
•
3.		 Policy Type: Enabling policy
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Industry, labor, educational institutions and state
agencies

B. Direct the Secretary of the DWD to assess the
proposed Federal Green Jobs Act, or other such
legislation, to determine whether the Wisconsin
Congressional delegation should be asked to
support the bill. If legislation is enacted, efforts
should be made to access funds for green job
training.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy to help
transition the state’s economy from carbon-based
to carbon-constrained. It does not result in any
direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions.
6.		 Estimated Costs: Costs were not estimated for
this policy

C. Request the Secretary of the Department of
Commerce to expand the focus of the existing
Customized Labor Training Program to expend at
least 10% of its funds for “green collar” training
and for support of converting manufacturing
operations to the production of renewable and
efficiency components.

		 Funding Sources: Reallocation of funds for work
force training and possible funding through
the Governor’s Clean Energy Wisconsin Plan’s
proposed Business and Job Development
initiatives. These include the Wisconsin Energy
Independence Fund, the Emerging Industry Skills
Partnerships, and Technical College Grants.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
• By September 2008, the Customized Labor
Training Program should be expending at least
the 10% targeted amount on green collar
training and job development.
• By January 2009, the report on Green Job
Training Programs should be submitted to the
Governor.

7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The thrust
of this policy proposal is to coordinate workforce
development for the emerging green jobs
sector. This proposal complements the initiatives
put forth in the Governor’s Plan for Energy
Independence, Clean Energy Wisconsin.
		
A. Direct the Secretary of the Department of
Workforce Development (DWD) to convene a
group to assess future training needs for the
emerging green jobs sector and to report back to
the Governor by January 2009.
•

•

fill these jobs (are there labor shortages, who
is looking for work and what skills do they
have and need).
The report should identify where changes are
needed and make recommendations for public
and private sector changes in structures and/
or allocation of funds to meet those training
needs.

9.		 Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: This is an enabling policy and does
not result in any direct GHG emission reductions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Costs
were not estimated for this policy

The group should include members from
employers, technical colleges, University
of Wisconsin-Extension, DWD Job Centers,
unions and other representatives
The group should assess what “green collar”
jobs exist and are emerging, the skills and
training needed to secure or advance into
these jobs, the readiness of the labor force to

11. Barriers to Implementation: The major barriers
in workforce development involve the level of
organization, facilitation and ongoing support that
is required for a successful program. Defining job
types and career ladders can be difficult; however,
convening groups under an appointee will help
ensure accountability.

196

12. Other Factors: The transition from a carbonbased to a carbon-constrained economy is likely to
create dislocations. By anticipating some of these
dislocations and being proactive, Wisconsin may
emerge as an economic leader.
13. Related Policies:
• Comprehensive Initiative to Support Voluntary
Long Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions
• Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program
• Enhanced Renewable Portfolio Standard

197

Cap and Trade Program
1.		 Work Group: Task Force Co-Chairs, building
on Carbon Tax / Cap and Trade Work Group’s
template

sector cap and trade program (C&T Program)
that establishes a price for greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions is essential to meet the emission goals
recommended by the Task Force. The Task Force
also recognizes that the C&T program should
cover the largest possible market. The most
preferable alternative would be a federal program
with a target effective date of 2012, that is
designed in a way that treats Wisconsin fairly and
recognizes that states such as Wisconsin, which
are highly dependent on coal for electricity and
have energy intensive industries, are likely to be
disproportionately affected, particularly during the
transition period to a low-carbon economy.

2.		 Policy Name: Broad-based, Multi-sector Cap and
Trade Program (Cap and Trade Program)
3.		 Policy Type: Legislation with regulatory
implementation and enforcement
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sectors: Electric generation, industrial,
commercial, residential, transportation, and
petroleum fuel industries.
Entities: Those with annual emissions of 25,000
metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e)
or greater.

The Task Force also recommends that Wisconsin
continue to participate and provide leadership
in the development of a Midwest Regional Cap
and Trade Program. Furthermore, Wisconsin
should promptly initiate the process for the
state to review, consider and take necessary
and appropriate action when a cap and trade
agreement and model rule are completed through
the MGA process. The Task Force recommends
against a Wisconsin-only cap and trade market,
since it is unlikely to have adequate diversity and
liquidity and would create competitive issues with
neighboring states.

5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Will be determined based on the
stringency of the cap, the sectors that are covered,
and the schedule.
6.		 Estimated Costs: Compliance costs will depend
on the stringency of the cap, the sectors that
are covered, and the schedule. The design of the
program will also affect costs. Design choices
affecting costs include:

•

Geographic scope of program (international,
national or regional)

•

Linkage with other cap and trade programs
(RGGI, Western Climate Initiative,
international)

•

Availability of offsets

•

Allowance distribution method

•

Flexibility options, such as banking and
borrowing

•

Other cost containment mechanisms, such as
“off-ramps”

•

		 With respect to a federal cap and trade program,
Wisconsin should advocate for the following,
subject to protecting the environmental integrity
of the program:
•

Any revenues realized by the federal
government from Wisconsin as a result of
allowance auctions – after a reasonable
contribution to federal R&D for GHG
reductions – should be returned to Wisconsin
to mitigate the disproportionate economic
impacts to Wisconsin consumers and
businesses.

•

Any free distribution of allowances and any
distribution of auction proceeds should favor
states that will be disproportionately impacted
by the program.

•

There should be substantial offset
opportunities which would enable Wisconsin
to reduce emissions from non-covered sources
and significantly increase its terrestrial sink
capacity.

Compliance Period

		 Funding Sources: Administrative costs will need
to be funded through either program revenues or
state operating budgets.
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: The
Task Force recognizes that a broad based multi-

198

•

•

States should be granted reasonable flexibility
on program implementation and should share
in its administration.

A. Scope of program.

Provisions should be developed to protect
industry from unfair competition from
competitors whose GHG emissions are not
regulated.

Continued focus on development of a regional
cap and trade program is important for a number
of reasons:

•

•

In the event that a federal program fails to
be adopted in a timely manner, participation
in a regional cap and trade program will
provide Wisconsin with the ability to meet the
statewide emission reduction targets.
The development of a regional C&T
program will increase pressure for prompt
development of a federal program, will
better inform the state and its stakeholders
about the key policy issues related to a cap
and trade program and will help to build
consensus within Wisconsin and the larger
Midwestern stakeholder community on
regional interests and needs. This will enable
the region to more effectively influence the
design of a federal program.

•

Include all 6 greenhouse gases

•

Covered sources include existing and new
point-source direct emitters of greenhouse
gases in the electric generation and other
industrial sectors as well as natural gas, diesel
fuel, and gasoline. The threshold level for
inclusion in the program would be annual
emissions of 25,000 metric tons of CO2e.

•

All electric energy imported to the state
would be subject to this cap.

•

The point of regulation should be the
emission source for the power and industrial
sector, the point of first sale for natural gas,
and the point where petroleum inspection
fees are applied for diesel fuel and gasoline.

•

Any regional program should be linked to
RGGI and the Western Climate Initiative.

B. Level of cap.
•

Design Elements for a Regional or Federal Cap
and Trade Program that Includes Wisconsin

The cap, and the rate of decrease of the cap,
should be set to be science-based, challenging
but achievable, and set to reach the state’s
emission reduction goals taking into account
the reductions that are reasonably expected
to be achieved by the other recommendations
of the Task Force.

C. Program structure, including the allocation
methodology for allowances.

The Task Force recommends that the design of
a cap and trade program involving Wisconsin,
whether it be part of a regional or a federal
program, include the features described below.
These recommendations are based on the
premise that the Enhanced Conservation and
Energy Efficiency Program is fully funded through
utility rates, that the Enhanced Renewable
Portfolio Standard has been enacted, and that the
revenues from the allowance fees and auction
proceeds are used as in the section “Use of
Revenues” described below. Furthermore, key
elements described below are not intended to
compromise the integrity or stringency of the cap
in any material way. Below are the recommended
key elements for a cap and trade program.

199

•

The program should be designed to (not in
order of priority):

•

Avoid windfalls, including but not limited to
those that would arise from over-allocation,

•

Prevent significant leakage,

•

Minimize speculation and prohibit and
prevent market manipulation,

•

Protect the environmental integrity of the
program and cost mitigation objectives, and

•

Reward efficiency and promote reductions of
emissions from existing sources.

•

The PSC should be required to ensure that the
value of all allowances provided to utilities

flow through to customers, not shareholders.
The fee for allowances should be regarded as
a recoverable cost of providing service.

F. Use of offsets.
•

The program should provide for broad
availability of offsets for emission reductions
from sources not covered by the program and
to significantly increase Wisconsin’s terrestrial
carbon sink capacity.

•

There should be stringent verification,
additionality, scientific credibility (i.e. the
reductions are “real”) and permanence
requirements (accounting for years of
effectiveness and insurance, etc.) pursuant to
a detailed set of offset protocols.

•

Wisconsin should begin developing such
offset protocols.

•

Some members of the Task Force believe
that limits should be set on the extent of
offsets that can be used to meet compliance
requirements.

D. Distribution of allowances.
•

•

•

•

For a transition period of up to the first ten
(10) years, a substantial majority of available
allowances (such as 90 percent) needed by
industry and Wisconsin utilities (including
municipal and cooperative utilities) should
be allocated to such entities in Wisconsin at a
fixed fee (such as $2 per allowance) adjusted
annually for inflation and the remainder of
the allowances should be auctioned.
The percentage of allowances allocated to
energy intensive industry subject to global
competition may be somewhat higher than
the percentage used for allocation to the
utilities for the first five (5) years of the
transition period. Alternatively, the level of
the fee may be somewhat lower for such
industry for such period.

G. Other cost containment measures.

Carbon dioxide emissions from biomass
facilities should not require allowances
under the program for all or a portion of the
transition period.
After the transition period, there should be a
gradual increase in the amount of allowances
to be auctioned.

•

Early action credit should be provided, subject
to clear verification requirements.

•

Unlimited banking, a compliance period of
three years, and a smooth annual step-down
of the cap to reach the Task Force targets
should be included.

•

A reasonably high allowance price cap, or
other cost containment measure, should be
included to provide protection against price
spikes.

•

None of these cost containment measures
should compromise the integrity or stringency
of the cap in any material respect – that is,
the emission reductions required by the C&T
program.

E. Use of revenues from allowance fees and auction
proceeds.
•

All fees for allowances and auction revenues
should be held in trust and be legally available
to be used solely to (1) fund programs and
investments to reduce GHG emissions that
lower the overall cost of achieving emission
reduction targets, including conservation and
efficiency investments; and (2) to support
climate change adaptation strategies. These
programs should include, but not be limited
to, the Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reductions that was recommended
in the Interim Report, and the existing
housing retrofit and rehabilitation, job
training and industrial competitiveness
programs recommended in the Final Report.

		 The above measures are intended to mitigate
what may be substantial initial cost impacts on
Wisconsin’s consumer and industrial base as
a result of uncertain GHG emission allowance
prices, particularly during the transition period
while low-carbon technologies are under
development. These design features are also
intended to ensure that the allowance value
is retained in Wisconsin, and not diverted to
financial firms or other jurisdictions, and to
enhance Wisconsin’s ability to achieve GHG

200

emissions in non-covered sectors, thus enhancing
the state’s terrestrial sequestration capacity. In
addition, these features are intended to help
garner the political support necessary for the
adoption of challenging emission reduction caps.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Wisconsin is one
of many stakeholders involved in the design of a
regional and/or federal cap and trade program.
The state’s role is one of advocating for our
interests in a larger political setting. Wisconsin
is one voice, among many, that will be trying to
influence the design of a federal cap and trade
program. While Wisconsin will have a stronger
voice in the development of a regional cap and
trade program, the challenge in advocating for a
program along the lines described in this template
will still be great.

		 Also, this recommendation recognizes that (1)
the allocation versus auction issue is highly
contentious and that Task Force members have
divergent, strongly held views on it; and (2)
positions taken on this issue by members of the
Task Force in the federal and MGA debates will
depend on other aspects of the program as they
develop, as well as positions that develop through
coalitions with which Task Force members may
ally. The purpose of this recommendation is to
recognize and emphasize the importance of cost
mitigation for Wisconsin consumers and industry
and to stimulate debate on ways to both protect
the environmental certainty of a cap and trade
approach and also provide funding for programs
needed to reach targets, with cost certainty and
protection, given the considerable uncertainty as
to prices and impacts of a large auction regime.

12. Other Factors: In drafting a regional program,
consideration should be given to policies to
minimize the potential for leakage which could
result through the shifting of generation to noncap and trade states.
		 It is also important to note that other
requirements and incentives for GHG reductions
in the covered sectors may reduce the financial
impact of the cap and trade programs. For
example, if the renewable portfolio standard
is substantially enhanced as proposed, GHG
emissions from electric generation would be
reduced, thereby decreasing the amount of
additional reductions needed to meet the cap.
Also, the use of monies raised by the allowance
fee and auction for GHG reducing activities
should further help Wisconsin meet its statewide
emission reduction goals.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option: The
Midwestern Governors Association timetable is
to have the development of a proposed cap and
trade agreement and a model rule completed
by November 2008. Wisconsin should promptly
initiate the process for the state to review,
consider and take such actions on the agreement
and model rule as are required and determined to
be appropriate.

13. Related Policies: All other recommendations of
the Task Force

The timetable for a federal cap and trade program
is uncertain.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The emission reductions will be
determined by the cap.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
administrative costs for this program are likely
to be significant, especially in the early years, to
establish the program.
For covered entities, the costs will include the
allowance fee (for example, $2 per allowance) and
any funds expended for auctioned allowances.
Compliance costs will be affected by the factors
described in section 6 as well as the nature
and effectiveness of other requirements and
incentives to reduce emissions.

201

Offset Program Design
1. Work Group: Carbon Tax / Cap and Trade

reductions, the offset program is believed to result
in “co benefits” – other environmental or societal
benefits beyond CO2e emission reductions.
The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
program under the Kyoto Protocol is an example
of a voluntary offset program. The European
Union Emissions Trading Scheme relies on the
Clean Development Mechanism under the Kyoto
Protocol for offset opportunities.

2. Policy Name: Recommended Design
Elements for an Offset Program as part of Cap
and Trade Regulatory Framework (Offset Program
Design)
3. Policy Type: Recommended design elements
for a program to track offset allowances (credits)
from certified emission reductions or carbon
sequestration projects that take place outside
the regulated program and meet specific
requirements.

The work group recommends specific aspects of
the design elements of the program include:
A. Administration. Offset projects can be
implemented by a party outside the regulated
cap and trade program. Offset projects can also
be implemented by a regulated entity through
activities outside their regulated portfolio.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric, Industry (all entities not captured
in the cap and trade program)
Sub-Sector: All Sectors
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This is an enabling policy which will not
result in any direct emission reductions.

B. Criteria. A project must demonstrate that
emission reductions would not otherwise have
occurred. Emissions reductions from a project
must be verified, quantified, enforceable and
permanent. The overarching program objective is
to have projects that result in certified offsets that
are compatible with and “recognized” by other
programs. It should be recognized that as GHG
policies develop, an increasing share of reductions
previously made voluntarily may become
mandatory and therefore no longer qualify as
offsets. Offset buyers must be aware of and plan
for this risk.

6. Estimated Costs: An offset program has
administrative costs. A project-by-project
evaluation could be quite costly, but these
administrative costs could be reduced through the
development of eligible project protocols.
Funding Sources: Administration costs could be
covered through fees paid by program participants
7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Design
elements for a voluntary offset program through
which non-regulated sources reduce, avoid or
sequester CO2 equivalent (CO2e) emissions. When
offsets are certified through the program they can
be purchased to be used as credits by regulated
entities participating in a trading program. By
monetizing offsets, the program encourages
emissions reductions from non-regulated sources
that otherwise would have little incentive to
change behaviors/processes. Further, by bringing
additional credits into the regulated program,
an offset program offers emitters in a trading
program increased compliance flexibility and
the opportunity to meet compliance targets at a
lower cost. As with other greenhouse gas (GHG)

C. Limitations. This issue is more fully addressed in
the Cap and Trade template.
D.

202

Scope. The offset program should be as
geographically broad as possible -- at a minimum
within the Midwest region. There should be
linkages to other existing programs such as RGGI
to expand the scope of the program. Protections
must be put in place to prevent double counting of
offsets in more than one program.
Qualifying offset projects for all six greenhouse
gases are allowed and will be adjusted based
on their respective global warming potentials
(GWP). The table below shows the GWP for the
recognized greenhouse gases: CO2, CH4, N2O,

hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and SF6.
World Resources Institute uses IPCC 1996 100
year global warming potentials, but as there may
be a migration to the more recent 2001 data in
the future, both are listed in the table below.

(similar to the RGGI protocol process). Likewise,
as new environmental regulations are adopted
and previously unregulated activities become
regulated, this administrative process would
be used to remove certain projects from the
eligibility list (similar to CDM).
In adopting protocols and making project
determinations, existing programs such as the
Kyoto Protocol CDM, RGGI, and the Chicago
Exchange should be considered. As an example,
the following types of projects have been deemed
eligible by RGGI:

E. Project Eligibility. Wisconsin currently has a
voluntary registry program that could serve as
an initial platform (with modification) to launch a
stand alone offset program.1
A set of protocols for determining project
eligibility based on existing standards and
scientific recommendations should be adopted
through a formal rulemaking process. Specific
projects not covered by the protocols would be
deemed eligible through an administrative process
overseen by the appropriate state authority

•

Reforestation, Afforestation and other land
use management changes;
• Landfill gas – methane capture and
destruction;
• Sulfur hexafluoride – reduction in fugitive
emissions from electricity
transmission and distribution
Comparison of 100-Year GWP Estimates from the IPCC's Second
equipment;
(1996) and Third (2001) Assessment Reports
• Farming operations – avoided
methane emissions.
2
3
Gas
1996 IPCC GWP
2001 IPCC GWP

Carbon Dioxide
Methane
Nitrous Oxide
HFC-23
HFC-125
HFC-134a
HFC-143a
HFC-152a
HFC-227ea
HFC-236fa
Perfluoromethane
(CF4)
Perfluoroethane
(C2F6)
Sulfur Hexafluoride
(SF6)

1
21
310
11,700
2,800
1,300
3,800
140
2,900
6,300
6,500

1
23
296
12,000
3,400
1,300
4,300
120
3,500
9,400
5,700

F. Equivalency. Offsets for
certified CO2e emissions
reductions should be awarded
on a one-to-one ton basis.

8. Timetables, Duration and
Stringency Option: In order
to encourage early emissions
reductions, there is a desire
to rapidly implement an offset
program. Assuming some type
of offset program is in place for
new emission sources prior to
implementation of a mandatory
cap and trade program, or as
part of a voluntary program,
implementation issues should
11,900
be limited. The program would
continue indefinitely.
22,200
The program can be more
or less stringent based upon
project eligibility and other
characteristics such as banking.
A key stringency issue will be whether there
is a limit placed on the percentage of offsets a
regulated entity can use to meet its emissions
reduction requirement.

9,200
23,900

1. Chapter NR437, Wis. Admin. Code
2. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change
1995: The Science of Climate Change (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1996).
3. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change
2001: The Scientific Basis (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2001).

203

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Reductions will depend on the
availability of offsets and associated costs.

verification/ownership must be balanced
against program costs and industry
confidentiality needs.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years:
In general, offsets will be pursued by entities
regulated under the cap and trade program to
the extent that offsets are available at a cost that
is lower than the cost of reducing emissions at
those sources. That cost will be reflected in the
allowance or credit cost.

13. Related Policies:
• Cap and Trade Program

11. Barriers to Implementation: An offset
program as part of a mandatory cap and trade
program will require authorizing legislation or
modification of existing rules. The major barrier
to implementation of this policy is developing a
strong verification, measurement and tracking
program. There will be policy disagreements
with respect to some key issues such as what
constitutes additionality, whether offset must be
permanent, and what percentage of offsets can
be used by a regulated entity to meet mandatory
reduction requirements.
12. Other Factors: An offset program can be complex
to design. The workgroup did not attempt
to reach consensus on, or develop specific
recommendations, with respect to the following
implementation issues:
•

•
•

•

•

Monitoring and Measurement: Eligible
project under the program must have
emissions reductions that are verified and
quantified, which will require monitoring and
measurement.
Additionality: Ownership rights must be
clarified to encourage program participation
and to minimize double counting.
Ownership Rights: Policy decisions must be
made with respect to the vintage (when
an offset was created) of offsets and
retrospective/prospective use.
Vintage: Banking of offset created under the
program allows participants more compliance
flexibility. Banking may speed overall
aggregate emissions reductions.
Transparency and Confidentiality: The desire
for transparency of offset measurement/

204

Incentives for Voluntary Programs
1. Work Group: Carbon Tax / Cap and Trade

would come from voluntary contributions from
citizens via a check off box on state tax forms and/
or on gas and electric utility bills.

2. Policy Name: Incentives for Voluntary Programs
3. Policy Type: Fiscal measure, financial incentives

D. Currently, uncertainty exists regarding the federal
tax deductibility for an entity that generates GHG
credits (e.g. emission credits and offset credits)
and permanently retires these allowances instead
of selling the allowances. The State, perhaps
working with the other Midwestern Governors,
should request an IRS ruling to eliminate this tax
uncertainty.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Use of voluntary programs can extend across a
broad range of sectors and entities.
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Actual greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions
will be dependent upon the voluntary program
selected, the implementation of incentives or
goals, and level of participation.

There are several existing voluntary emission
registry programs, each with different
requirements and characteristics. These programs
can be categorized into three categories: (A)
Registry; (B) Reduction Commitments; and (C) End
User Participation.

6. Estimated Costs: Direct costs will be a result of
any tax or other financial incentives to increase
participation in voluntary programs.
Indirect costs may include program administrative
costs. In addition, some voluntary programs
require third party verification, as well as program
enrollment fees and annual membership fees.
Actual costs can vary significantly depending on
the program, sector and entity.

A. Registry Programs
A registry program provides a platform to report
emissions and projects to reduce emissions. The
table on page 206 summarizes the voluntary
registry programs that we are aware of:

Funding Sources: Direct costs for fiscal measures,
financial incentives or other governmental action
may come from state revenues. Indirect costs
would be borne by program participants.

B. Programs Requiring Reduction Commitments
The table on page 207 summarizes the voluntary
programs with binding reduction commitments
that we are aware of:

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Specific
recommendations include:

C. End User Participation Voluntary Programs
End use customers could be provided
opportunities to voluntarily pay a fee or donation
that could be used to reduce emissions. An
example of this would be Pacific Gas and Electric’s
(PG&E) recent launching of “ClimateSmart” a
voluntary program where PG&E’s residential
and business customers can help to fund
environmental projects aimed at removing GHGs
from the air or avoiding the emissions in the first
place. Customers who enroll will pay a separate
amount on their monthly utility bills to remove
or avoid the equivalent CO2 associated with their
energy use - thus making them “climate neutral”.
The amount a customer will pay for ClimateSmart
will be determined after a calculation of exactly

A. Wisconsin should implement financial incentives
(such as tax incentives) to encourage organizations
in the state of Wisconsin to participate in
voluntary emission registry programs to track and
reduce green house gas (GHG) emissions.
B. Wisconsin should explore taking a leadership role
by participating in the Chicago Climate Exchange
for the emissions of the State owned and operated
facilities and activities. Any credits obtained by the
State for reductions could be retired.
C. The State should create a fund that could be used
to purchase and retire GHG emissions. Funding

205

DOE 1605(b)
Program

WDNR Voluntary
Emission Reduction
Registry

The Climate Registry

Business Environmental
Leadership Council

U.S. Climate
Action
Partnership

Website

www.eia.doe.
gov/oiaf/1605/
frntvrgg.html

http://dnr.wi.gov/
air/vol/registry/

www.
theclimateregistry.org

www.pewclimate.org/
companies_leading_
the_way_belc

www.us-cap.
org

Reported
Quantity

Total emissions
and/or emission
reductions

Emission reductions

Total emissions

Not specified

N/A

Reporting
Scope

Direct emissions;
indirect emissions
from electricity
purchases

Avoided emissions

Direct emissions;
indirect emissions
from electricity
purchases (optional if
for resale)

Not specified

N/A

Baseline

Optional reporting
of 1987 – 1990
baseline

Average annual
To be selected by
emissions for 2 years reporting organization
prior to reduction
(for efficiency
and renewables
– average WI
generating system
emission rate)

N/A

N/A

Target

N/A

N/A

Considering “sectorspecific metrics” to
be developed in the
future.

Organizations
encouraged to set
reduction targets

N/A

Inventory
Protocol

Program-specific
protocol based on
WRI/WBCSD1

Various acceptable
protocols, including
WRI/WBCSD1

Program-specific
protocol being
developed. Draft
expected in late
October.

Not specified

N/A

Third-Party
Verification

Optional

Optional

Required

N/A

N/A

Offsets

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Reporting
Requirements

Annual reports

Annual reports

Annual Reports

Not specified

N/A

Membership
Fee

No

No

Annual fee required.
No
Fee based on revenue/
budget of reporting
organization.

Other
Administrative
Costs
Comments

Third party verification
costs.
Original 1994
program guidelines
replaced with
more-stringent
2007 guidelines.
Revised reporting
software being
developed.

Newly-formed
organization of 40+
states, etc. Expects
to begin accepting
reporting data in
January, 2008.

206

No

EPA Climate Leaders

Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX)

DOE Climate Vision

Website

www.epa.gov/climateleaders

www.chicagoclimateexchange.com

http://www.climatevision.gov/

Reported
Quantity

Total emissions

Total emissions

GHG intensity

Reporting Scope

Facility wide inventory including
all direct emissions and indirect
emissions from purchased electricity
and steam. Can opt-in other indirect
sources.

Direct emissions from fossil fuel
Sector identifies scope. Can
combustion. Can opt-in reporting of include direct emissions,
indirect emissions.
avoided emissions, sequestered
emissions, etc. converted to GHG
intensity.

Baseline

Most recent year available when
organization joins program

1998-2001 or 2000

2002

Target

Individualized goal (absolute or
intensity) developed by organization
and EPA – must be aggressive
relative to EPA sector benchmarks.
Longer term goal to be achieved
over 5 to 10 years.

New member reduction (absolute)
from baseline:
2007: 1.5%
2008: 3%
2009: 4.5%
2010: 6%
Allowance credits awarded
if reductions exceed targets.
Allowances purchased if reductions
do not meet targets.

Target of 18% reduction in GHG
intensity by 2012 from 2002.
Sectors identify commitment
level.

Inventory
Protocol

Program-specific protocol based on
WRI/WBCSD1

Program-specific protocol based on
WRI/WBCSD1

Work plan identifies protocols
and methodologies used to
determine GHG intensity and
action to reduce emissions.

Third-Party
Verification

Optional. If conducted is at partner’s
expense.

Third party verification of baseline
and annual emissions included as
part of membership

N/A

Offsets

Optional

Can be included if an approved
offset project.

N/A

Reporting
Requirements

Inventory Management Plan for EPA
approval; annual inventory reports

Annual reporting

Develop work plans and provide
periodic reports to DOE when
requested.

Membership Fee

No

Enrollment fees and annual
membership fee Membership fee
based on size of emission baseline.

No

Other
Administrative
Costs

Third part verification costs, if
conducted.

Third party verification for offset
projects is the responsibility of the
project sponsor.

Comments

Program will provide up to 80
hours of technical assistance to
develop and document inventory
management plan. Can include
an on-site visit. After completion
of base year inventory, EPA can
provide up to 10 hours of technical
assistance in subsequent years.

- Market based trading scheme.
- Associate membership available
to small businesses, office-based
firms and non-governmental
organizations.

207

Voluntary sector initiative.
Implementation can be
coordinated for a sector by
business organizations and/or
trade groups.

how many pounds of GHG emissions the
customer’s electricity and natural gas usage
produces. PG&E estimates that the cost for the
average residential customer will be less than
$5 per month. Prior to enrolling, all customers
can view an estimate of their carbon emissions
via a new carbon footprint calculator on PG&E’s
ClimateSmart website.

voluntary programs in the state/region.
Actual costs for reduction can vary significantly
depending on the program, sector and entity and
will likely change over time.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Some major
barriers to implementation at this time are: lack
of incentive to participate, lack of awareness
of the existing voluntary programs, concern of
internal records/data to be able to demonstrate
emissions and subsequent reductions, and risk
of early actions not being counted in subsequent
mandatory program.

8. Timetables, Duration and Contingency Option:
Due to a number of voluntary programs that
are currently operational, some WI entities
are already participating in these programs.
Development of incentives, goals and/or activities
to increase awareness of such programs could
likely be started within 6 months. Duration of this
initial implementation phase would be dependent
upon actual incentives and/or goals that may be
used and the nature and intensity of awareness
activities.

A. Lack of incentives. There are no direct financial
incentives to participate in a voluntary program at
this time. Direct financial incentives would likely
increase participation and the amount of GHG
reductions that could be obtained via a voluntary
program. An example of a direct financial
incentive would be a state tax incentive.

Long term duration range is flexible. Use of
voluntary programs could be used a long term
tool or could be used as a transition mechanism
to allow actions to be taken in Wisconsin while
a regional or national program is developed and
implemented.

B. Lack of awareness. Most of the programs are
relatively new and interest in green house gas
emissions has historically not been wide spread
and the awareness and familiarity with the various
voluntary programs is limited. Recently, interest
has increased and is expected to continue to
increase with national and regional debates taking
place on green house gas policies. Participation in
the voluntary programs would likely increase with
more education and awareness of the various
voluntary programs. State outreach efforts to
increase awareness of voluntary programs may
result in increased interest and participation
across all sectors.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Reductions are difficult to project
at this time. Existing voluntary programs have
demonstrated varying success with reductions.
Reductions will vary based on individual programs,
sectors, and entity. Reductions can be impacted
positively with incentives and or goals and greater
awareness of the existing voluntary programs.
For example, the actual emission reductions
received under the CCX program compared to the
reduction target is summarized in the table below.

C. Concern with increased administrative burden.
If facilities have not had a need to track certain
activities and/or retain certain records, the
information is often either not available,
difficult to obtain, and possibly not complete
or accurate. Minimizing the amount of history
required and creating awareness of record
keeping requirements would help minimize these
concerns.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: With
several voluntary programs already operational,
start up costs would be relatively limited; the
administrative costs for participating in various
programs are borne by the participant. There
could be costs to the state should incentives be
implemented to encourage participation in a
voluntary programs, such as tax incentives. Costs
could also be incurred to increase awareness of

D. Early action. Risk of early actions not being
credited under a Federal mandatory program,

208

however this may be mitigated to some degree
with large enough financial incentives. In order to
further mitigate any concerns with early actions,
The State of Wisconsin should engage in the
debate and stand behind early action programs to
encourage recognition of early actions in a Federal
Program.
12. Other Factors: The use of existing voluntary
programs would seem to be a good transition
mechanism to allow actions to be taken in
Wisconsin almost immediately while a regional or
national program is developed and implemented.
Voluntary programs could be used to support and
facilitate potential solutions that may arise from
other task force subcommittees.
Other positive aspects of voluntary programs are:
A. Allow for actions to be implemented in a relatively
short time frame since programs are currently
available.
B. Minimize the cost impacts of the reducing
emissions for those entities that would have
difficulty absorbing increased costs at this time.
C. Aid in creating awareness and education of the
public on green house gas issues and solutions.
D. Reduces State resources needed for the
development and implementation of a State-run
regulatory/mandatory program.
E. Create initial incentives for sources to participate.
13. Related Policies: None

209

Co-Generation Incentives and/or Mandates
1.		 Work Group: Ad-hoc Co-Generation
2.		 Policy Name: Incentives and/or mandates
for Co-Generation / Combined Heat and
Power (CHP) construction, upgrades, and/or
replacement (Co-Gen)
3.		 Policy Type: Incentives, information and
regulatory changes to encourage investment in
CHP generation and distribution systems.
4.		 Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Sector: Electric utility and industry
Sub-Sector: Distribution utilities and industrial
facilities
5.		 Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This policy is estimated to result in
the deployment of 250 MW of CHP by 2020
and an additional 250 MW of CHP by 2030. The
deployment of these CHP units will result in a
reduction of 1.1 million metric tons of carbon
dioxide equivalents (CO2e) by 2020 and 2.1
million metric tons of CO2e by 2030 compared to
business-as-usual.
6 . Estimated Costs: The increase in annual cost (in
2007 $) to deploy the CHP policy is estimated
to range from $53 million/yr to $71 million/yr
by 2020, and $106 million/yr to $143 million/
yr by 2030. These estimates are based on the
projected costs for deploying 5 units of 50 MW
by 2020 and an additional 5 units of 50 MW by
2030. In addition, feasibility studies are expected
to cost up to $250,000 per industrial site.
		 Funding Sources: State government operating
budgets and Focus on Energy programs
7.		 Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Establish
policies, incentives and information to identify
and install new CHP systems and to facilitate
the decommissioning of older, high emission
sources and the replacement of these units with
CHP systems. Emphasis should be on projects
that maximize the thermal host load in order
to maximize efficiencies. Potential candidates
include the cyclone boiler installations within
Wisconsin. This policy does not include the
retirement and replacement or repowering of
electrical utility boilers, an option incorporated

into the planning forum recommendation from
the Electric Generation and Supply Work Group.
		 Specific components of the policy proposal
include the following:
A. Conduct a review of applicable statutes and
regulations for provisions that might preclude
or inhibit the entry by electric utilities into
contractual arrangements with large customers
located in their service territories for the sale
of electricity and steam from CHP systems.
This review, to be conducted by the PSC, would
include Wis. Stat. §196.192 (market-based
compensation, rates and contracts). If necessary,
amend statutes or regulations to remove such
obstacles to the development of CHP systems.
B. Fund site specific feasibility studies through
Focus on Energy regarding industrial boiler
retirement and/or installation of CHP systems.
C. Consider incentive programs through Focus on
Energy to provide funding for the installation of
CHP systems.
D. To provide information for utilities and
developers considering CHP or district heating
projects, conduct and publish the results of
a statewide survey of large users of thermal
energy. To provide information for industries
with thermal energy requirements seeking
to site new facilities, this survey would also
report on existing and potential generating
facilities capable of supplying thermal energy.
The information obtained in the survey
would be made available to local economic
and infrastructure planning entities. In order
to keep the information current, establish a
voluntary registry in which industries can report
their thermal needs and owners of generating
facilities can report their capabilities for
providing cogenerated thermal energy.
E. Conduct an evaluation of regulatory obstacles
to the installation of CHP systems and other
projects to improve utility plant efficiency and
maximize the utilization of biomass fuel. This
evaluation, to be conducted by the DNR, would
focus on air permitting requirements such as
New Source Review and Best Available Retrofit

210

Technology requirements that might discourage a
plant owner from considering or proceeding with
projects of this nature.
F.

A. Capital Cost. Compared to an electric-only
facility, a CHP facility has a higher capital cost.
This additional cost results from a number of
factors, including (1) the direct cost of the thermal
production and delivery facilities; (2) the need to
locate the plant near the thermal host, limiting
siting options; and (3) the need to match the
plant’s electrical output to the thermal demand in
order to maximize efficiency, generally resulting in
a smaller than optimal electric generating facility.
Recovering this additional capital cost as part of
the price charged to a thermal host would likely
make the thermal energy price uncompetitive
if the thermal host would otherwise obtain
thermal energy from an existing plant. A potential
thermal host contemplating the installation of
a new facility, or required to replace or retrofit
an existing thermal energy plant, would likely be
willing to pay a higher price for thermal energy
in order to avoid these capital expenditures.
However, limiting the potential thermal hosts
to those with such circumstances significantly
reduces the number of sites available for CHP
facilities.

Establish tax incentives to encourage the siting of
industrial facilities at locations from which they
can utilize thermal energy cogenerated by existing
generating facilities. These generating facilities
would include existing CHP plants that are capable
of supplying additional thermal output, power
plants that are capable of being retrofitted
to supply cogenerated thermal output, and
unutilized utility plants at industrial facilities (such
as paper mills) that have been shut down.

G. As part of the Enhanced Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS) policy, expand the definition of
renewable resources to encourage the installation
of CHP systems and other clean technologies.
H. Conduct a study of Wisconsin Department of
Administration steam generating facilities to
attempt to identify one or more sites at which
existing steam facilities can be replaced with CHP
plants. The economic analysis of the potential
replacement of existing facilities should consider
the risks and costs of compliance with future GHG
regulations.

B. Operating Cost. Despite its higher efficiency,
a gas-fired CHP facility would be unlikely to
produce thermal energy at a cost that would be
competitive with a coal-fired thermal plant, or
to produce electricity that would be competitive
with the market price of electricity during off-peak
periods. The CHP facility owner would be required
either to operate at an economic loss on the
production of electricity during off-peak periods,
or to install a backup thermal energy source, such
as an auxiliary boiler, to supply thermal energy
and allow the CHP facility to be shut down during
these periods. Doing so, however, would increase
the capital cost of the facility and reduce its
average efficiency advantage relative to separate
electricity and thermal energy production. A coalor biomass-fired CHP facility would have a lower
operating cost than a gas-fired facility, allowing
economical operation during off-peak periods, but
would have a higher capital cost than a gas-fired
facility. In addition, the GHG reduction benefit of a
coal-fired CHP facility displacing gas-fired thermal
energy production would likely be marginal, at
best.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Funding for individual feasibility studies
should be made available as soon as possible.
Implementation of policies and investment in
projects take place over the following 10 - 20
years.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: Emission reductions are based on
an assumption of the installation of 500 MWs of
CHP projects with a capacity factor of 85% and an
effective heat rate of 4,900 Btu/kWh.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: Costs
are based upon estimated capital costs for 50
MW combined-cycle CHP facilities adjusted for
increased efficiencies due to co-generation (4,900
Btu/kWh heat rate). Incremental administrative
costs of implementing CHP policies are estimated
to be negligible.
11. Barriers to Implementation: Policies to
encourage the installation of additional CHP
facilities must overcome a number of inherent
barriers:

C. Thermal Host Risk. The economics of a CHP
facility depend upon the continued viability of the
facility’s thermal host. The loss of a thermal host
would make a CHP facility a relatively inefficient

211

electric generating facility. A utility or developer
contemplating the installation of a CHP facility
must take the risk that the thermal host’s facility
will remain in operation throughout the life
of the CHP facility. A CHP facility with multiple
thermal hosts, such as a district heating system,
would face less risk from the loss of any single
thermal host, but the additional thermal energy
distribution infrastructure required to serve
multiple thermal hosts would result in higher
capital costs for such a facility.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•
•

Enhanced RPS
Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization

212

Enhanced Water Efficiency and Conservation
1. Work Group: Ad Hoc Water Conservation

various water supply and wastewater treatment
options. Finally, the energy savings that could
be achieved through water conservation and
efficiency efforts have not traditionally been
considered in energy efficiency programs.

2. Policy Name: Enhanced Water Efficiency and
Conservation
3. Policy Type: State agency-initiated efforts to
coordinate water conservation and efficiency with
energy efficiency programs to reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions.

The State of Wisconsin is already implementing
water conservation and efficiency measures.
Specifically, the PSC is assisting water utilities in
developing water conservation and efficiency
programs, including using innovative rate
structures to promote water efficiency. In addition,
2003 Act 310, the Groundwater Law, and the Great
Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources
Compact will require water conservation and
efficiency measures for new or increased water
withdrawals. Finally, the DNR, the PSC, and the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce are working
with the Council of Great Lakes Governors to
develop water conservation goals and objectives
for the Wisconsin portion of the Great Lakes basin.

4. Affiliated Sectors, Sub-sectors and/or Entities:
Public water and wastewater utilities, waterintensive industries, agriculture, and residential
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: Preliminary estimates suggest emission
savings of 16,800 tons of CO2 equivalents per 1%
reduction in water use by water utility customers
statewide.
6. Estimated Costs: To be determined
Funding Sources: A small scale pilot program
could be funded by individual water utilities, with
the approval of the PSC. Alternatively, funding
options for a broader statewide effort include:
•

Requesting funding through the biennial
budget process as part of the Great LakesSt. Lawrence River Basin Water Resource
Compact

•

Assessing a fee on water and wastewater
utility customers, similar to the model used by
the Focus on Energy program

•

•

Policies and programs that encourage enhanced
coordination among water and energy efficiency
programs would lead to measurable water savings,
protect important water resources, and reduce
GHG emissions. Thus, GHG emission reductions
attributable to water conservation efforts
should be considered as part of the Task Force’s
recommendations. The types of activities that
could be incorporated into an enhanced effort
include:
•

Collecting a one-time fee from persons
constructing residential, agricultural,
industrial, and municipal wells

Rebates or other incentives to utility
customers to purchase, install, and use waterefficient products and services

•

Allocating a portion of Focus on Energy funds
specifically for water projects, if the Task Force
recommends an increase in program funding

Technical and financial assistance to water
utilities in developing water conservation and
efficiency plans

•

Technical and financial assistance to large
water users to assist with identifying solutions
for reducing their water and energy use

•

Technical and financial assistance to
wastewater utilities to capture energy from
anaerobic digestion

•

Education and outreach materials, including
K-12 educational programs

•

Research on water efficient technologies and
practices

•

Establishing a sales tax on bottled water and
similar products

•

No new funding

7. Specific Policy Description: Water conservation
and use efficiency is an important component
of long-term water supply planning. However,
funding to assist with water efficiency efforts is
limited. Furthermore, there has been little effort
to evaluate the energy and GHG implications of

213

The Task Force could consider a number of
recommendations to implement such activities.
Some of these may require statutory changes,
while others could be implemented by state
agencies under existing authorities. These options
include:
•

Creating an independent, statewide Focus on
Water program

•

Implementing a Focus on Water program
as one component of the Focus on Energy
program

•

Establishing a limited, regional program in
an area of water supply concern, such as
southeastern Wisconsin

•

Establishing water conservation and efficiency
programs as a pilot project at an individual
water or wastewater utility

Energy program could potentially be implemented
in the next program year, unless statutory changes
are required. Any of the proposed options that
require statutory changes could not be expected
to start in the next year.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The production, distribution, use,
collection, treatment, and disposal of water
requires significant energy inputs to power
motors, pumps, and other infrastructure. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates
that 3.0% of national energy consumption - or
approximately 56.0 billion kWh per year - is used
for drinking water and wastewater.1 The amount
of energy required to produce drinking water or
treat wastewater varies depending on system
characteristics.
Figure 1 provides a conceptual model for the
water and wastewater system. National studies
estimate that the extraction, treatment, and
conveyance of drinking water require about 1.5
kWh2 to 2.0 kWh3 per 1,000 gallons. Similarly,
one EPA estimate suggests that the collection,
treatment, and discharge of wastewater requires
approximately 11.75 kWh/1,000 gallons.2

The Task Force could also recommend that state
agencies continue their efforts to coordinate
existing water and energy efficiency programs.
One option is to incorporate water conservation
into Focus on Energy program planning and
potential studies. Another option is to continue
to identify opportunities to use Focus on Energy
funds for water-related projects that result in
GHG reductions, such as capturing methane from
wastewater anaerobic digesters, or projects that
result in both energy and water savings, such as
rebates for dishwashers and clothes washers.
A third option would be for Focus on Energy
advisors to incorporate water efficiency elements
into the checklists that are used when exploring
opportunities for residential, commercial, and
industrial energy efficiency projects. In addition,
the PSC could improve its tracking of water
savings generated by these types of projects.
Finally, the PSC could explore options for allowing
the Focus on Energy program to consider off-site
and secondary energy benefits, such as reduced
pumping costs, for projects that have a water use
reduction component.

Based on annual reports filed with the PSC,
energy costs represent approximately 10.5% of
overall operation and maintenance expenses for
public water utilities. From 2001 through 2006,
Wisconsin water utilities pumped an average
of 212.5 billion gallons per year, using 374.4
million kWh, for an average of 1.8 kWh/1,000
gallons. The Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage
District estimates that it uses approximately
7.8 kWh/1,000 gallons of wastewater. Based
on these data, it is reasonable to conclude
that the entire water system from source to
discharge requires about 10 kWh/1,000 gallons in
Wisconsin.
Reductions in energy use and GHG emissions
may be readily attainable through existing
water-saving technologies. For example, EPA
estimates that retrofitting just one out of every
100 American homes with water-efficient fixtures
would save about 100 million kWh of electricity

8. Timetable, Duration and Stringency Option:
Concerning stringency, none of the options
included in this policy proposal recommend
mandatory end-user water restrictions. A pilot
water conservation program at one or more
utilities could begin within a year and continue
for a long enough period of time to study its
effectiveness. Changes to the existing Focus on

1. EPA, 2008, http://www.epa.gov/waterinfrastructure/bettermanagement_energy.html.
2. “Ensuring a Sustainable Future: An Energy Management Guidebook for Water and Wastewater Utilities,” EPA, January 2008.
3. Pacific Institute, 2004, Water to Air Models, http://www.
pacinst.org/resources/water_to_air_models/index.htm

214

per year and avoid 80,000 tons of CO2 equivalent
emissions.4 Using these figures proportionately
based on Wisconsin’s share of the 2007
national population,5 this modest level of water
conservation in Wisconsin could result in savings
of 1.9 million kWh of electricity per year and avoid
1,520 tons of CO2 equivalent emissions.

Carbon dioxide is produced in both aerobic and
anaerobic wastewater treatment processes.
Methane is produced in the anaerobic treatment
of wastewater. In many cases, this methane
leaks to the atmosphere or is burned without
recapturing its energy benefits. Addressing these
sources may be another effective strategy for
reducing GHG emissions related to water and
wastewater utilities. For example, reductions in
GHG emissions could be achieved by reducing the
biologic oxygen demand of wastewater flowing to
the treatment plant and by capturing energy from
methane generated by the treatment process.

Looking more broadly at all water uses, a 1%
reduction in water pumped by Wisconsin utilities
would equate to savings of approximately 2 billion
gallons per year. Based on the 10 kWh/1,000
gallons estimate cited, each 1% reduction in water
use would translate into savings of roughly 20
million kWh and 16,800 tons of CO2 equivalent
emissions.

Actual GHG reductions that could be expected
as a result of ongoing or enhanced water
conservation and efficiency programs in Wisconsin
require further evaluation.

In addition, the processes commonly used to
treat wastewater contribute to GHG emissions.

Figure 1: Process Diagram for Water Production, Use, and Treatment

4. EPA, 2008, http://www.epa.gov/watersense/water/benefits.
htm
5. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007, http://factfinder.census.gov/. Wisconsin’s estimated 2007 population was 5.6 million, or 1.9% of the
U.S. total of 301.6 million.

215

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: To be
determined

Wisconsin should not rely solely on utility-focused
programs to promote water conservation.
Research, technology transfer, and education
are also needed. A public education campaign
could raise awareness about the benefits of water
conservation and efficiency and the availability
of useful information about best practices
and technologies from sources such as EPA’s
WaterSense program.

11. Barriers to Implementation: Statewide
implementation of enhanced water conservation
and efficiency efforts may be hindered by the
fragmentation of the Wisconsin water and
wastewater industry. Currently, more than 580
public water utilities and 600 municipal sewer
systems serve only half of the state’s residents.
The rest of the state’s residents are served by
private wells and septic systems. As a result,
identifying an equitable source of funding may be
controversial.

13. Related Policies: The Task Force could consider
minor expansion of other templates to encompass
water-related opportunities. These include the
Enhanced Conservation and Energy Efficiency
Program template and both of the building code
templates developed by the conservation and
efficiency work group. Opportunities for energy
recovery at wastewater treatment plants could
be included in the Advanced Renewable Tariff
template.

Public utilities and municipal sewer systems
likely will oppose efforts to assess fees on their
customers. Private well and septic system owners
are not currently charged an ongoing rate or fee,
making collection of additional funding from these
users controversial. Further, well permitting fees
collected by the DNR are used to fund existing
programs. Finally, electric utilities might oppose
using Focus on Energy dollars to pay for water
conservation and efficiency projects that result in
only indirect energy savings.
Some water utilities have expressed concern that
water conservation programs, if successful, will
result in reduced revenues and increased water
rates. These utilities may not support a statewide
water conservation program. However, the PSC
could explore options for mitigating the negative
revenue effects of conservation, including more
frequent rate cases or innovative rate-making
policies.
Current law may not allow the Focus on Energy
program to consider the energy saved by
utilities as a result of reduced water use. As a
result, legislation to allow the Focus on Energy
program to account for off-site or secondary
energy benefits may be needed. Development
of new, dedicated funding sources for any of
the recommended initiatives would also require
legislation.
12. Other Factors: Some models show that global
warming could contribute to water shortages
in Wisconsin. Water conservation practices
implemented throughout the state will help
Wisconsin adapt to any climatic changes. Because
many homes and businesses get their water
from wells and are not water utility customers,

216

Paper Waste
1. Work Group: Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery
and Disposal

when more materials were recycled instead of
landfilled.
Funding Sources: Any incremental DNR and
municipal costs would be absorbed in operating
budgets. All other costs would be borne by the
private sector and/or consumers.

2. Policy Name: Increased paper recycling (Paper
Waste)
3. Policy Type: Regulation/legislation, incentives

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy would reduce GHG emissions by diverting
more recyclable paper from Wisconsin landfills
through a graduated expansion of existing
landfill paper bans in conjunction with increased
outreach, enforcement and incentives.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Landfill operators, waste and recycling haulers,
municipalities, residents, businesses, paper
industry
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: The following table presents a rough
estimate of the savings in GHG emissions if 50 or
75% of recyclable paper generated in Wisconsin
and currently going to Wisconsin landfills were
recycled instead. The calculations are based on a
2002 DNR study and U.S. EPA life-cycle analysis of
waste management alternatives.

Unrecovered paper represents 20.8% by weight
of the in-state municipal solid waste stream in
Wisconsin, or about 990,000 tons per year. While
some of this paper is either non-recyclable or
too contaminated to be recycled, the majority is
recyclable cardboard, newspapers, magazines,
office paper and mixed paper, all of which are
commodities with active markets and high market

6.

Annual reductions in GHG emissions from paper diverted from landfills to recycling
Material
Mixed recyclable paper
Recyclable cardboard
Newspaper
High-grade paper (office paper)
Magazines
TOTALS

Tons1
Landfilled
201,715
188,176
92,270
65,585
47,381
595,127

Total savings
Emissions factor2
(MTCO2e) if 50%
(MTCO2e/ton)
recycled
-3.89
380,908
-3.51
331,225
-1.92
87,963
-4.79
157,516
-2.77
66,018
1,023,630

Total savings
(MTCO2e) if 75%
recycled
571,355
496,786
131,949
236,273
99,026
1,535,389

demand.

Estimated Costs: Costs for landfill operators,
waste and recycling haulers, municipalities and
businesses could increase if additional equipment
or changes to administrative procedures to divert
paper from landfills to recycling centers are
needed. Some of these costs could be recovered
through the sale of recyclable paper. DNR costs
would increase due to expanding its inspection
and enforcement program. The state (and some
local governments) would lose tipping fee revenue

Wisconsin law currently bans several types
of recyclable paper from landfill disposal or
incineration. However, mixed recyclable paper is
not included in the bans, and the ban on officetype paper does not apply to households. While
the recycling rates (ranging from 28 to 72%) for
the banned paper materials are high compared
to many other states, significant amounts are still
going into landfills each year.

1. From DNR 2002 Waste Characterization Study, http://dnr.wi.gov/
org/aw/wm/recycle/studies/index.html
2. From Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases: A LifeCycle Assessment of Emissions and Sinks (3rd ed.), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/waste/
SWMGHGreport.html

The Governor’s Task Force on Waste Materials
Recovery and Disposal recommended increased
recovery of scrap (recyclable) paper in Wisconsin.

217

The Task Force urged that the paper recycling
requirements be expanded to include mixed waste
paper and be more strongly enforced, especially
for the business/commercial sector and for
office paper coming from households. With that
in mind, in order to increase the recycling rates
for paper and thus reduce GHG emissions, this
proposal would:

reductions are due to increased forest carbon
sequestration as forests are left intact rather than
harvested for paper production. Because of the
life-cycle approach, not all emissions reductions
would occur within Wisconsin, though the state
would share in global benefits from reduced GHGs
and there would be a potential to incorporate
credits for waste management alternatives into a
cap-and-trade system.

A. Add “mixed recyclable paper” to the list of paper
categories required to be recovered by effective
recycling programs in Wisconsin (i.e. add it to the
list of banned items in s. 287.07(3) and (4), Wis.
Stats.) and remove the exception for office paper
coming from households.

The estimates are based on data from the DNR’s
2002 Waste Characterization Study, which
estimated the amounts of materials generated
and landfilled in Wisconsin each year. Estimates of
50% and 75% of landfilled recyclable paper were
used to represent increased recycling as expanded
landfill bans on paper were phased in. Next,
these tonnages were multiplied by emissions
factors calculated by the U.S. EPA using a life-cycle
analysis for each category of recyclable paper.
These emissions factors represent the difference,
in metric ton carbon dioxide equivalents
(MTCO2e), of recycling compared with landfilling a
material.

B. Increase education and outreach on paper
recycling to households and businesses, improve
collection services in areas or business sectors
that are underserved, and create incentives and
enforcement strategies for paper recycling.
C. After implementing the above measures, if a
new waste characterization study shows that
significant amounts of paper are still being
landfilled, consider stronger measures to recover
paper, such as a prohibition of landfill disposal
of more than incidental quantities of recyclable
paper.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: With
paper being diverted from landfills to recycling,
the state would lose tipping fee revenues.
Currently, the state receives $4/ton from a
recycling tipping fee and $1.90/ton from other
fees (principally an environmental repair fee) for
solid waste disposed of at Wisconsin landfills. The
table below shows the lost revenue under the 50
and 75% recycling scenarios. Aggregate annual
revenue generated by the fees is approximately
$45 million.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Options:
Development and passage of legislation would
take at least one year. The expanded landfill
bans would need to be phased in to allow local
governments time to educate residents and
landfills and the DNR to design and implement
an inspection and enforcement program. Ideally,
the initial expansion of the bans and associated
incentives and penalties could be implemented
by 2011-2012, with significant GHG reductions by
2014-2015. Duration would be indefinite.

Certain local governments that receive tipping
fee revenues under local negotiated agreements
would also lose a small proportion of these
revenues as tonnages decreased.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The GHG reductions from this
policy come both from reducing landfill methane
emissions and from reducing the need for virgin
materials in paper production. In particular, the

11. Barriers to Implementation: Local recycling
programs, landfills and waste haulers, and the
DNR would need some additional resources to
implement and maintain the expanded paper
bans. Landfill operators, waste haulers, businesses

Annual loss in state tipping fee revenue
due to diversion of paper from landfills to recycling
Additional recycling of
current tons landfilled
50% (297,565 tons)
75% (446,346 tons)

Lost recycling tipping fee
revenue
$1,190,260
$1,785,384

218

Lost environmental repair
and other fee revenue
$565,374
$848,057

Total revenue loss
$1,755,634
$2,633,441

and municipal recycling programs would all likely
have to add equipment, training and/or other
resources to comply with the stricter bans, and
thus might oppose the change. Landfill operators
(including local governments) would also lose
tipping fee revenue due to less waste being
landfilled. On the other hand, portions of the
paper industry in Wisconsin would likely support
expanded landfill bans as a means of increasing
the supply of scrap paper available for use by
recycle mills in Wisconsin.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•

Enhanced Recycling (for purposes of
quantification)

219

Wood Waste
1. Work Group: Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery
and Disposal

Landfill operators, incinerator operators, waste
and recycling haulers, construction industry,
municipalities, manufacturers, distributors,
retailers

2. Policy Name: Recovery of untreated wood wastes
(Wood Waste)

5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: The following tables present a rough
estimate of the savings in GHG emissions if 50%
of recoverable untreated wood (modeled as

3. Policy Type: Regulation/legislation, incentives
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:

Annual reductions in GHG emissions, in metric ton carbon dioxide equivalents (MTCO2e), from
untreated wood (dimensional lumber) diverted from landfills to recycling

Untreated Wood Type/
Type of Landfill Source
(LFs)
Mixed/Multi-material
(MSW) LFs
Mixed/ Construction &
Demolition (C&D) LFs
Pallets/MSW LFs
Total

Emissions factor3
Total savings
(MTCO2e/ton) if
(MTCO
e) if 50%
recycled
2
Recoverable
recycled
tons

1

Tons
Landfilled

Estimated
percent
recoverable2

607,650

25%

151,913

-1.97

149,634

8,800

25%

2,200

-1.97

2,167

76,926
693,376

100%

76,926
231,039

-1.97

75,772
227,573

Annual reductions in GHG emissions, in MTCO2e, from untreated wood (dimensional lumber) diverted from landfills to combustion
Untreated Wood Type/
Type of Landfill Source
(LFs)
Mixed/MSW LFs
Mixed/C&D LFs
Pallets/MSW LFs
Total

Tons
Landfilled
607,650
8,800
76,926
693,376

Estimated
percent
recoverable1
25%
25%
100%

1. Untreated wood and pallets at multi-material municipal solid waste
(MSW) landfills from DNR 2002 Waste Characterization Study, http://
dnr.wi.gov/org/aw/wm/recycle/studies/index.html. C&D landfill
tonnage based on estimated disposal in 3 active intermediate-size
and 19 active small-size construction and demolition landfills located
around the state.
2. Unpainted and usable for recycling or processing into wood-based
products
3. From Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases: A LifeCycle Assessment of Emissions and Sinks (3rd ed.), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/waste/
SWMGHGreport.html. Emissions factor is for dimensional lumber.

Recoverable
Tons
151,913
2,200
76,926
231,039

Total savings
Emissions factor
(MTCO2e/ton) if (MTCO2e) if 50%
combusted
combusted
-0.29
-0.29
-0.29

22,027
319
11,154
33,500

dimensional lumber) currently generated and
landfilled in Wisconsin each year were instead
recycled or combusted in waste-to-energy
facilities.
6. Estimated Costs: Construction companies,
manufacturers, distributors and retailers could
incur costs for equipment and labor to divert
discarded wood and pallets to processing centers

220

or waste-to-energy combustion facilities. Some
of these costs could be offset by reduced landfill
costs. Local governments could incur costs to
adopt and enforce wood recovery ordinances.
DNR would also incur costs to coordinate the
introduction of local wood recovery ordinances.
The state, landfills and some local governments
would lose tipping fee revenue if less wood were
landfilled.

The Governor’s Task Force on Waste Materials
Recovery and Disposal urged increased recovery
of clean, untreated wood waste for recycling/
reuse and the further development of a market
infrastructure to collect and process the materials.
Based on those recommendations, the State of
Wisconsin should:

A. Require local governments to adopt ordinances

requiring the recycling of wood waste generated
in new construction as part of the building permit
process. Authorize DNR to waive this requirement
for a local government that demonstrates that
compliance would result in a net increase in GHG
emissions due to transporting discarded wood
greater distances or other local factors.

Funding Sources: State funding and incentives
for development of wood waste recycling and
reuse infrastructure could be derived from an
appropriation from the Recycling and Renewable
Energy Fund, which would receive additional
revenues from the imposition of state recycling
fees on waste disposed of at Construction
and Demolition (C&D) Waste landfills. Other
incremental state and local government costs
would be absorbed in operating budgets. All other
costs would be borne by the private sector and/or
consumers.

B. Provide state-level funding and/or incentives (e.g.
tax breaks and grants) to encourage development
of the wood waste recycling/reuse infrastructure.

C. Remove policy/regulatory barriers to increased

recycling and reuse. (e.g. replace the current
requirement that a builder get a low-hazard
exemption to recycle untreated, new construction
wood with a self-implementing notification).

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy would reduce GHG emissions by diverting
untreated dimensional lumber to either recycling/
reuse or waste-to-energy combustion through
a combination of local ordinances, financial
incentives and reduced regulatory barriers.

D. Consider imposing a landfill ban on untreated

wood if significant amounts continue to enter
landfills.

Though recycling and reuse of discarded wood
has been increasing, untreated wood makes
up about 13% of all materials disposed of in
Wisconsin landfills each year.1 While this lumber
represents carbon that is essentially stored in
landfills (because the decomposition process
is very slow), a greater climate benefit can be
realized by either combusting the wood to recover
energy (displacing generation by fossil fuels) or
recycling/reusing it in products such as landscape
mulch or engineered wood (i.e., chipboard and
particle board), thus reducing the need to harvest
new trees and allowing forests to grow and
sequester more carbon. While this policy concerns
wood from new construction, the state should
also promote reusing wood and other materials
recovered during demolition of existing structures,
a practice that can achieve similar if not greater
reductions in GHG emissions.

E. Revise policies that create financial incentives

to dispose of wood in C&D landfills (e.g. subject
wood and other wastes accepted at C&D landfills
to state-imposed disposal taxes that now apply
only at municipal solid waste (MSW) sites).

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Options:
Development and passage of legislation would
take at least one year. If incentives and local
ordinances don’t achieve significant increases
in diversion, implementation of the ban
would need to be phased in. This would allow
time to educate builders and set up a more
comprehensive collection infrastructure, and for
the DNR to design and implement an inspection
and enforcement program. Ideally, the ordinance
requirement could be implemented by 2011, with
significant GHG reductions by 2014. Duration
would be indefinite.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The GHG reductions from this
policy come either from reducing the need
for virgin materials in lumber/wood products,

1. Based on the 2002 Waste Characterization Study, which included only waste going to regular solid waste landfills and not the
approximately 30 smaller, C&D-specific landfills.

221

thus allowing forests to grow and sequester
carbon, or from reducing the need to burn
fossil fuels by combusting wood waste in wasteto-energy facilities. The GHG reductions are
significantly larger for recycling/reuse than for
combustion due to the significant benefit of
forest carbon sequestration when fewer trees are
harvested. Because of the life-cycle approach,
not all emissions reductions would occur within
Wisconsin, though the state would share in
global benefits from reduced GHGs and there
would a potential to incorporate credits for waste
management alternatives into a cap-and-trade
system.

Certain local governments that receive payments
from landfills under local negotiated agreements
would also lose revenues as tonnages decreased.
There would also be costs stemming from
tax breaks and grants for wood recycling
infrastructure development, which could be paid
for by using recycling fund revenues as discussed
in other templates.
Revenue would be generated through the
collection of state-imposed taxes at specialized
C&D landfills, which are now exempt. The amount
of waste accepted at those sites is unknown, so
the revenue gain cannot be accurately estimated.

The estimates are based on data from the DNR’s
2002 Waste Characterization Study, which
estimated the amounts of materials generated
and landfilled in Wisconsin each year in MSW
landfills (additional amounts are disposed of at
C&D waste landfills). An estimate of recovery of
50% of recoverable, landfilled untreated wood
was used to represent increased diversion as the

11. Barriers to Implementation:
A. Logistical. The state would need to coordinate
closely with local governments in developing a
model ordinance. If a ban were implemented,
a comprehensive inspection and enforcement
program would need to be implemented to
detect violations at construction sites or landfills.

Annual loss in state tipping fee revenue due to diversion
of untreated wood from landfills
Additional recycling/
combustion of current
tons landfilled
228,839 tons

Lost recycling
tipping fee
revenue
$915,356

recommended policies were phased in. These
tonnages were multiplied by an emissions factor
calculated by the U.S. EPA. The emissions factor
represents the difference, in metric ton carbon
dioxide equivalents, of recycling or combustion
compared with landfilling a material.

Lost environmental
repair and other fee
revenue
$434,794

Net revenue loss
$1,350,150

Builders could need additional training on how
to separate and collect untreated lumber from
construction and demolition projects, as well as
provisions of local recycling ordinances.
B. Financial. Local governments would need
resources for enforcing the new requirements.
Construction companies, landfills, waste haulers
and the DNR would need some additional
resources to implement and maintain a wood
landfilling ban. Builders or other groups
responsible for diverting wood might need
financial incentives to offset costs of setting up a
large-scale collection system.

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: With
untreated wood diverted from MSW landfills
to recycling or incineration, the state would
lose tipping fee revenues. Currently, the state
receives $4/ton from a recycling tipping fee
and $1.90/ton from other fees (principally an
environmental repair fee) for solid waste disposed
of at Wisconsin MSW landfills. The loss of revenue
would be partly offset by new revenue gained by
extending state taxes to wood and other wastes
disposed of at C&D landfills. The table below
shows the net lost revenue for the 50% recycling
or combustion scenarios. Aggregate annual
revenue from the fees is approximately $45
million.

C. Political. There could be resistance from some
local governments that would have to implement
and enforce local ordinances requiring recycling
at construction sites. Construction interests could
oppose wood recovery ordinances or bans due to
increased costs. For a wood landfilling ban, there
could be resistance from landfill operators and

222

owners and some local governments, in light of
potential reduction in revenue from landfill tip
fees and safety and health concerns associated
with enforcing bans at disposal facilities.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

Advanced Biomass and Biofuel
Commercialization and Utilization
Industrial Boiler Fuel Switching
Enhanced Recycling (for purposes of
quantification)

223

Enhanced Recycling
1. Work Group: Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery
and Disposal

•

2. Policy Name: Reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions through enhancements to existing
recycling programs (Enhanced Recycling)

Commercial/business recycling, estimated
based on the amount of residential recycling
and the residential-commercial ratio
of recyclables found in the 2002 Waste
Characterization Study.1

The sum of these numbers shows up in the “total
tons” column below. This figure is then multiplied
by the U.S. EPA emissions factor2 for that material
category to get the metric ton carbon dioxide
equivalent (MTCO2Ee) GHG emissions savings for
the amount recycled. (EPA has specific emissions

3. Policy Type: Legislative action for upcoming
biennial budget
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Landfill operators, waste and recycling haulers,
municipalities, residents, and businesses

5. Estimated Greenhouse
Actual residential and estimated commercial recycling and resulting GHG
Gas Emissions
savings for selected materials, 2006
Reduction Impact:
It is not possible to
Emissions
provide a definite
factor
quantitative estimate
Category
Total tons
MTCO2e
of the GHG reductions
(MTCO2e/ton)
associated with this
Glass containers
103,527
-0.32
33,129
policy. However, this
policy should result
Paper
921,125
-3.89
3,583,176
in significant GHG
Steel containers
25,973
-1.83
47,531
reductions because it
Plastic containers
29,424
-1.53
45,019
will provide important
tools to allow local
Aluminum containers
7,959
-13.61
108,308
governments and
Total
1,088,008
-3,817,163
others to increase
recycling in Wisconsin.
Recycling provides substantial reductions in GHG
factors for mixed paper and mixed plastics.)
emissions by reducing the consumption of energy
and resources, such as forests, to obtain raw
B. Potential additional GHG reductions with recycling
materials for manufacturing.
rate increase. Another method for estimating
GHG reductions from recycling is to look at the
overall recycling rate (that is, the amount of
municipal solid waste, or MSW, generated in
Wisconsin that is diverted for recycling). DNR
estimates the current overall recycling rate at
24% (1.4 million tons recycled out of 5.6 million
tons of MSW generated in Wisconsin in 2006).
Note that the volume of recyclables is higher than
the 1.1 million tons in the above table, because
other recyclable materials are included in that
figure. Because of this, the table below uses EPA’s
emissions factor for “mixed recyclables.”3

Please Note: Because this template covers some of the
same materials as the other waste-related templates especially paper and wood - estimated savings from this
template should not be added to the estimated savings
from other templates.

A. Summary of current GHG savings from recycling.
The DNR has compiled estimates of the amounts
of several “materials” generated in Wisconsin and
recycled in 2006. These are based on:
•

Residential recycling amounts (primarily from
single-family homes and buildings with 1 - 4
units)

Below are the GHG emissions savings if the overall

1. http://dnr.wi.gov/org/aw/wm/recycle/studies/index.html
2. From Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases:
A Life-Cycle Assessment of Emissions and Sinks (3rd ed.),
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/
climatechange/wycd/waste/SWMGHGreport.html

224

Tons recycled and GHG emissions reductions with increased
recycling rate
Increase over
Additional Emissions factor
current rate
tons recycled
(MTCO2e /ton)
1% (25% total
diversion)
2% (26% total
diversion)
5% (29% total
diversion)

55,620

-3.05

111,239

-3.05

278,099

-3.05

recycling rate were to increase to 25, 26 or 29%
(an increase of one, two or five percentage
points).

and corporate income surcharges used for
recycling.

MTCO2e

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal:
This proposal seeks to reduce GHG emissions
by enhancing Wisconsin’s present recycling
169,641
programs. The Ad Hoc Waste Materials
Recovery and Disposal Work Group has
339,279
identified four initiatives to enhance
Wisconsin’s recycling: education and
848,202
outreach, grants to local governmental
units and others to increase recycling, more
effective deployment of recycling programs,
and research regarding further recycling
opportunities.
A. Education and outreach. As discussed in Section 5
above, recycling results in significant GHG
reductions, in addition to other environmental
and economic benefits. Inadequate outreach
and promotion of recycling are key obstacles to
increasing recycling rates, so this initiative has
the potential to increase participation in recycling
programs by linking the simple act of recycling
with the meaningful impact it can have on climate
change.

NOTE: Some of these estimated emissions reductions
come from increased recycling of paper and wood.
Separate templates prepared by the ad-hoc waste
work group also propose policies that would increase
paper and wood recycling. To avoid double counting
the benefits from increasing paper and wood recycling,
emissions reduction estimates from those templates
should not be added to these estimates.

6. Estimated Costs: This policy is predicted to cost
approximately $5 - 10 million annually.
Funding Sources: $5 - 10 million is the amount
that has been historically diverted from
Wisconsin’s Recycling Fund (now the Recycling
and Renewable Energy Fund), which includes
revenue and interest from landfill fees and
corporate income surcharges, for general purpose
spending.
For the fiscal year 2008 - 09 Wisconsin’s budget
projects that the state will collect $53 million
in revenue and interest from landfill fees and
corporate income surcharges established to
pay for state and local recycling programs. Of
that amount, about $38.5 million, or roughly
73%, will be spent on recycling (note that the
diverted amount for the 2008 - 09 fiscal year is
greater than the historical amount). The balance
will be used for state spending related to: PCB
Sediment Waste Transportation; the Department
of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
Clean Sweep Program; and the Department
of Commerce Wisconsin Development Fund,
especially for renewable energy projects. Because
of the importance of these programs, the work
group recommends that their funding continue,
but utilizing a source separate from landfill fees

225

•

Some consumers already believe recycling
is an important tool for addressing climate
change. In an October 2007 Harris poll, 31%
of respondents listed recycling as the most
important thing they could do to reduce
global warming. Most Wisconsin residents
and entities, however, do not make this link.
Trend research on recycling participation
also suggests diminishing interest in
recycling in general. A recent research effort
by the National Recycling Coalition found
over 100 million “sometimes” recyclers in
the United States who lacked the motivation
and interest in recycling to participate
routinely. The research indicated that in
order to participate more in recycling, these
consumers need to feel more optimism,
hope, and accomplishment from the
act of recycling. Drawing a link between
climate change, an area in which many feel
powerless to act, and recycling, which is
available at virtually everyone’s doorstep,
is a powerful way to boost recycling in
Wisconsin and nationwide.

•

Providing education and outreach to link
recycling to climate change is a low cost

way to enhance waste recovery and reduce
GHG emissions, because it largely relies
on greater utilization of existing recycling
infrastructure. To prevent overlap, the
Waste Materials Recovery and Disposal
Work Group recommends that this
education and outreach regarding recycling
be performed by the entities set up under
the Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long-term GHG Emissions
Reductions.

the Recycling and Renewable Energy Fund for
non‑recycling purposes. Such money would
be used to establish a recycling innovation
fund or augment existing recycling grant
programs to provide recycling grants to
local governments and others. These grants
would be based in part on the projected
net reductions in GHGs from the proposed
recycling initiatives. This would help ensure
that the most effective steps to reduce GHG
are implemented.

B. Grants to local governmental units and others to
increase recycling. If the funds diverted from the
Recycling and Renewable Energy Fund identified
in Section 6 were redirected to recycling purposes,
the Work Group recommends the following:

C. Effective deployment of recycling programs. In
order to ensure that recycling is fully implemented
by local governments and those within their
jurisdictions, it is important for local governments
to promote active recycling by all. Accordingly,
this policy proposal calls for local governments
to take steps to ensure that all businesses and
other entities within their jurisdictions are fully
implementing appropriate recycling plans. For
example, it would provide for local governments
to work with retail establishments, parks and
other spaces used by the public to ensure that
they have recycling containers available. Event
sponsors could be required by ordinance to
submit and follow a recycling plan as part of the
local permit process. Local governments would
be eligible to receive grants to fund technical
assistance and outreach within business sectors
and other entities to assist them in developing
sustainable material recovery programs in support
of the local governments’ overall plans.

•

Utilizing all state recycling funds solely for
recycling would provide money to help local
governments and others increase recycling
in their areas. Increased recycling could be
achieved through the use of funds to improve
recycling programs and infrastructure,
including increased enforcement of existing
state and local recycling laws, and equipment
associated with adding materials to recycling
streams, implementing single-stream
recycling and increasing the size of containers
used for recycling. Local governments may
also have unmet infrastructure needs for
recycling containers for public spaces, special
events and government facilities that these
grants could fulfill.

•

In addition to the above, the existing grant
formula structure could be revised to
provide incentives for improving recycling
performance by grant recipients. Such
incentives might include establishing baseline
minimum rates and per-capita supplements or
“bonuses” for achieving higher recovery rates,
and allowing a broader range of materials
to count towards a recipient’s recovery
rate. Bonuses could be tied to reduced GHG
emissions achieved through recycling and
reuse programs.

•

D. Research regarding further recycling
opportunities. This policy proposal also calls for
a portion of the funds currently diverted from
the Recycling and Renewable Energy Fund to be
made available for studies of further recycling
opportunities. These studies would include
periodic waste composition and generation
studies to provide fundamental metrics for the
performance of the recycling program. Other
research could also include examination of:

Because local governments and others may
have varying needs to help them increase
recycling, the work group believes that it
is important to allow them to determine
what would be the most effective initiatives.
Accordingly, this policy would call for DNR
to receive the money that is now taken from

226

•

Bottlenecks in the recycling system (shortage
of single-stream processing capacity, limited
markets for certain materials)

•

Gaps in collection infrastructure (businesses,
underserved communities, public events and
spaces)

•

Study of best practices to enhance recovery in
problem areas or for problem materials (such

as food waste and construction/demolition
materials)
•

The feasibility of innovative or incentive-based
programs for increasing recovery of materials

•

Examining the sources of discarded material
to identify the greatest potential for recovery

8. Timetables, Duration, and Stringency of Options:
This policy would call for protection of all money
from the Recycling and Renewable Energy Fund
by 2010 and for use of those funds for the above
policies during that year and all years thereafter.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate GHG Reductions:
Because many of the initiatives described
would be customized to meet the needs of local
governments, it is difficult to quantify specific
GHG reductions associated with this set of
policies. Since recycling generates significant
GHG reductions, the projects and programs
supported by the policies in this template would
be screened for their potential impact on GHGs,
and because the policies provide the necessary
tools for local governments and others to
increase recycling, they are anticipated to lead to
significant improvements in both recycling and
GHG reductions.
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: The
cost of this policy is the amount of money that is
presently diverted from the state’s Recycling and
Renewable Energy Fund. Historically this amount
has been in the $5 - 10 million range.
11. Barriers to Implementation: The primary
barrier to implementation would be the fact
that the use of all money from the Recycling
and Renewable Energy Fund would prevent
that money from being used as general revenue
for the state, including for renewable energy
projects. Accordingly, there will likely be pressure
to continue to divert the funds to the general
revenue and other uses.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies:
•
•
•

Comprehensive Initiative to Support
Voluntary Long Term Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Reductions
Paper Waste (for purposes of quantification)
Wood Waste (for purposes of quantification)

227

Electronics Waste
1. Work Group: Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery
and Disposal

less ideal for refurbishing. According to recycling
industry sources, a more accurate estimate for the
refurbishing rate of household computers is on the
order of 5%.

2. Policy Name: Electronics reuse and recycling
(Electronics Waste)

If 20% of residential in-service computers and
televisions were replaced in Wisconsin every year
and of these, 5% were refurbished and 95% were
recycled instead of all landfilled or incinerated, an
order-of-magnitude estimate of GHG reductions
would yield approximately 249,333 metric tons
(MT) of CO2e per year.

3. Policy Type: Regulation/legislation, incentives
4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Computer/electronics producers, retailers and
recyclers; businesses and residents; municipalities;
landfill operators; waste and recycling haulers
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: GHG savings from recycling computers
(extracting recyclable materials such as aluminum
and glass) and especially from refurbishing
computers - reducing the need for new computer
equipment - are potentially significant given the
growing volume of electronics in use. The exact
amount of electronics equipment that could be
recycled/refurbished every year is difficult to
pinpoint, but a 2006 DNR survey estimated that
there are currently 3.8 million computers (about
60,000 tons) and nearly 7.5 million televisions
(about 190,000 tons) in Wisconsin households. The
estimates do not include the computers and other
electronics found in businesses and institutions,
though these entities are currently more likely to
recycle their electronics due to state hazardous
waste rules.

6. Estimated Costs: Costs for landfill operators, waste
and recycling haulers, municipalities and businesses
could increase if additional equipment or changes
to administrative procedures to divert electronics
from landfills to recycling centers are needed.
Some of these costs could be recovered through
the sale of refurbished computers, recyclable
components or recycled products. Manufacturers
could minimize costs through design improvements
to increase the recyclability and reusability of
electronic products. DNR costs would increase
due to an expansion of its landfill inspection and
enforcement program. The state (and some local
governments) would lose tipping fee revenue when
more materials were recycled instead of landfilled.
Funding Sources: Most costs associated with this
proposal would be borne by manufacturers and
consumers purchasing covered electronic products.
Any incremental DNR and municipal costs would be
absorbed in operating budgets.

While not all of the household computers and
televisions are obsolete, the short life of many
electronics indicates that significant volumes are
or will be ready for disposal in coming years. There
is evidence from the household survey and other
sources that households and small businesses are
storing a large volume of unusable or unwanted
electronic equipment, and that only a small volume
of electronics is currently being landfilled or
incinerated.

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: This
policy would reduce GHG emissions by diverting
electronics for reuse and recycling through a landfill
ban and a state program requiring manufacturers
to assume responsibility for collecting and recycling
certain discarded household electronic products.

Virtually all of this equipment can either be
recycled or refurbished. Research indicates that
when the equipment is recovered for these
purposes, with both household and business
sources taken into account, approximately 50% of
used electronics are recycled and 50% refurbished.
However, all but the smallest businesses, and
households, are prevented by hazardous waste
laws from disposing of computer equipment in
landfills and incinerators. Therefore, most of
the used material that would be diverted from
landfilling comes from households and small
businesses, and this material tends to be older and

228

In December 2006, the Governor’s Task Force
on Waste Materials Recovery and Disposal
recommended establishing a state policy to
promote environmentally sound recycling
and reuse of discarded televisions, monitors,
laptops and desktop computers. The Task Force
endorsed the principles developed by Midwest
E-Waste Policy Initiative, which focus on product
stewardship by manufacturers in a system that
would be adopted by Wisconsin and five other
Midwest states to provide regional consistency for
manufacturers, recyclers and consumers. The Task
Force’s recommendation was designed around a
shared responsibility model that would not unduly

•

burden local or state governments with the costs
of collection and processing.
Since that time, Minnesota has enacted a law
consistent with the Midwest Initiative, and a
Wisconsin state senator introduced legislation
consistent with the Minnesota bill in December
2007. The bill would have banned all computer
monitors and televisions containing cathode
ray tubes (CRTs), computers and other video
display devices from Wisconsin landfills and
incinerators, and would have required electronics
manufacturers to recycle a certain amount of
electronics per year based on their sales to
households in the state.

The U.S. EPA has calculated that, compared
with landfilling, each ton of computers recycled
reduces GHG emissions by 2.3 MT of CO2e, while
reducing the need for new computers would
reduce GHG emissions by 55.5 MT of CO2e per ton
of computers refurbished for continued use.1
10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: With
household computers, televisions and other
electronic equipment (video display devices) being
diverted from landfills to recycling and reuse, the
state would lose tipping fee revenues. Currently
the state receives $4/ton from a recycling tip fee
and $1.90 from combined environmental fees.
The exact amount of lost revenue would depend
on the tonnages diverted from landfills each
year. Electronics manufacturers would also incur
costs associated with collecting and recycling
equipment. First year costs would be higher,
reflecting the immediate need to conduct public
outreach on how to dispose of analog television
receivers that may be generated by the switchover
to a digital broadcast standard.

This work group recommends the adoption of
an electronic waste policy consistent with the
Midwest E-Waste Policy Initiative which would
establish manufacturer responsibility for the
recycling of electronic waste.
Federal law requires that all full-power television
broadcast stations stop broadcasting in analog
format by February 17, 2009 and broadcast only
in digital format. In light of this nation-wide
conversion, this work group also recommends
that the state provide funding for the DNR to
conduct public education and outreach describing
the options for recycling discarded televisions,
particularly until the policy recommended above
is established.

11. Barriers to Implementation:
A. Logistical. A comprehensive tracking, inspection
and enforcement program would need to be
implemented to ensure compliance with program
requirements by manufacturers and at landfills.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Option:
Development and passage of legislation would
take at least one year. The landfill ban and
manufacturer requirements would be phased
in to allow all impacted parties time to educate
residents and to establish the infrastructure for
collection and processing, and allow the DNR
to design and implement registration, tracking
and inspection programs. Duration would be
indefinite.

B. Financial. Under the producer responsibility
model, there should be minimal financial barriers
to implementation.
C. Political. While stakeholders agree that a system
is needed to ensure environmentally sound
recycling and reuse of discarded electronics, there
is disagreement on the approach among the
various stakeholders.

9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG
Reductions: The GHG reductions in this policy
come from:
•

Refurbishing and reusing computer
equipment, thus extending its life and
reducing the need to manufacture new
computer equipment.

12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies: None

Providing recycled materials (such as
aluminum, glass, lead and copper) from
computers for use in new products, thus
reducing the need for virgin materials and
reducing the energy needed to produce the
new products; and/or

1. From Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases: A LifeCycle Assessment of Emissions and Sinks (3rd ed.), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/
waste/SWMGHGreport.html

229

Food Waste
1. Work Group: Ad-hoc Waste Materials Recovery
and Disposal

Funding Sources: Some of the costs for
municipalities might be met by state funding
or incentives. An appropriation from the state’s
Recycling and Renewable Energy Fund might be
one source of funding for this proposal.

2. Policy Name: Reduced landfilling of food waste
(Food Waste)
3. Policy Type: Incentives and research

7. Specific Description of Policy Proposal: Food
waste makes up more than 10% of all municipal
solid waste generated and landfilled in Wisconsin
each year. Because of the high volume of food
and other compostable organics in the waste
stream, the Governor’s Task Force on Waste
Materials Recovery and Disposal recommended
actions to substantially increase the diversion
of waste organics, including food residuals,
from disposal. A key benefit of this would be to
reduce GHG emissions, primarily by reducing the
amount of materials in landfills that decompose
anaerobically, thus releasing methane.

4. Affected Sectors, Sub-Sectors and/or Entities:
Municipalities, compost facilities, landfill
operators, businesses and institutions
5. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Impact: This policy would not lead to any direct
GHG emission reductions. However, if the study
recommended by the policy was conducted,
sufficient knowledge should be developed to
generate policy proposals (such as a mandate
for some level of diversion or incentives for
voluntary approaches and local initiatives) that
would lead to direct GHG emission reductions.
The following table presents a rough estimate of
potential savings in GHG emissions if 25 or 50%
of food waste currently generated and landfilled
in Wisconsin each year were composted instead.
These reductions result from reduced methane
production in landfills and increased carbon
storage in soil due to compost use. To the extent
that food waste diverted from landfills can be used
to produce biogas through anaerobic digestion,
and that biogas displaces fossil fuel based energy
production, additional GHG reductions will occur.

Currently, there are significant amounts of food
in the waste stream, much of it from commercial
and institutional sources such as grocery stores,
restaurants, institutions, food distributors
and food processors. There is, however, little
infrastructure or precedence in Wisconsin for
large-scale composting of materials other than
yard trimmings. Because of these limitations, the
Waste Task Force recommendations centered
on actions to address knowledge and regulatory
barriers rather than policies to legislate mandatory
actions or provide incentives for voluntary
approaches. Specific recommendations include
the following:

6. Estimated Costs: There would be significant startup costs for municipalities and others collecting
and composting food waste. This would include
large-scale education and outreach programs
to get businesses (and eventually residents) to
properly separate food waste. There would be lost
revenue from landfill tipping fees as more waste
was diverted to composting facilities.

A. Initiate a study to identify contributors of pre- and
post-consumer food waste currently entering the
municipal solid waste stream. The initial focus

Annual reductions in GHG emissions, in metric ton carbon dioxide equivalents (MTCO2E), from
food waste diverted from landfills to composting facilities
Material

Tons1
Landfilled

Emissions factor2
(MTCO2e /ton)

Food waste

486,619

-.92

1. From DNR 2002 Waste Characterization Study, http://dnr.wi.gov/
org/aw/wm/recycle/studies/index.html.
2. From Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases: A LifeCycle Assessment of Emissions and Sinks (3rd ed.), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/wycd/waste/
SWMGHGreport.html

Total savings
(MTCO2e) if 25%
composted
111,518

Total savings
(MTCO2e) if 50%
composted
223,032

would be on commercial/institutional generators
because these sources account for nearly 60% of

230

landfilled food waste and include many single,
large-volume sources, which would ease collection
and reduce administrative costs.

Reductions: The GHG reductions in this policy
come primarily from reducing landfill methane
emissions by diverting wet organic waste (food)
that would otherwise break down anaerobically
in the landfill. There is also a small GHG benefit
from the carbon stored in the compost itself and
increased carbon storage in soils where compost
is applied. Since the majority of the benefit comes
from the diversion from landfilling, other uses of
food waste (such as donation of edible food or use
in animal feed) would likely have a similar GHG
impact.

B. Initiate research on the details of public health,
practicality and costs of food waste composting
from commercial properties, including pilot
implementation studies. Similarly, ask the Office
of Energy Independence to initiate and direct
research on the potential for recovery of food
waste through options preferred over composting
from a GHG reduction standpoint.
C. Develop and promote a hierarchy for the recovery
of source-separated food waste, including
donations for human use, animal feed, energy
recovery and biofuel production.

The estimates are based on data from the DNR’s
2002 Waste Characterization Study, which
estimated the amounts of materials generated
and landfilled in Wisconsin each year. Estimates of
25 and 50% of landfilled food waste were used to
represent increased diversion as the composting
infrastructure improves. (These estimates are
more conservative than for other waste materials
due to the current lack of infrastructure and the
large number of individual sources of food waste
- essentially all homes, businesses and institutions
in the state.) These tonnages were multiplied by
an emissions factor calculated by the U.S. EPA.
The emissions factor represents the difference, in
MTCO2e, of composting compared with landfilling
a material.

D. Identify and develop a strategy to reduce barriers
to increased diversion of food wastes, and
create incentives for the preferred options in the
hierarchy.
The above recommendations would provide a
platform from which specific policy proposals
to achieve significant GHG reductions through
increased food waste diversion could be
developed. Such policy proposals might either
mandate some level of diversion or provide
incentives for voluntary approaches and local
initiatives. The estimated GHG savings noted in
Section 5, above, assume the implementation of
an effective strategy based on the results of the
above recommendations

10. Rough Estimate of Costs for Selected Years: With
food waste diverted from landfills for composting
or other reuse, the state would lose tipping fee
revenues. Currently, the state receives $4/ton
from a recycling tipping fee and $1.90/ton from
other fees (principally an environmental repair
fee) for solid waste disposed of at Wisconsin
landfills. The table below shows the lost revenue
for the 25 and 50% diversion scenarios. Aggregate
annual revenue from the fees is approximately
$45 million.

8. Timetables, Duration and Stringency Options:
Funding for research should be made available
as soon as possible, ideally by the 2008-2009
fiscal year. Should the Wisconsin Global Warming
Task Force elect to recommend additional policy
proposals, funding for these should be made
available as soon as possible, ideally by the 20092010 fiscal year at the latest, with a goal of 25%
diversion of food waste by 2012 and 50% by 2015.
9. Explanation of Rough Estimate of GHG

Annual loss in state tipping fee revenue due to diversion of food wastes from landfills
Additional composting of
current tons landfilled
25% (121,655 tons)
50% (243,310 tons)

Lost recycling tipping fee
revenue
$486,619
$973,238

231

Lost environmental repair
and other fee revenue
$231,145
$462,288

Total revenue loss
$717,764
$1,435,526

Certain local governments that receive tipping
fee revenues under local negotiated agreements
would also lose a small proportion of these
revenues as tonnages decreased.
There would also be costs from state support of
local or business food waste diversion initiatives.
11. Barriers to Implementation: There is currently
very little infrastructure in Wisconsin for
collecting and composting food waste on a large
scale, so significant time and resources would
need to be invested in such a system. Local
governments would need to have an interest in
adding food waste to their collection systems
and a commitment to educate residents and
businesses. Large sources of food scraps (such
as food processing plants) might need incentives
or assistance to manage their high volumes of
waste and offset costs associated with setting up a
composting program.
12. Other Factors: None
13. Related Policies: None

232

